                                       Plant Biotechnology and Agriculture 

 Plant Biotechnology 
and Agriculture 

 Prospects for the 21 st  Century 

 E d i t e d   b y 
 Arie Altman 
 Robert H. Smith Institute of Plant Sciences and Genetics in Agriculture 
 Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
Rehovot, Israel 

 Paul Michael Hasegawa 
 Bruno C. Moser Distinguished Professor 
Horticulture and Landscape Architecture Department 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA       

 Amsterdam (cid:129) Boston (cid:129) Heidelberg (cid:129) London (cid:129) New York (cid:129) Oxford 
Paris (cid:129) San Diego (cid:129) San Francisco (cid:129) Singapore (cid:129) Sydney (cid:129) Tokyo       

 Academic press is an imprint of elsevier  

Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier
32 Jamestown Road, London NW1 7BY, UK
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
525 B Street, Suite 1800, San Diego, CA 92101-4495, USA

First edition 2012

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved
Except chapter 8 which is in the Public Domain.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or  
transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying,  
recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher 
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology  
Rights Department in Oxford, UK: phone (44) (0) 1865 843830; 
fax (44) (0) 1865 853333; email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively, 
visit the Science and Technology Books website at www.elsevierdirect.com/rights 
for further information

Notice
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage  
to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise,  
or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained 
in the material herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, 
independent verification of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress

ISBN : 978-0-12-381466-1

 For information on all Academic Press publications 
visit our website at elsevierdirect.com

Typeset by MPS Limited, a Macmillan Company, Chennai, India  
www.macmillansolutions.com

Printed and bound in United States of America

12 13 14 15  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

This book is dedicated to the memory of my dear wife, Yehudit (1947–2009).

Arie Altman.

Foreword

In  the  1970s  when  breakthroughs  in  cloning  and  sequenc-
ing  of  bacterial  and  yeast  DNA  were  reported,  visionaries 
predicted  that  there  would  be  a  plethora  of  future  applica-
tions that would follow. They also predicted that the lives of 
humanity would be changed as a consequence. In the interim 
between  the  cloning  of  bacterial  DNA  and  today  there  have 
been  many  breakthroughs  that  confirmed  the  predictions 
including: production of protein-based therapies and vaccines 
that treat human and animal diseases; enzymes that are used 
as industrial products and in fermentation of foods and drinks; 
improved varieties of crops; and new ways of producing bio-
fuels and other bioproducts. These are some of the outcomes 
from  discoveries  made  more  than  35  years  ago.  The  list  of 
successes is long. Progress in research and outcomes of tech-
nologies have been remarkable, to say the least.

The  results  of  investments  made  in  science  and  technol-
ogy  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  were  evident  in  the  1990s  and 
in  the  first  decade  of  the  new  millennium,  including  in  agri-
culture.  For  example,  investments  made  in  maize  genet-
ics and breeding paid dividends in superior hybrids and elite 
germplasm  that  were  poised  for  subsequent  improvement 
through  genetic  engineering  (GE)  and  other  types  of  bio-
technology.  Likewise,  investments  made  in  understanding 
how Agrobacterium tumefaciens acted as a pathogen served as 
the  starting  point  through  which  leaders  in  the  field,  includ-
ing Mary Dell Chilton, Josef Schell, Marc Van Montague, and 
Rob  Schilperoot,  along  with  the  research  team  at  Monsanto 
Company (St. Louis, MO) led by Robb Fraley, Steve Rogers, 
and  Rob  Horsch,  developed  transgenic  crop  plants.  These 
leaders were responsible for the rush of activity by scientists 
and technicians around the globe to apply plant genetic engi-
neering to develop new traits in crop and non-crop plants.

In the text that follows the reader is provided with back-
ground  information  on  plant  biotechnology;  on  the  status  of 
studies  in  genetics,  genomics,  and  cousin  “omics”  platforms; 
and  on  the  current  understanding  of  how  genetic  engineer-
ing  is  accomplished.  These  are  followed  by  chapters  that 
present  the  state  of  the  art  in  advances  in  the  improvement 
and  preservation  of  germplasm,  plant  breeding,  and  seed 
improvement,  including  apomixis.  Each  of  these  is  essential 
to the short- and long-term success of agriculture and agricul-
tural biotechnology. They also represent a background for the 
reader to dive into the chapters that describe the applications 
of  current  science  and  technology.  The  applications  will,  if 
successfully completed and moved through the maze of “regu-
latory safety processes” and accepted by consumers, continue 
to shape the future of global agriculture.

Many  scientists,  including  me,  became  engaged  in  the 
genetic sciences because we hoped to; (1) contribute to dis-
covery  of  new  knowledge;  and  (2)  contribute  to  improve-
ment of the human condition. Most of us are more successful 
in  achieving  one,  but  usually  not  both,  of  these  goals.  While 
discoveries  of  new  knowledge  have  their  own  rewards,  for 
many  of  us  additional  satisfaction  comes  from  knowing  that 
knowledge  has  translated  to  applications  that  have  impact. 
Agricultural  biotechnology  has  indeed  had  impact  since  the 
first  products  came  to  the  marketplace  in  1996,  and  those 
impacts  color  the  future  of  the  technologies.  The  successful 
introduction of crops that exhibit resistance to certain insects, 
tolerance  to  selected  herbicides,  and  increased  resistance  to 
selected virus diseases gave many of us hope that other appli-
cations  would  be  equally  well  received.  The  farm  producers 
and  farm  economy,  the  environment,  the  consumer,  and  the 
seed  companies  have  all  benefited.  Indeed,  there  was  great 
optimism  that  researchers  would  continue  to  make  rapid 
advances  and  would  produce  crops  with  increased  resistance 
to pests and pathogens and requiring fewer chemical protect-
ants; crops able to withstand high and low temperatures, and 
droughty and saline soils; crops with increased levels of nutri-
ent  rich  proteins,  vitamins,  and  minerals;  and  special  appli-
cations  that  would  yield  value-added  products  to  serve  the 
pharmaceutical,  industrial  chemical,  and  energy  needs  of  a 
demanding world population.

Imagine  our  surprise  and  disappointment  when  the  new 
discoveries  were  branded  by  some  as  products  to  be  feared, 
and as damaging to human and animal health and to the envi-
ronment. That disappointment continues today in many parts 
of the globe, and is of increasing concern in countries where 
GE  crops  were  first  introduced.  This  was  and  remains  an 
unexpected  outcome  of  the  technologies  that  remain  to  be 
adequately addressed. Those who have branded the technol-
ogies  as  unsafe  and  to  be  avoided/feared  have  done  so  for  a 
variety of reasons so disparate as to be impossible to analyze 
in  any  detail  here.  Some  consider  that  there  are  legitimate 
reasons to be concerned about the safety of the product, not-
withstanding that widely held scientific consensus uncovered 
no  significant  concerns:  others  are  categorically,  often  philo-
sophically, opposed to the use of advanced genetic technolo-
gies  on  agricultural  plants  and  animals.  Still  others  consider 
that until a trait that has consumer appeal is offered, they will 
not purchase products with GE materials.

The effects of the “fear branding” exercise have been felt 
in  many  different  segments  of  the  pathway  to  a  product  of 
biotechnology.  I  have  encountered  university  professors  who 

Foreword

discouraged  their  students  from  engaging  in  science  that 
would  enhance  agricultural  biotechnology;  potential  innova-
tors who are unsure that their technology would be accepted 
or  worse,  that  those  opposed  to  GE  products  would  block 
progress;  potential  investors  who  are  unsure  of  the  pathway, 
and  eventual  cost,  of  regulatory  approval  and  choose  not 
to  invest  in  a  GE  product;  regulatory  officials  who  work  to 
streamline product approval only to find themselves in court 
defending  a  process  or  product  before  a  magistrate  who  has 
no knowledge of the science that evaluates the actual risk of 
a  new  product  and  overrides  decisions  made  by  regulatory 
authorities; and seed company officials who decide to develop 
traits  achieved  through  mutagenesis  and  advanced  breeding 
rather than GE technologies because of concern about regula-
tory approval and consumer acceptance of a GE product. The 
negative  impacts  on  innovation  are  stifling  and  have  reduced 
development of many different types of products.

Some  of  the  new  processes  and  products  are  described 
in  this  volume  because  there  is  great  hope,  even  expecta-
tion,  that  new  technologies  will  find  their  way  to  approval 
and  application  because  of  their  value  to  the  environment, 
the  inventor,  and  the  consumer,  as  well  as  to  the  producer.  

I  characterize  myself  as  cautiously  optimistic  on  one  day 
and narrowly pessimistic on other days. Perhaps it is because 
of  the  role  that  agriculture  plays  in  addressing  many  of  the 
“grand  challenges”  that  are  required  for  a  sustainable  future, 
including  global  food  security  in  a  changing  climate,  biologi-
cal solutions for energy needs, and a healthy population, that 
we continue. With the growing demands brought by a grow-
ing  population,  new  technologies  will  be  required  as  part  of 
the  solution:  this  is  the  consensus  of  many,  not  only  of  the 
scientists.

In the following pages the hopeful will see opportunities to 
meet the grand challenges; the less hopeful, even cynical, will 
point out the many challenges or pitfalls. Regardless of where 
you are in this casting, I hope that you learn a bit, discuss a 
bit, and then make decisions of how you will engage based on 
a more complete understanding than you had before reading. 
The grand challenges command it.

Roger N. Beachy 
President Emeritus, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, and 
First Director, National Institute of Food and Nutrition, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture

xxvi

Preface

In  a  world  where  population  growth  is  outstripping  food 
supply,  new  agricultural  technologies  —  especially  plant- 
biotechnology — must be swiftly implemented to narrow the 
gap between production and human need. The world popula-
tion will soon reach 7 billion, and over 10 billion in the year 
2050,  while  agricultural  production  is  growing  at  a  slower 
rate of about 1.8–2% annually. All humans depend on agricul-
ture for animal feed, fiber, and food production; the latter is 
required as caloric and macronutrient staples to reduce under-
nutrition, but also as an important source of micronutrients to 
alleviate  malnutrition.  Biotechnology  offers  novel  approaches 
to  enhance  crop  productivity  and  food  biofortification,  and 
produces  novel  plant-based  biomaterials,  including  potential 
energy  resources.  One  also  cannot  understate  the  economic 
aspects of agriculture in human quality of life. It is irrefutable 
that  traditional  agricultural  methods  alone  will  be  unable  to 
meet  population  demands;  consequently,  applying  plant  bio-
technology procedures is a necessity.

Massive and immediate implementation of plant and agri-
cultural  biotechnology  is  as  crucial  as  that  of  medical  bio-
technology — sometimes even more so — since more people 
worldwide die from famine and malnutrition-related diseases 
than from “modern,” west-world diseases. Crop product and 
food  shortages  are  the  ultimate  disaster.  However,  unlike 
most natural disasters, this is one that we can prepare for and 
sometimes even prevent.

Domestication  of  plants  and  animals  found  in  the  wild 
combined  with  gradual  long-term  selection  for  productiv-
ity  and  quality  traits  were  the  first  attributes  of  agriculture. 
Domestication,  followed  by  food  storage,  coincided  with  the 
use  of  microorganisms.  Thus  was  born  classical  food  fermen-
tation, the earliest known application of biotechnology for the 
generation  and  preservation  of  food  products.  This  traditional 
agriculture  now  faces  three  major  limitations:  (1)  market 
limitations (the world is becoming a global village where free-
market  rules  negate  the  effectiveness  of  local  pricing  policies, 
and where a dictate of international trade and policies exists); 
(2) limitations of natural resources (global climatic changes — 
mainly  desertification,  drought,  and  salinization  —  as  well  as 
industrialization and urbanization, have reduced land and water 
availability and caused alarming deterioration of soil, water, and 
air quality); and (3) inherent biological genetic limitations (the 
release of new improved genotypes by classical breeding is now 
too slow to cope with the demands, and is considerably limited 
by the lack of appropriate “natural” genes or alleles that can be 
introgressed by traditional genetic crosses).

Achievements  to  date  in  plant  biotechnology  have  already 
surpassed  all  previous  expectations,  and  the  future  is  even 

more  promising.  The  full  realization  of  the  plant  and  agricul-
tural  biotechnology  revolution  depends  on  both  continued 
successful and innovative research and development activities, 
as well as on a favorable regulatory climate and public accept-
ance.  The  new  achievements  of  plant  molecular  biology  and 
biotechnology  in  the  last  decade  make  it  possible  to  be  fully 
integrated  with  classical  physiology,  biochemistry,  and  breed-
ing,  thus  resulting  in:  (1)  better  growth  and  development 
control (vegetative and reproductive); (2) improved plant pro-
tection against the ever-increasing threats of abiotic and biotic 
stress;  (3)  aid  to  classical  breeding;  (4)  generation  of  engi-
neered organisms; and (5) expansion of agriculture toward the 
production of specialty foods and novel biomaterials.

In  this  respect,  the  present  comprehensive  treatise  aims  at 
providing an authoritative update of plant biotechnology tech-
niques,  procedures,  and  accomplishments,  from  basic  biologi-
cal  discovery  science  to  applications  in  agriculture  and  other 
life sciences. This book contains expert evaluations of achieve-
ments  and  of  the  potential  that  novel  plant  biotechnological 
approaches  and  products  will  add  to  “classical”  plant  science 
and agriculture for improvement of crops and plant-based agri-
cultural products. Specific emphasis is on the interrelationships 
between  basic  plant  biotechnologies  and  applied  agricultural 
applications, and the way they contribute to each other.

This book is also intended as a reference for plant biologists, 
agricultural scientists, and plant molecular geneticists, as well 
as for those involved in plant breeding, food science, and bio-
material  product  development.  In  addition,  it  will  serve  as  a 
comprehensive text for graduate-level students in departments 
of agricultural, plant, food, and biotechnological sciences.

The first section of the book (Introduction to basic proce-
dures  in  plant  biotechnology)  highlights  the  most  significant 
biological advances that are relevant to biotechnology, includ-
ing  chapters  on  genomics,  proteomics,  metabolomics,  tissue 
culture, and genetic transformation. This is followed by a sec-
tion  on  breeding  biotechnologies,  including  somatic  cell  pro-
cedures,  marker-assisted  selection,  hybrid  seed  production, 
identifying  and  exploiting  natural  variation,  epigenetics,  and 
epigenomics. The third section deals with germplasm-related 
topics such as micropropagation and generation of pathogen-
free plants, regulation of apomixis, and germplasm collection 
and preservation. This is followed by two sections with chap-
ters on the control of plant response to the environment, both 
abiotic  and  biotic  stress,  including  drought,  salinity,  extreme 
temperatures,  pollutants,  and  phytoremediation,  as  well  as 
fungal, microbial, and viral diseases, and insect and weed con-
trol.  The  sixth  section  is  devoted  to  the  application  of  bio-
technologies  to  improve  and  control  yield  and  quality  traits, 

Preface

including  chapters  discussing  root,  shoot,  and  fruit  develop-
ment and flowering control, as well as postharvest storage and 
modification of secondary metabolites for quality traits. Next 
is a section on the use of plants as factories for pharmaceuti-
cals, biomaterials, and bioenergy. The last section of this book 
deals with transgene flow, intellectual property rights, regula-
tory issues, and crop biotechnology in developing countries.

We  wish  to  express  our  appreciation  to  all  contributing 
authors.  Distinguished  scientists  worldwide,  who  have  made 
significant scientific contributions and are pioneers in the field 
of  plant  and  agricultural  biotechnology,  wrote  each  chapter. 
The  various  articles  present  the  opinion  of  the  authors  and 

their  points  of  view.  While  every  effort  was  made  to  reach 
uniformity in style, the presented results and ideas and organ-
izational details of the chapters reflect the preferences of the 
respective authors.

We are grateful to many of our colleagues and friends for 
their  advice  and  collaboration,  and  to  Elsevier  —  and  espe-
cially to Rogue Shindler — for their assistance and patience.

Finally,  with  love  and  affection,  we  are  indebted  to  our 

families for their patience and understanding.

Arie Altman 
Paul Michael Hasegawa 

xxviii

Contributors

Arie Altman 
Professor of Horticulture and Plant Biotechnology, Robert H. Smith 
Institute of Plant Sciences and Genetics in Agriculture, Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel Introduction

Ute Baumann 
Australian Centre for Plant Functional Genomics ACPFG, University 
of Adelaide, Glen Osmond, Australia

Diane M. Beckles 
Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, 
California, USA

Giora Ben-Ari 
Institute of Horticulture, the Volcani Center ARO, Bet-Dagan, Israel

Philip N. Benfey 
Department of Biology and Institute for Genome Science and Policy, 
Center for Systems Biology, Duke University Durham, North Carolina, 
USA

Sylvain Bischof 
Department of Biology, Plant Biotechnology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland

Eduardo Blumwald 
Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, 
California, USA

J. Hans Bohnert 
Department of Plant Biology and Department of Crop Sciences, 
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA; 
Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 program) and Environmental 
Biotechnology, National Core Research Center, Graduate School of 
Gyeongsang National University, Korea

Ray A. Bressan 
Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 program) and Environmental 
Biotechnology, National Core Research Center, Graduate School of 
Gyeongsang National University, Korea; Department of Horticulture 
and Landscape Architecture, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana, USA; Center for Plant Stress Genomics, King Abdallah 
University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Joann A. Conner 
Department of Horticulture, The University of Georgia, Tifton, 
Georgia, USA

Carole Cramer 
Arkansas Biosciences Institute, Arkansas State University, 
Jonesboro, Arkansas, USA

Nikos Darzentas 
Institute of Agrobiotechnology, CERTH, Thermi-Thessaloniki, 
Greece

Maheshi Dassanayake 
Department of Plant Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana 
Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA

Hugo De Groote 
International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre (CIMMYT), 
Nairobi, Kenya

Om Parkash Dhankher 
Plant, Soil, and Insect Sciences, University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst, Massachusetts, USA

Aurora Díaz 
Departamento de Biología Medioambiental, Centro de 
Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain
19 Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

Dong-Ha Oh
Department of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA; Division of Applied Life 
Science (BK21 program) and Environmental Biotechnology, National 
Core Research Center, Graduate School of Gyeongsang National 
University, Korea

Sharon Doty 
School of Forest Resources, College of the Environment, University 
of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
20 Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

Florent Engelmann 
IRD, UMR DIADE, Montpellier, France; Bioversity International, 
Maccarese (Fiumicino), Rome, Italy
17 Germplasm collection, storage, and conservation

Rafael Catalá 
Departamento de Biología Medioambiental, Centro de 
Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain

Kellye A. Eversole 
Eversole Associates, Bethesda, Maryland, USA

John M. Cheeseman 
Department of Plant Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana 
Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA

Delphine Fleury 
Australian Centre for Plant Functional Genomics ACPFG, University 
of Adelaide, Glen Osmond, Australia

Chiang Shiong Loh 
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore

Abed Gera 
Department of Plant Pathology, Agricultural Research Organization, 
the Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel

Contributors

Anatoli Giritch 
Nomad Bioscience GmbH, Halle, Germany

Yuri Y. Gleba 
Nomad Bioscience GmbH, Halle, Germany

Masayo Kawaguchi 
School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Japan

Eli Khayat 
Scientific Director, Rahan Meristem Ltd., Rosh Hanikra, Israel

Dennis Gonsalves 
USDA, ARS, Pacific Basin Agricultural Research Center,  
Hilo, HI, USA

Prakash P. Kumar 
Department of Biological Sciences and Temasek Life Sciences 
Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Singapore

Kannan Grant 
Office of Technology Commercialization, University of Alabama 
Huntsville, Huntsville, Alabama, USA

Peter Langridge 
Australian Centre for Plant Functional Genomics ACPFG, University 
of Adelaide, Glen Osmond, Australia

Jonathan Gressel 
Plant Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

Uri Lavi 
Institute of Horticulture, the Volcani Center ARO, Bet-Dagan, Israel

Jonas Grossmann 
Department of Biology, Plant Biotechnology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland

Amnon Lers 
Department of Postharvest Science of Fresh Produce, Agricultural 
Research Organization, the Volcani Center, Bet-Dagan, Israel

Wilhelm Gruissem 
Department of Biology, Plant Biotechnology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland

Avtar K. Handa 
Department of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA

Christian S. Hardtke 
Department of Plant Molecular Biology, University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland

Antoine Harfouche 
Department for Innovation in Biological, Agro food and Forest 
systems, University of Tuscia, Viterbo, Italy

Chiang-Shiong Loh 
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore

Sally Mackenzie 
Center for Plant Science Innovation, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, 
Nebraska, USA

Venu Margam 
Department of Entomology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana, USA

Kenji Matsui 
Department of Biological Chemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, and 
Department of Applied Molecular Bioscience, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan

Paul Michael Hasagawa 
Bruno C. Moser Distinguished Professor, Horticulture and Landscape 
Architecture, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA

Tracie K. Matsumoto 
USDA, ARS, Pacific Basin Agricultural Research Center, Hilo, HI, USA

J.S. (Pat) Heslop-Harrison 
Department of Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK

T.J.V. Higgins 
CSIRO, Plant Industry, Canberra, Australia

Elizabeth E. Hood 
Arkansas Biosciences Institute, Arkansas State University, 
Jonesboro, Arkansas, USA

Joseph E. Huesing 
Department of Entomology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana, USA

Takashi Ikeda 
School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Japan

Jianfeng Xu 
Arkansas Biosciences Institute, Arkansas State University, Jonesboro 
Arkansas, USA

Aliki Kapazoglou 
Institute of Agrobiotechnology, CERTH, Thermi-Thessaloniki, Greece

Autar K. Mattoo 
Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y Desarrollo, Sonora, 
México; USDA-ARS, Sustainable Agricultural Systems Laboratory, 
Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Beltsville, Maryland, USA

Munir Mawassi 
Department of Plant Pathology, Agricultural Research Organization, 
The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel

Richard B. Meagher 
Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA

Giuliana Medrano 
Arkansas Biosciences Institute, Arkansas State University, 
Jonesboro, Arkansans, USA

Richard Meilan 
Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Purdue University, 
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA

Larry L. Murdock 
Department of Entomology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana, USA

xxii

Contributors

Martina Newell-McGloughlin 
Director, University of California Systemwide Biotechnology Research 
and Education Program (UCBREP); Adjunct Professor, Plant 
Pathology, University of California Davis, Davis, California, USA

Blake A. Simmons 
Vice-President, Deconstruction Division, Joint BioEnergy Institute, 
Emeryville, California, USA; Senior Manager, Biological and Materials 
Science Center, Biofuels and Biomaterials Science and Technology, 
Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, California USA

Kaisa Nieminen 
Department of Plant Molecular Biology, University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland

Peggy Ozias-Akins 
Department of Horticulture, The University of Georgia, Tifton, 
Georgia, USA

Zvi Peleg 
Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, 
California, USA

Elizabeth A.H. Pilon-Smits 
Biology Department, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
Colorado, USA

Yves Poirier 
Département de Biologie Moléculaire Végétale, Université de 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

Ute Roessner 
Australian Centre for Plant Functional Genomics and Metabolomics 
Australia, School of Botany, University of Melbourne, Australia

Julio Salinas 
Departamento de Biología Medioambiental, Centro de 
Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain

Dor Salomon 
Department of Molecular Biology and Ecology of Plants, Tel-Aviv 
University, Tel-Aviv, Israel

Alon Samach 
The R.H. Smith Institute for Plant Sciences and Genetics in 
Agriculture, The R.H. Smith Faculty of Agricultural, Food and 
Environment, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel

Fumihiko Sato 
Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto, Japan

Trude Schwarzacher 
Department of Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK

Guido Sessa 
Department of Molecular Biology and Ecology of Plants, Tel-Aviv 
University, Tel-Aviv, Israel

Yoel Shiboleth 
Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA

Acram Taji 
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia

Tanya Tapingkae 
Faculty of Agricultural Technology, Chiang Mai Rajabhat University, 
Thailand

Martín-Ernesto Tiznado-Hernández 
Department of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA; Centro de Investigación en 
Alimentación y Desarrollo, Sonora, México; USDA-ARS, Sustainable 
Agricultural Systems Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural Research 
Center, Beltsville, Maryland, USA

Christopher N. Topp 
Department of Biology and Institute for Genome Science and Policy, 
Center for System, Biology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 
USA

Athanasios Tsaftaris 
Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, AUTH, Thessaloniki, 
Greece; Institute of Agrobiotechnology, CERTH, Thermi-Thessaloniki, 
Greece

Tzvi Tzfira 
Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA

Jan B. van Beilen 
Département de Biologie Moléculaire Végétale, Université de 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

Deborah Vicuna Requesens 
Arkansas Biosciences Institute, Arkansas State University, 
Jonesboro, Arkansas, USA

Harkamal Walia 
Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, 
California, USA

Philip R. Watkins 
CSIRO, Plant Industry, Canberra, Australia

Dae-Jin Yun 
Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 program) and Environmental 
Biotechnology, National Core Research Center, Graduate School of 
Gyeongsang National University, Korea; Department of Horticulture 
and Landscape Architecture, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana, USA

Vincent K Shier 
Oblon, Spivak, McClelland, Maier, & Neustadt, L.L.P., Alexandria, 
Virginia, USA

Zul Zulkarnain 
Agricultural Faculty, University of Jambi, Indonesia

xxiii

Genetics and genomics of crop 
domestication

1

J.S. (Pat) Heslop-Harrison  Trude Schwarzacher
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Plants and Domestication  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
Domesticated crops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
Weeds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
Invasive species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
Model species and crop sciences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
Understanding Domestication Processes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5

Evidence of relatives and processes of  
early domestication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
Genes of domestication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
Genetic variation and domestication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
Genetic control related to diversity and speciation . . . .  6
Domestication of maize . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
Domestication of legumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
Yield traits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
Hybrid Species and New Polyploids in Domestication   .  .  .  . 8
Post-Domestication Selection  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
Modifications in crop characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
New Domestication   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9
Domesticated species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
Lost crops  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
Trees and biofuels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
Genetics and breeding for new uses:  
Ecosystem services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
Features of Domesticated Genomes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
Superdomestication  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16

Plants and Domestication

Scope

In this review of genetics and genomics related to plant bio-
technology and agriculture, we consider the nature of species 
that  are  grown  as  crops  and  used  by  mankind,  or  otherwise 
associated  with  people.  We  will  then  review  aspects  of  the 
genetics and genome changes that have been associated with 
crop  plants  and  their  domestication  from  their  wild  rela-
tives before speculating about some of the new opportunities 
for  plant  biotechnology  to  meet  the  challenges  faced  in  the 
twenty-first century.

Domesticated crops

Domesticated  crops  are  a  subset  of  all  plants.  Domesticated 
species,  whether  plants  or  animals,  are  considered  as  those 
grown by people for economic or other reasons, and that dif-
fer from their closest wild relatives. Domesticated species are 
reliant  on  human  intervention  for  their  reproduction,  nutri-
tion, health, planting, and dispersal. They are harvested with 
the possibility that a different species will be planted in their 
place.  Additional  characteristics  selected  for  domestication 
include  size  of  harvested  parts,  yield  or  yield  stability,  and 
quality for the use of the product. There are extensive genetic 
differences  in  all  of  these  characteristics  between  individu-
als within a species, as well as between species, and multiple 
characteristics are selected at the time of domestication that 
make  the  crop  worth  growing  by  farmers  for  millennia  and 
now by today’s plant breeders.

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00001-8

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Genomic  techniques  allow  the  underlying  selection  proc-
esses  to  be  understood,  exploited,  and  refined  for  crop 
improvement.  Genomic  scientists  can  now  understand  and 
improve  the  efficiency  of  exploitation  of  genes,  genetic 
diversity, and controls present in crop species and their wild 
relatives.  Domestication  of  plants,  including  selection  of 
appropriate species and genetic changes, is one of the features 
of agriculture, but agriculture also requires knowledge beyond 
suitable genotypes (Janick, 2005), such as the planting, grow-
ing,  protection,  and  harvest  of  the  plants  and  the  accurate 
timing of the various farming operations.

Domesticated plants are grown by the human population to 
meet a range of needs that can be summarized by the six “Fs”: 
food, feed, fuel, fibers (and chemicals), flowers, and pharma-
ceuticals.  Plants  within  each  of  these  classes  have  substan-
tial  economic  impact.  Nevertheless,  out  of  400,000  species 
of flowering plants, less than 200 have been domesticated as 
food and feed plants, and just 12 species provide 75% of the 
food  eaten  (FAOStat,  2010).  Very  few  of  the  1000  gymno-
sperms, and arguably none of the 15,000 ferns and allies, have 
been domesticated. New knowledge of genetics and improved 
techniques  of  selection,  hybridization,  or  gene  transfer  have 
the potential to enable more species to be domesticated.

As  well  as  domesticated  crop  species,  there  are  many 
spices,  pharmaceutical  (and  medicinal),  horticultural,  and 
garden  (“flowers”)  plants  collected  over  the  last  millennia 
from  the  wild  and  cultivated  on  a  small-scale.  These  plants 
may  be  genetically  similar  and  as  diverse  as  their  wild  rela-
tives, although one or a small number of genes may have been 
selected.  Many  of  the  selections  require  human  intervention 
to  survive,  often  because  they  are  grown  outside  their  natu-
ral  climate  range  or  have  abnormalities  that  are  regarded  as 
attractive  or  useful  but  reduce  plant  fitness.  However,  with 
the exception of some hybrids, the limited changes mean they 
are not normally considered as domesticated.

Weeds

Weeds and invasive species are associated with human farm-
ing and habitation, although they are not normally considered 
as domesticated species. There has been limited genomic and 
genetic  work  on  most  of  these  species  with  notable  excep-
tions,  in  particular  Arabidopsis  thaliana.  Harlan  and  deWet 
(1965) defined a weed as “a generally unwanted organism that 
thrives in habitats disturbed by man”; like crops, weed species 
are  extremely  diverse,  and  have  different  strategies  for  sur-
vival.  The  effect  of  weeds  on  agriculture  can  be  devastating, 
such  as  taking  nutrition  from  the  crop,  making  harvest  diffi-
cult, or reducing the value and quality of the harvest.

Most crop plants will not establish themselves in an envi-
ronment where weeds thrive and active intervention is needed 
to remove competition. In an extensive study of feral oil seed 
rape  (canola  or  Brassica  napus),  Crawley  and  Brown  (1995) 
showed  the  very  high  level  of  turnover  of  site  occupancy  on 
highway  verges,  with  local  extinction  occurring  within  three 
years  in  the  absence  of  new  seeding  and  soil  disturbance.  In 
contrast,  weeds  can  be  notably  persistent,  with;  for  exam-
ple,  nettles  (Urtica  dioica)  remaining  as  markers  of  sites  of 

habitation after hundreds of years in northern Europe in the 
absence  of  further  habitation  or  evidence  of  crops.  There 
are  strong  selection  pressures  on  weeds  to  benefit  from  the 
human-created habitat at the farm (rather than plant breeder) 
level, working with potentially much larger and more widely 
distributed populations than breeders use. Weeds may mimic 
the  growth  forms  or  seeds  of  crops  and  are  distributed  or 
grow  along  with  them.  The  selection  is  not  applied  to  yield 
and  quality  characteristics,  but  on  survival  and  popula-
tion  distribution  or  expansion,  with  key  genes  such  as  those 
for  seed  dormancy  or  dehiscence  (see  the  section  Genes  of 
Domestication) potentially selected in the opposite direction 
from the seeds of a crop.

Crops  can  become  weeds.  In  the  Brassicas,  for  example, 
the  same  genotype  may  be  a  weed  with  low  yield  and  poor 
characteristics  in  one  environment,  but  a  robust  crop  with 
desirable  properties  in  another.  Volunteers  —  plants  from  a 
previous  crop  on  the  same  land  —  are  a  major  challenge  in 
growing many field crops. They thrive in the crop conditions; 
the  economic  damage  from  these  weeds  includes  acting  as 
reservoirs  of  crop-specific  diseases  over  several  seasons  in  a 
rotation.

Weeds  have  no  harvest  value  in  a  crop,  reducing  yields, 
and making crop management difficult, so farmers have been 
improving their weed control methods since the start of agri-
culture.  In  advanced  commercial  farms  weed  control  is  an 
expensive  part  of  the  agronomy,  while  for  smallholders  and 
subsistence  farmers,  the  continuous  labor  required  can  be 
one  of  the  most  tedious  and  demeaning  operations  for  the 
people,  usually  women  and  children,  that  are  involved.  The 
removal  and  control  of  weeds  is  environmentally  costly  and 
involves  burning,  herbicides,  deep  plowing  and  multiple  soil 
cultivations,  processes  leading  to  erosion,  poor  soil  moisture 
conservation, use of large amounts of energy, loss of soil struc-
ture,  uncontrolled  fires,  and  smoke  or  pollution.  Approaches 
to  weed  control  have  changed  continuously  over  millennia, 
including use of fire, planting methods, and plowing. As well 
as the application of agronomic and technological approaches 
to limit weed spread, breeders must also consider the genetic 
characteristics  of  weeds  and  both  the  potential  of  a  crop  to 
become a weed and the ease of control of weeds within a new 
variety. This work interacts with making models of population 
biology  based  on  the  understanding  of  weed  characteristics 
such as developmental plasticity or seed dormancy.

Invasive species

Another  group  of  plants  associated  with  humans  are  the 
invasive  species.  Along  with  habitat  destruction,  invasive 
species  are  often  considered  to  be  the  major  threat  to  bio-
diversity  worldwide,  although  Gurevitch  and  Padilla  (2004) 
pointed out that the cause and effect data are generally weak. 
Genetics and genomic research is required to understand the 
biology  of  invasives,  so  that  the  characteristics  that  led  to 
uncontrolled  displacement  of  native  species  can  be  avoided 
in  the  breeding  of  crops.  The  requirements  of  crops  includ-
ing high partitioning of the plant’s resources to the harvestable 
product, non-distribution of seeds, and uniformity of growth 

4

Genetics and genomics of crop domestication

C H A P T E R   1

tend to mean that few domesticated crops have invasive char-
acteristics.  However,  a  number  of  horticultural  plants  and 
those introduced for their novelty value have caused problems 
both in agriculture and the wild in very diverse environments 
ranging  from  temperate  and  tropical,  through  fresh  water, 
grasslands,  and  woods  to  uplands,  with  the  species  taking 
advantage of man-made or man-influenced habitats. Examples 
of invasive species causing significant problems include water 
hyacinth  (Eichhornia  species),  Rhododendron,  knotweed 
(Fallopia japonica; Bailey et al., 2007), kudzu (Pueraria spp.), 
and some ferns (bracken, Pteridium, and Azolla spp.). This is 
notable since ferns have not been domesticated as crops.

Model species and crop sciences

The  diversity  in  growth  forms,  reproduction,  and  uses 
between  the  crops  means  that  most  crop  scientists  have 
focused  their  work  on  a  single  species,  while  fundamental 
studies adopted a small number of convenient models. During 
much of the twentieth century, major research or model spe-
cies  were  crops  because  they  could  be  easily  obtained  and 
grown  worldwide,  and  laboratory  protocols,  resources,  and 
background  information  were  extensive.  Spinach  was  used 
for many studies of photosynthesis (e.g., Bassham and Calvin, 
1955),  maize  was  used  for  genetics  (e.g.,  McClintock  et  al., 
1981),  and  carrot  or  tobacco  was  used  for  tissue  culture. 
However, for genetics, a fast generation time, small plant size, 
and the ability to mutagenize populations were major advan-
tages.  Researchers  including  Kranz,  Redei,  and  Koornneef 
(e.g.,  Koornneef  et  al.,  1983)  established  A.  thaliana  as  a 
model species in the 1970s, and, because of its small genome 
size (165 Mbp), Arabidopsis was chosen to be the first plant 
to  have  its  DNA  sequenced  (Arabidopsis  Genome  Initiative, 
2000).  The  ease  of  growing  large  numbers  under  controlled 
conditions and extensive scientific resources led to it becom-
ing  the  model  for  plant  research  in  many  laboratories.  Rice 
became  the  second  plant  genome  to  be  sequenced,  because 
of its status as one of the world’s two major crops, relatively 
small  genome  size  of  435 Mbp,  and  contrasting  taxonomic 
position  to  Arabidopsis  (e.g.,  Sasaki  et  al.,  2002).  A  major 
justification  of  these  sequencing  projects  was  the  suggestion 
that the gene content of all plants would be similar, a predic-
tion that has largely held true (e.g., Figure 3 in Argout et al., 
2011),  although  sequencing  led  to  some  surprises  including 
the low total number of genes — typically 30,000 — found in 
all organisms.

With the advent of plant biotechnologies, genomics, math-
ematical  modeling,  and  informatics,  a  large  number  of  tools 
and  results  of  general  nature  can  be  applied  across  most 
crops and potential crops (see review by Moose and Mumm, 
2008).  Few  crop  scientists  are  now  restricted  to  work  on 
one  species  and  need  to  exploit  approaches  and  results  with 
other  crops  and  model  species.  In  the  genetics  and  genom-
ics  field  there  are  many  parallels  between  species,  making  it 
essential  to  integrate  information.  Throughout  history  and 
prehistory,  humans  have  been  classifying  plants,  assessing 
their  similarity  to  use  as  food  or  medicines,  and  avoiding  or 
processing toxic plants long before the advent of agriculture. 

A  succession  of  techniques  including  morphological  study, 
crossing, karyotype analysis, DNA sequence comparisons, and 
now  whole  genome  sequences  has  established  plant  relation-
ships.  The  Angiosperm  Phylogeny  Group  (2009)  presents 
a  robust,  monophyletic  phylogeny  showing  relationships 
between  all  angiosperms;  better  understanding  of  the  evolu-
tion  and  phylogeny  is  important  for  crop  genetics  because  it 
shows the most closely related species to use to find valuable 
characteristics.

Understanding Domestication 
Processes

Evidence of relatives and processes of 
early domestication

The  early  processes  of  domestication  can  be  inferred  from 
examination of wild crop relatives and comparison with exist-
ing crops at the morphological, physiological, genetic, or DNA 
levels.  Since  farming  and  domestication  is  less  than  10,000 
years  old,  the  archaeological  record  of  the  introduction  of 
species into agriculture is rich (Zeder, 2006) and documents 
some aspects of the transition from hunter–gatherer societies 
to  sedentary,  farming-based  communities.  Indeed,  the  earli-
est  hunter–gatherer  cave  paintings  date  from  32,000  years 
ago  (Clottes,  2010)  and  in  combination  with  archaeological 
evidence they show the pre-agricultural period. The domesti-
cation process happened independently in Southeast Asia and 
the  Middle  East,  and  soon  after  it  is  found  in  Asia,  Europe, 
Africa, and the Americas after the retreat of the Pleistocene 
ice  around  12,000  years  ago.  The  domestication  of  all  of 
the  major  crops  now  grown  started  at  about  the  same  time. 
Pictures of domesticated plants appear in Chinese and Arabic 
manuscripts  up  to  2000  years  ago  (Paris  et  al.,  2009;  Wang 
et al., 2008; Janick, 2005) and can be correlated with archae-
ological  evidence.  With  the  use  of  genetic  markers  to  geno-
type  crops  and  their  relatives  found  in  various  locations, 
Salamini  et  al.  (2002)  reviewed  how  genetic  markers  traced 
the  sites  of  domestication  of  cereals  to  wild  populations  of 
grasses  in  the  Near  East,  and  Gross  and  Olsen  (2010)  dis-
cussed  that  genetic  inferences  about  geographical  origins  of 
crops  and  the  number  of  independent  domestication  events 
are compatible with archaeological data.

Domestication  of  particular  species,  and  the  genetic  char-
acteristics that make them different from their wild relatives, 
are also associated with technology used in agriculture socie-
ties for planting, harvesting, threshing, transport, and storage; 
or long-lasting infrastructure like roads, habitations, and field 
organization; and domestic arrangements including specialized 
storage and preparation premises or cooking processes. All of 
these  give  additional  information  about  the  genetic  changes 
from wild species since genotypes must complement the soci-
etal practices. In the first decade of the twenty-first century, 
genetic  and  genomic  methods  enabled  examination  of  the 
processes  of  crop  domestication,  including  both  the  identifi-
cation  of  the  genetic  basis  and  its  origin  and  the  duration  of 
domestication (Papa et al., 2007).

5

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Genes of domestication

The  “suite  of  traits”  including  seed  dispersal,  seed  dormancy, 
gigantism in the harvested parts, determinate and synchronized 
growth,  increased  harvest  index,  and  change  in  sweetness  or 
bitterness have been called the “domestication syndrome” after 
Hammer  (1984).  These  characteristics  make  a  crop  worth 
growing, and without them the difficulties of planting, cultiva-
tion,  and  poor  harvest  make  them  unrewarding  to  grow.  It  is 
likely that a combination of all of the characteristics must be 
present together for a species to reach the first stage of domes-
tication,  since  most  of  these  traits  in  some  form  are  present 
in all domesticated crops. Doebley (2004) and Doebley et al. 
(2006) reviewed data showing that the differences in cultivars 
mean that wild progenitors of crops are not easily recognizable. 
Furthermore, many of these characters are so disadvantageous 
in non-cultivated situations that the crop will not establish in 
the  wild  (Crawley  and  Brown,  1995):  indehiscent  plants  will 
not  distribute  seeds,  whereas  an  annual  plant  bearing  seeds 
without  dormancy  means  the  species  would  not  survive  one 
bad season.

Further evidence, at least in the cereals, for the importance 
of the small number of domestication syndrome genes comes 
from the similarity of changes in several domesticates known 
as  convergent  evolution.  Paterson  et  al.  (1995)  showed  that 
the  same  genes  and  gene  pathways  were  involved  in  domes-
tication  of  sorghum,  rice,  and  maize.  As  with  other  genetic 
effects,  many  domestication  characteristics  are  regulated  by 
quantitative trait loci (QTLs) where several genes have effects 
(Varshney et al., 2006), and transcriptional regulators (rather 
than  enzymatic  or  structural)  genes  (Doebley  et  al.,  2006; 
Martin et al., 2010) are often involved.

Genetic variation and domestication

Genetically,  any  requirement  for  change  of  multiple  char-
acters  simultaneously  requires  either  an  extremely  unusual 
conjunction  of  genetic  mutations  or  recombination,  or  selec-
tion and intercrossing to bring characters together over many 
generations.  Clearly,  the  latter  did  not  happen  to  any  great 
extent,  and  genetic  and  genomic  data  collected  over  the 
last decade do suggest that the diversity of alleles present in 
domesticated  species  is  lower  than  in  their  wild  progenitors. 
This  supports  the  domestication  syndrome  concept  with  a 
number  of  characteristics  coming  together  at  one  time.  This 
selection  has  left  a  “genomic  signature”  in  all  current  crops, 
present thousands of generations later, and the loss of diver-
sity  compared  to  the  wild  species  is  seen  as  a  “genetic  bot-
tleneck”  (Doebley,  2004).  Genetic  analysis  has  shown  that 
many  of  the  gene  alleles  involved  in  the  domestication  syn-
drome are present within the gene pool of wild progenitors of 
crops, although with a low frequency, whereas other traits are 
apparently new mutations (Doebley et al., 2006; Huang et al., 
2007; and see Chapter 13). One important approach to iden-
tifying  genetic  bottlenecks  has  been  comparison  of  genomic 
regions  neighboring  key  domestication  traits  with  selectively 
neutral  regions;  reduced  variation  in  linked  genes  suggests 
that the number of domestication syndrome genes is limited. 

The  “selective  sweep”  of  the  genome  (Clark  et  al.,  2004) 
with directional selection leads to reduced variation and link-
age  disequilibria  (Anhalt  et  al.,  2008,  2009)  in  the  selected 
regions.

Whereas  only  a  few  plants  have  carried  critical  traits 
related  to  domestication  and  have  been  used  for  most  sub-
sequent breeding, the genetic bottleneck or “founder effect” 
will  have  reduced  the  diversity  to  a  small  number  of  gene 
alleles  present  in  the  original  selected  population  (changing 
gene allele frequencies, eliminating rare alleles, and introduc-
ing  linkage  disequilibrium).  It  has  widely  been  considered, 
especially on theoretical grounds, that genetic drift will have 
further  reduced  the  diversity  after  domestication,  given  that 
the  selection  of  a  few  hundred  varieties  at  most  for  use  in 
breeding represents a tiny population size. In many cultivated 
crops, the level of genetic polymorphism has been reduced by 
60 to 90% in passing through the genetic bottleneck in culti-
vars  compared  to  wild  relatives  (e.g., Buckler  et  al.,  2001  in 
maize). Similarly, rice cultivars may include only 10 to 20% of 
the diversity present in the wild relatives (Zhu et al., 2007). 
Even with extensive data, it remains challenging to distinguish 
between  the  monophyletic  and  polyphyletic  origin  of  a  crop 
using  molecular  markers.  As  noted  by  Zhang  et  al.  (2009), 
genetic marker data can indicate that the two cultivated rice 
subspecies,  indica  and  japonica,  either  evolved  independ-
ently  at  different  times  and  sites  (Tang  et  al.,  2006),  or  had 
a  monophyletic  origin  from  a  common  wild  rice  that  subse-
quently  separated.  The  diversity  restriction  is  not  universal, 
and the polyphyletic origin of some polyploid crops has prob-
ably  reduced  the  bottleneck  effect:  hexaploid  bread  wheat 
(AABBDD  genome  constitution)  has  much  of  the  genetic 
diversity  present  in  its  progenitors  (Dubcovsky  and  Dvorak, 
2007)  and  originated  recurrently  with  ancestral  D-genomes 
(Caldwell et al., 2004), even if all the D-genome variation is 
not represented (Saeidi et al., 2008). Cifuentes et al. (2010) 
discussed  the  polyphyletic  origin  of  canola  (oilseed  rape,  
B. napus), which incorporates variation from both the dupli-
cation of loci as a polyploid and from several ancestors of the 
tetraploid cultivars.

In domesticated species, artificial selection is the main evo-
lutionary force because humans — farmers and more recently 
plant  breeders  —  exert  strong  selection  pressure  compared 
to  that  from  the  environment  where  a  species  is  established 
(Innan and Kim, 2008). These authors pointed out that arti-
ficial selection may act on alleles that may have been neutral 
variants  before  domestication,  and  the  fixation  of  these  may 
not remove DNA variation in the surrounding region, depend-
ing  on  the  initial  frequency  of  the  beneficial  alleles.  The 
number of alleles selected during domestication, the popula-
tion  sizes,  and  the  number  of  independent  selection  events 
will all affect the intensity of the selection bottleneck.

Genetic control related to diversity and 
speciation

While  geographical  isolation  of  populations  stops  gene  flow 
within  a  species,  it  is  far  from  the  only  effect  that  leads  to 
separation  of  genotypes.  Rieseberg  and  Blackman  (2010) 

6

Genetics and genomics of crop domestication

C H A P T E R   1

have  identified  no  less  than  41  different  genes  that  can  lead 
to  reproductive  isolation  of  populations.  Genetics  related  to 
plant  evolution  and  isolation  is  a  relatively  recent  research 
area, and it is clear that the identification of genes that effect 
reproductive  behavior  —  recombination  and  interact  with 
effects on fertility, leading to isolation and speciation (Heslop-
Harrison, 2010) — may well show how some of the selective 
sweeps  (Nielsen  et  al.,  2005)  have  been  driven  during  crop 
domestication.  Understanding  the  genetic  effects  and  genes 
that enable these processes may show how levels of diversity 
can be maintained within species, whether in wild ecosystems 
or crops.

Domestication of maize

One of the best understood examples of genetic and genomic 
changes  during  domestication  comes  from  maize  (Zea  mays 
or corn in the Americas), where the seminal work of Doebley 
and  colleagues  (Doebley  et  al.,  2006;  Wright  et  al.,  2005) 
identified  the  relatively  few  genes  giving  rise  to  the  major 
physiological  and  morphological  differences  between  maize 
and  its  closest  wild  ancestor,  teosinte  (represented  by  sev-
eral  Zea  species).  Maize,  with  naked  grains  in  multiple  rows 
and 10 to 100 times more kernels per ear, has a very differ-
ent appearance from the branched teosinte, which has grains 
with a hard seed coat on inflorescences that shatter (disarticu-
late) when ripe and carried on multiple stalks. Among the first 
genes  identified  was  teosinte  branched  1  (tb1),  a  transcrip-
tional regulator that represses the branching (Doebley, 2004). 
The gene teosinte glume architecture, tga1 (Wang et al., 2005), 
is  a  key  single-gene  that  controls  development  of  the  hard 
coat around the kernel in teosinte. It was identified by high-
resolution  genetic  mapping  and  map-based  cloning.  Doust 
(2007) more generally studied the developmental genetics of 
grass  plant-architecture  in  genetic,  evolutionary,  and  ecologi-
cal  contexts.  He  concluded  that  exploring  the  phylogenetic 
context of the crop grasses suggests new ways to identify and 
create combinations of morphological traits that will best suit 
future  needs:  knowledge  of  past  events  shows  how  future 
breeding can proceed.

Technically,  works  such  as  those  previously  mentioned 
have focused on making experimental hybrid populations for 
genetically mapping traits that can be identified as domestica-
tion  related.  Another  group  of  researchers  took  a  large-scale 
approach  to  characterizing  how  bottlenecks  and  artificial 
selection  have  altered  genetic  variation  during  domestication 
of  teosinte  to  form  maize  using  an  unbiased,  genome-wide 
approach. Wang et al. (2005; see also Vigouroux et al., 2005) 
measured  single  nucleotide  polymorphism  (SNP)  levels  in 
774  genes,  and  found  that  the  maize  inbred  lines  had  only 
57%  of  the  variation  present  in  the  teosinte  sample,  show-
ing  evidence  for  the  genetic  bottleneck.  The  genes  could  be 
divided  into  two  classes  based  on  the  variation  signatures  at 
single  nucleotides  (SNPs):  2–5%  of  the  genes  were  under 
selection  during  domestication  and  have  been  selected  with 
10 times the intensity of the selectively neutral genes where 
limited  population  size  alone  has  reduced  the  variation. 
Yamasaki  et  al.  (2005,  2007)  sequenced  1095  maize  genes 

from various lines and identified eight genes with no variation 
between  inbred  maize  lines,  but  with  SNP  variation  in  teos-
inte;  six  showed  selection  throughout  the  DNA  sequence  of 
the gene, while two had signatures of selection in the 3 por-
tion of each gene. The functions of the genes, examined after 
the  analysis,  were  “consistent  with  agronomic  selection  for 
nutritional quality, maturity, and productivity,” although most 
had  not  been  identified  previously  as  being  associated  with 
their selection in the crop.

Domestication of legumes

Weeden  (2007)  examined  the  domestication  of  the  pea 
(Pisum  sativum),  and  identified  approximately  20  genes  or 
QTLs responsible for the domestication of it. Because of the 
availability of a range of germplasm from the pea, a time line 
for the “domestication syndrome” genes could be established. 
Domestication  syndrome  characters  including  indehiscent 
pods, seed dormancy, gigantism as seed weight, and earliness 
were seen in the most primitive lines, while dwarfing, harvest 
index, photoperiod-sensitivity and white flowering, along with 
additional  seed  weight  traits,  appeared  much  more  recently. 
This  is  evidence  for  the  model  shown  by  Gross  and  Olsen 
(2010)  that  domestication  is  a  two-stage  process.  First,  is  a 
rapid process that makes the crop worthwhile to grow, includ-
ing the domestication syndrome traits that allow a crop to be 
reliably sown, cultivated, and harvested such as uniform seed 
germination  and  fruit  ripening.  This  is  then  followed  by  a 
stage  acquiring  traits  over  a  longer  period  that  improves  the 
crop.

A second finding of Weeden (2007) showed that, although 
the  phenotypic  characters  are  similar,  the  genes  involved  in 
pea  domestication  are  different  from  those  in  the  common 
bean, Phaseolus, contrasting with the conclusion showing con-
vergent evolution in rice, maize, and sorghum (Paterson et al., 
1995).  Weeden  is  optimistic  that  the  presence  of  multiple 
genes means that there are several ways for breeders to mod-
ify unwanted characters and avoid detrimental effects associ-
ated with some otherwise valuable alleles.

Several studies have investigated the genetic diversity and 
signatures of domestication in soybean, a species with a center 
of origin and domestication in South China. Guo et al. (2010) 
proposed a single origin with a moderately severe genetic bot-
tleneck  during  domestication,  showing  that  wild  soybeans 
in  South  China  have  an  unexploited  and  valuable  gene  pool 
for future breeding. However, Hyten et al. (2006) examined 
other  populations,  finding  that  there  were  several  rounds  of 
reduction of genetic diversity, following domestication in Asia 
to  produce  numerous  Asian  landraces  and  introduction  of  a 
few  genotypes  to  North  America.  Notably,  they  found  mod-
ern  cultivars  retained  72%  of  the  sequence  diversity  present 
in  the  Asian  landraces  but  lost  79%  of  rare  alleles,  with  the 
major constrictions of diversity coming first from the domes-
tication event, and secondly from the introduction of a small 
number  of  races  to  North  America,  while  later  breeding  has 
had less effect.

Grasses  tend  to  have  inflorescences  where  all  individuals 
flower together and the seeds reach maturity at a similar time, 

7

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

which  is  certainly  an  advantage  for  agriculture.  However, 
other wild plants flower and set seed over a long part of the 
crop season, making growing and harvest of the ripe seed dif-
ficult. In species such as soybean (Glycine max), determinacy 
of  growth  through  the  character  of  a  terminal  flower  is  an 
agronomically important trait associated with the domestica-
tion. Most soybean cultivars are classifiable into indeterminate 
and determinate growth habit, whereas G. soja, the wild pro-
genitor of soybean, is indeterminate. Tian et al. (2010) took a 
candidate-gene approach to demonstrate that the determinate 
growth habit in soybean is controlled by a single gene homolo-
gous to TFL1 (terminal flower) in Arabidopsis, which is a rea-
sonable  expectation.  The  genetics  of  the  determinate  habit 
has been known since the 1970s, and mapped more recently. 
There are, as expected from the known genetic background of 
soybean, four homologous copies for the determinate genes.

Yield traits

Yield,  affected  by  gigantism  and  number  of  harvested  units, 
is normally a quantitative trait with continuous variation and 
complex  heritability.  However,  analysis  and  partitioning  of 
yield  components,  combined  with  use  of  well-designed  test 
crosses  and  large  populations,  is  allowing  key  regions  of  the 
genome  —  in  some  cases  now  correlated  with  genes  —  to 
be  identified.  Genes  increasing  harvestable  yield  have  been 
extensively  studied  using  genetic  and  genomic  approaches. 
Measurements  of  yield  components,  starting  long  before 
extensive use of genomic approaches, showed that, for exam-
ple, rice yield includes traits such as grain number and grain 
weight,  or  duration  and  rate  of  grain-filling,  and  is  regulated 
by  multiple  QTLs  (Yano,  2001).  Use  of  appropriate  hybrid 
populations  segregating  for  yield  characteristics,  such  as  bio-
mass  in  forage  grasses  (ryegrass,  Lolium  perenne;  Anhalt 
et al., 2009) or fruit yield in tomato, Solanum lycopersicoides 
(Lycopersicon esculentum; Cong et al., 2002), is showing that 
genetic  regions  on  the  map  are  responsible  for  a  large  part 
of  the  variation  in  yield  observed.  However,  often  a  large 
number  of  genetic  regions  are  identified:  in  tomato,  no  less 
than 28 different QTLs affecting fruit weight have been iden-
tified  (Cong  et  al.,  2002).  QTL  analysis  is  also  of  potential 
importance when identifying characters where the same gene 
affects  different  traits;  this  could  indicate  selection  in  oppo-
site  directions  is  unlikely  to  succeed  (e.g.,  grain  protein  and 
yield or palatability/sweetness and insect resistance).

Hybrid Species and New Polyploids in 
Domestication

Most of the species previously discussed have a genetic struc-
ture similar to their wild relatives, such as fertility and repro-
duction through seeds. However, a group of crop species have 
a  different  genomic  constitution  from  wild  species,  bringing 
together  copies  of  genomes  from  different  ancestral  species 
that  are  not  found  normally  in  nature.  This  includes  species 
that have different chromosome numbers from their relatives 
or that are hybrids (see Molnár et al., 2010).

Among  early  domesticates,  the  banana  is  an  interesting 
example.  Wild,  fertile,  diploid  bananas  have  small  fruits  and 
large seeds with very little fruit pulp that is eaten. However, 
almost  all  of  the  cultivated  lines  are  sterile  and  parthe-
nocarpic,  producing  fruits  in  the  absence  of  seeds.  This  is  a 
characteristic  associated  with  triploidy,  so  cultivars  have  a 
chromosome constitution of 2n  3x  33, while the fertile 
wild  species  are  2n    2x    22.  The  ultimate  origin  of  the 
accessions  that  have  become  cultivars  is  unclear,  although 
there are many independent parthenocarpic cultivars selected 
by  early  farmers  in  South  East  Asia  that  are  vegetatively 
propagated  (Heslop-Harrison  and  Schwarzacher,  2007). 
De  Langhe  et  al.  (2010)  presented  evidence  indicating  the 
complex origin of the cultivars, involving intermediate hybrids 
and  backcrossing,  with  additional  clonal  variation.  They  note 
that this gives extensive variation, but makes development of 
artificial breeding schemes difficult.

Polyploid  cytotypes  can  be  larger  than  their  diploid  pro-
genitors,  and  this  has  lead  to  their  selection  and  cultivation 
in  blueberries  and  strawberries  (the  octaploid  hybrid  is  cul-
tivated,  and  small  wild  species  are  mostly  diploid;  Schulze 
et al., 2011). This advantage is not universal and fruit gigant-
ism  can  be  under  the  control  of  several  genes.  Cultivated 
grapes are much larger than their wild progenitors, but there 
is  no  recent  genome  duplication  in  their  ancestry  (French-
Italian Public Consortium, 2007).

Post-Domestication Selection

Modifications in crop characteristics

Since early agriculture, crop improvement has been a continu-
ous  process  over  thousands  of  years,  driven  by  the  need  for 
disease  resistance,  adaptation  to  new  and  changing  climates, 
quality,  ability  to  propagate  and  grow,  and  yield.  Systematic 
breeding since the mid-twentieth century — required by the 
need for increased food production, new crop uses, a different 
socioeconomic environment, climate, and water use changes — 
and new quality requirements have accelerated breeding with 
unprecedented speed.

As  well  as  the  continuing  increase  in  the  world’s  popula-
tion,  people  worldwide  have  moved  into  conurbations.  In 
Europe,  only  2%  of  the  population  is  engaged  in  agriculture, 
a change seen in global trends, with 2008 being the first year 
when more than half the human population lived in cities.

Changes  in  demand  have  certainly  lead  to  substantial 
changes  in  the  nature  of  crops.  This  divorce  of  populations 
from  local  food  production  requires  new  infrastructure  to 
bring agricultural production to the people, and perhaps new 
genotypes appropriate to the transport chain. Increased meat 
consumption,  particularly  of  chicken  and  pork,  is  seen  as  a 
significant global trend, requiring not only farming of the ani-
mals, but also production of the crops to feed these animals. 
Another significant global trend is the increase in plant oil pro-
duction driven by consumer demand. Major crops such as oil 
palm, oilseed rape, and soybean show the greatest increase in 
production over the last 50 years. The increase in animal and 

8

Genetics and genomics of crop domestication

C H A P T E R   1

oil consumption is widely considered to have negative effects 
on  human  health,  although  the  use  of  biotechnology  allows 
modification  of  the  fatty  acid  content  of  oilseed  plants  for 
health purposes or to produce nutritional fatty acids not nor-
mally found in crop plants (Damude and Kinney, 2008).

Over a similar period, several crops have shown substantial 
declines either globally or regionally. Notable examples would 
be  fiber  crops  including  hemp,  jute,  and  flax  that  have  been 
replaced by petrochemical-based ropes and textiles, while oats 
in northern Europe are no longer grown as feed for horses.

Mechanization  of  agriculture  in  the  twentieth  century  in 
developed countries has directly led to landscape-wide effects 
such  as  larger  fields,  more  land  in  cultivation,  and  changed 
water or erosion management. Improved crop protection and 
artificial nitrogenous fertilizer application has also led to sub-
stantial changes in landscape and crop mixes, largely removing 
the need for fallowing or cover crops. Along with labor costs 
(which are very high in crops where mechanization has been 
limited),  farming  practices  have  certainly  changed  both  the 
mix  of  crops  grown  and  the  requirements  from  the  genetics 
of the varieties in a complex relationship between consumer 
income, tastes, import availability, and price.

Is biotechnology affecting the species and acreage of crops? 
Two  crops  showing  substantial  production  declines  regionally 
have  been  restored  to  production  with  transgenic  varieties. 
Lines  of  cotton  carrying  insect  resistance  with  the  Bt-toxin 
have  lead  directly  to  an  increase  (or  stability  from  a  declin-
ing trend) in acreage of cotton. Papaya, where Hawaiian pro-
duction fell by 40% and moved from the Oahu island because 
of devastation by the papaya ringspot virus, has been restored 
to production by the introduction of the resistance transgenic 
variety  from  1998  (http://www.hawaiipapaya.com/rainbow.
htm).  It  is  predictable  that  intensive  production  of  other 
crops will follow similar patterns (King et al., 2003, 2004) in 
the future with either stoppage of production or introduction 
of transgenic varieties.

New Domestication

Domesticated species

for  domestication  of  new  species,  although  in  practice  the 
number  of  new  species  introduced  to  agriculture  in  the  last 
century on a significant scale is very limited. On the FAO list 
of crops, only kiwi fruit and the hybrid cereal triticale are sig-
nificant additions in the last 50 years. As well as the new crop 
classes mentioned earlier, there are species currently collected 
from  the  wild  that  are  being  prospected  for  domestication. 
Overexploitation is threatening the survival of several medici-
nal plants and spices, providing an incentive for increasing the 
scope of domestication.

Our  understanding  of  the  domestication  processes  in  the 
major  crops  can  now  be  applied  to  advancing  domestication 
in species that have not been domesticated (Heslop-Harrison, 
2002).  Although  the  farmer  and  consumer  demands  are 
higher than ever, the use of molecular methods and genomics 
covered in this volume are likely to mean that relatively rapid 
selection  of  unimproved  wild  species  is  possible,  including 
some fruits and nuts with limited breeding (Heslop-Harrison, 
2004). Appropriate diversity can be found within germplasm 
collections,  and  multiple  DNA  markers  can  combine  traits 
and select from huge populations of plants or transformation 
can introduce single-genes.

Lost crops

Major  crops  were  domesticated  early  in  the  history  of  agri-
culture,  and  the  rarity  of  introductions  was  discussed  ear-
lier. It is also valuable to consider crops that were cultivated 
more  extensively  in  prehistory  —  meeting  the  early  require-
ments  for  being  worthwhile  crops,  but  not  being  as  useful, 
or improved at the rate of other species more recently. Proso 
millet  (Panicum  miliaceum)  was,  like  wheat,  widely  grown, 
as  is  demonstrated  by  archaeological  evidence  (Hunt  et  al., 
2008).  However,  since  this  early  period,  its  production  has 
reduced to less than 1% of the production of wheat. It is nota-
ble  for  being  the  most  water-efficient  grass  (Heyduck  et  al., 
2008), but there is minimal genetic work (not even the ances-
tors of the tetraploid have been defined clearly), so it is one 
example where further work on its genetics will be valuable. 
A  number  of  legumes,  now  minor,  may  also  be  interesting 
“lost crops.”

About  10%  of  all  plants  species  are  suitable  for  food,  and  a 
higher  proportion  has  been  used  as  species  or  flavors,  or  has 
medicinal  value.  However,  most  species  have  not  met  the 
first  requirements  for  successful  domestication.  The  small 
number  of  plants  that  have  been  domesticated,  along  with 
their repeated domestication in a number of localities, might 
suggest  that  no  other  species  are  suitable  for  domestication, 
at  least  for  production  of  substantial  amounts  of  food.  Are 
there other plants that have appropriate genetical attributes to 
become  a  crop?  It  may  be  that  the  genetics  was  complex  or 
allelic diversity was restricted so that it never become worth-
while  to  cultivate  the  plant  at  the  early  period  of  domesti-
cation,  and  later  in  history,  refinement  of  genetic  traits  had 
already  given  the  major  crops  a  significant  advantage  so  oth-
ers could not compete in terms of ease of husbandry, harvest, 
nutritional  value,  or  some  other  quality.  There  are  prospects 

Trees and biofuels

Trees  provide  fuel  and  fiber  for  construction,  utensils,  and 
paper. Planting and coppicing of trees has long been practiced, 
with  selection  of  trees  for  regeneration  and  yield.  However, 
the  selection  and  characterization  of  trees  for  construction 
timber or fiber has been less systematic because of the avail-
ability  of  timber  trees  in  native  forests,  the  long  timescales 
involved in cultivation, lack of continuous revenue, and large 
capital  costs  involved.  The  selection  methods  and  genetics 
being applied to trees are rapidly changing, and application of 
genomics and marker technology has potential to improve tree 
characteristics (Neale, 2007; Gailing et al., 2009)

For  biofuels,  the  twenty-first  century  has  seen  the  estab-
lishment  of  several  genomics-based  research  programs  that 
are  looking  at  both  the  improvement  of  existing  crops  and 

9

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

introduction  of  new  crops  with  high  biomass  yields  suitable 
for  fuel  production  as  well  as  new  ways  of  processing  using 
microorganisms to break down biomass (Heaton et al., 2008; 
Rubin, 2008; Somerville et al., 2010)

Genetics and breeding for new uses: 
Ecosystem services

Most  plants  planted  and  grown  on  a  large  scale  by  man  pro-
vide  products  that  are  traded  and  used  or  have  horticultural 
or  amenity  value.  However,  as  well  as  conservation  manage-
ment  of  wild  environments,  it  is  probable  that  there  will  be 

increased selective breeding for plants that improve the local 
or  wider  environment.  During  the  twentieth  century,  plants 
have been used for habitat restoration of mining sites, and the 
selection of appropriate species and genotypes of trees, shrubs, 
and  grasses  for  colonization  of  these  sites  has,  along  with 
improvements in earth handling and planting methods, made 
enormous  improvements  in  the  landscapes  of  derelict  areas 
(Richardson, 1975). Elsewhere, plantings are used to stabilize 
soils or sands and prevent erosion or drift. As well as the poor 
substrates, mining wastes may be contaminated by heavy met-
als,  and  Bradshaw  and  colleagues  carried  out  extensive  work 
on the selection of genotypes for land remediation, which are 
now widely applied (Antonovics et al., 1971). Beyond use for 

Table 1.1  Key features of selected model species and major and minor crops related to the organization of their genomes

Crop

Species

Family

1C 
Genome 
size 
(Mb)c

2n 
Chromo- 
some 
number

Ploidy 
level

Life form

Life span

Climatic range

Maize

Zea maysa

Poaceae

2670

Triticum aestivum

Poaceae

17,000

Wheat

Rice

Rice

Oryza sativa ssp. 
indica a

Oryza sativa ssp. 
japonica a

Poaceae

Poaceae

Sorghum

Sorghum bicolor a

Poaceae

Barley

Rye

Hordeum vulgare

Poaceae

Secale cereale

Poaceae

Pearl millet

Pennisitum 
glaucum

Poaceae

20

42

24

24

20

14

14

14

18

2x (4x)

Herb

Annual

Temperate

2x

2x

2x

2x

2x

2x

2x

2x

Herb

Herb

Herb

Herb

Herb

Herb

Herb

Herb

Annual

Annual

Temperate

Tropical

Annual

Temperate to tropical

Annual or 
perennial

Annual

Annual

Annual

Tropical to subtropical

Temperate

Temperate

Tropical

Annual

Temperate to subtropical

420

466

730

5400

8100

2620

Foxtail millet

Setaria italica

Poaceae

513

Sugar cane

Saccharum sp.

Poaceae

3960 (80 
chr)

80–128

8x or 
more

Giant herb

Perennial

Warm temperate to tropical

Potato

Tomato

Solanum 
tuberosuma

Solanum 
lycopersicum

Solanaceae

2050

Solanaceae

1000

Cassava

Manihot esculenta

Euphorbiaceae

807

Soybean

Glycine maxa

Fabaceae

Groundnut 
or peanut

Arachis hypogaea

Fabaceae

1100

2807

48

24

36

40

40

4x

2x

2x

2x

4x

Herb

Herb

Woody 
shrub

Perennial

Temperate

Temperate to subtropical

Perennial, 
grown as 
annual crop

Perennial

Tropical to subtropical

Annual herb

Annual

Temperate to subtropical

Herb

Annual

Tropical to warm temperate

10

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Genetics and genomics of crop domestication

C H A P T E R   1

land remediation, other plant species provide “ecosystem serv-
ices” such as waste decomposition, water purification, hydrol-
ogy improvement through root systems, fencing, or hedging. It 
is certain that the uses of plants to provide these services will 
increase as their value is recognized through economic meth-
ods (e.g., the Millenium Ecosystem Assessment, 2010, under-
taken  in  connection  with  the  United  Nations  system).  New 
ecosystem values are likely to be introduced, including carbon 
capture (e.g., through roots; Kell, 2011).

The  human  uses  of  plants  to  provide  ecosystem  serv-
ices  have  currently  involved  selection  of  appropriate  geno-
types from the wild. However, there is a genetic basis for the 
properties needed, and systematic breeding, including use of 

biotechnology  (Chory  et  al.,  2000),  can  improve  their  per-
formance enough so there is enough improvement to balance 
the research and breeding costs.

Features of Domesticated Genomes

Table 1.1 summarizes the remarkable diversity in fundamen-
tal  characteristics  of  some  major  and  minor  crops  and  some 
other  comparator  species  including  features  of  their  genome 
organization  and  size  (see  discussion  in  Heslop-Harrison  and 
Schwarzacher,  2011).  The  crops  have  mostly  been  domesti-
cated and then selected by farmers and breeders over several 

Propagation

Parts used

Commodity

Nutritional use

Grain endosperm/
leaves

Grain endosperm

Grain endosperm

Cereal/forage

Starch, protein, oil

Cereal

Cereal

Starch, protein

Starch, protein

Grain endosperm

Cereal

Starch, protein

Predominant breeding 
system

Cross-pollinating/monoecious 
although self-fertile

Self-pollinating

Self-pollinating

Self-pollinating

Self-pollinating occasionally 
out-crossing

Self-pollinating

Out-crossing

Out-crossing

Self-pollinating occasionally 
out-crossing

Seed

Seed

Seed

Seed

Seed

Seed

Seed

Seed

Seed

World 
production 
2009 (Million 
tonnes)

817

682

679

62

150

18

Storage

Dry/years

Dry/years

Dry/years

Dry/years

Dry/years

Dry/years

Dry/years

Dry/years

Cereal/forage

Starch, protein

Cereal

Cereal

Cereal

Starch, protein

Starch, protein

Starch, protein

32 (millet)

Grain endosperm/
leaves

Grain endosperm

Grain endosperm

Grain endosperm

Grain endosperm/
leaves

Cereal/forage

Starch, protein

32 (millet)

Dry/years

Cross-pollinating

Stem cutting

Stalks

Sugar

Sugar

1683

Processed

Not true breeding

Vegetatively 
(tuber)

Self-incompatible, self-fertile 
in some cultivars

Seed

Out-crossing

Self-pollinating

Self-pollinating

Vegetatively 
(stem)

Seed

Seed

Tuber

Fruit

Root

Vegetable

Starch

Vegetable

Dietary fiber, 
antioxidantsb

Vegetable

Starch

Seed (cotyledon)

Protein and oil

Protein, oil

Pods with seed 
(cotyledon)

Vegetable, oil

Protein, fat, nutrient 
rich

330

141

241

222

36

Months

Fresh

Days/only in 
ground

One year

One year

(Continued )

11

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Table 1.1  (Continued)

Crop

Species

Family

1C 
Genome 
size 
(Mb)c

2n 
Chromo- 
some 
number

Ploidy 
level

Life form

Life span

Climatic range

Alfalfa

Medicago sativa

Fabaceae

841

16/32

2x/4x

Herb

Annual

Warm temperate

Oil palm

Elaeis guineensis

Arecaceae

1800

Date palm

Phoenix 
dactyliferaa

Arecaceae

929

Coconuts

Cocos nucifera

Arecaceae

3472

32

36

32

2x

2x

2x

Sugar beet

Beta vulgaris

Amaranthaceae

1223

18 or 36

2x or 4x

Banana and 
plantain

Banana cultivars 
Musa

Musaceae

Wild banana

Musa acuminata

Musaceae

550

Sweet 
potato

Onion

Ipomoea batatas

Convolvulaceae

1467

Allium cepa

Alliaceae

16,382

Rapeseed

Brassica napus

Brassicaceae

1125

Cabbage

Brassica oleracea

Brassicaceae

758

Arabidopsis

Arabidopsis 
thalianaa

Brassicaceae

165

Oranges 
(citrus)

Apples

Strawberry

Wild 
strawberry

Citrus sinensis

Rutaceae

Malus domestical a

Rosaceae

Fragaria    
ananassa

Rosaceae

Fragaria vesca a

Rosaceae

Grape

Vitis vinifera a

Vitaceae

611

327

597

240

490

Cucumber

Cucumis sativus a

Cucurbitaceae

367

Olive

Olea europaea

Oleaceae

1907

Lettuce

Lactuca sativa

Asteraceae

2590

12

Tree

Tree

Tree

Herb

Perennial

Tropical

Perennial

Tropical

Perennial

Tropical

Biennial

Temperate

Giant herb

Perennial

Tropical

Giant herb

Perennial

Tropical

Herb/vine

Perennial

Tropical to warm temperate

Herb

Herb

Herb

Biennial

Temperate

Annual

Temperate

Annual

Temperate

Ephemeral

Annual

Temperate

Tree

Perennial

Warm temperate to 
subtropical

33

22

60

16

38

18

10

18

3x

2x

2x

4x

2x

2x

2x

34/51

2x/3x

Tree

Perennial

Temperate

56

14

38

14

46

18

8x

2x

2x

2x

2x

2x

Herb

Herb

Perennial

Temperate

Perennial

Temperate

Shrub

Perennial

Temperate to warm 
temperate

Herb

Tree

Herb

Annual

Temperate

Perennial

Warm temperate

Annual or 
biannual

Temperate

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Genetics and genomics of crop domestication

C H A P T E R   1

Predominant breeding 
system

Propagation

Parts used

Commodity

Nutritional use

Out-crossing and  
self-pollinating

Seed

Leaves

Forage

Out-crossing/monoecious

F1 seed

Fruit (mesocarp and 
kernel)

Oil

Out-crossing/dioecious

Seed/cuttings

Fruit (mesocarp)

Fruit

Oil

Fruit

Out-crossing

Out-crossing, occasionally 
self-fertile

Seed

Seed

Seed (endosperm)

Fruit

Fruit, fiber

Root

Fruit

Root vegetable

Sugar

Fruit

Starch tropics, 
temperateb

Suckers/tissue 
culture

Suckers

Fruit/leaves

Fruit/fiber

Starch

Out-crossing

Seed

Tuber

Vegetable

Starch

108

Week

Seed/bulb

Bulb

Vegetable

Flavoring, starch

Oil

Oil

Vegetable

Antioxidants/vitaminsb

World 
production 
2009 (Million 
tonnes)

207

7

4

229

130

Storage

Fresh/
processed

Months

One year

Month/ 
processed

Weeks

Months

72

62

71

Months

One year

Fresh

Sterile

Cross-pollinating but  
self-fertile

Cross-pollinating but  
self-fertile

Out-crossing/ 
self-incompatible

Out-crossing/ 
self-incompatible

Self-pollinating

Self-fertile, some  
self-pollinating

Out-crossing/ 
self-incompatible

Out-crossing, 
self-incompatible

Self-fertile, some  
self-pollinating

Out-crossing/ 
self-incompatible

Seed

Seed

Seed

Grafting

Grafting

Seed

Leaves

Fruit

Fruit

Fruit

Fruit

Fruit

Leaf

Hybrid polyploid, vegetative

Runners

Out-crossing

Seeds, runners

Fruit

Self-fertile

Seed

Grafting

Berry

Fruit, wine

Seed

Vegetable

Dietary fiber, vitaminsb

39

Fruit

Fruit

Fruit

Fruit

Dietary fiber, vitaminsb

68 (124 Citrus)

Weeks

Dietary fiber, vitaminsb

72

Dietary fiber, vitaminsb

4

Dietary fiber, vitaminsb

Drink, antioxidants, 
vitamins

67

Months

Fresh

Fresh/dried/
processed

Fresh

Vegetable/oil

Oil

18

Months

Leaf vegetable

Dietary fiber, vitaminsb

24

Fresh

(Continued )

13

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Table 1.1  (Continued)

Crop

Species

Family

1C 
Genome 
size 
(Mb)c

2n 
Chromo- 
some 
number

Ploidy 
level

Life form

Life span

Climatic range

Celery

Apium graveolens

Apiaceae

1050

Papaya

Carica papaya a

Caricaceae

367

Saffron

Crocus sativus

Iridaceae

5770

Cotton

Poplar

Gossypium 
hirsutum

Populus 
trichocarpa a

Malvaceae

2347

Salicaceae

550

Human

Homo sapiensa

Hominidae

3200

22

18

24

52

38

46

2x

2x

3x

4x

2x

2x

Herb

Tree

Herb

Woody 
shrub

Tree

Biennial

Temperate

Perennial

Tropical

Perennial

Temperate to 
mediterranean

Annual

Warm temperate

Perennial

Temperate

Perennial

 

 

 

 

 

 

The crops have been selected intensively by farmers at both the level of choice of species (including new species or hybrids hardly known outside agriculture) and for  
characteristics including harvestable yield and propagation from diversity within each species. However, few common features related to genome size, chromosome number, and  
ploidy emerge from the table.
aGenome sequenced, public and published by 2011.
bFive-a-day: fruit or vegetable with range of properties making it a healthy food, not normally eaten for energy or protein.
c1C is the unreplicated haploid DNA content; most DNA contents from angiosperm genome size database, Bennett and Leitch (2011); some from sequencing consortia.

thousand years from the approximately 400,000 plant species. 
Cereals dominate the list of production figures, and it is clear 
that the exploitation of the seed has been very important. As 
a high-energy, harvestable, desiccated, storable, transportable, 
and robust part of the plant, people have been able to exploit 
the requirements of the plant for propagation.

Comparative  analysis  is  extremely  informative  in  most  of 
biology. All of the domesticated species in Table 1.1 share at 
least  some  key  characteristics  related  to  domestication  and 
selection: an imbalance of parts compared to the wild forms 
with the harvested part being larger; selection against the dis-
persal mechanisms most common in the wild (including shat-
tering of pods or inflorescences, dropping of fruits, continuous 
fruiting, and delayed germination of seeds); ability to establish 
quickly in single-species stands; or reduction in bitter or other 
compounds in the harvested part.

However,  the  data  in  Table  1.1  suggest,  perhaps  sur-
prisingly,  few  features  of 
large-scale  genome  organiza-
tion  that  have  evidence  of  selection  (Heslop-Harrison  and 
Schwarzacher, 2011), despite the intensive selection of genic 
characteristics  as  discussed  previously.  Of  the  top  three 
cereals, rice has a very small genome and wheat a very large 
genome;  wheat  is  a  hexaploid,  rice  is  diploid,  and  maize  is 
an  ancient  tetraploid.  Related  to  selection,  it  is  also  notable 
that  the  breeding  systems  or  propagation  methods  (Dwivedi 
et  al.,  2010;  Charlesworth,  2006),  affecting  heterozygosity 
and gene allele population genetics in agriculture, are diverse. 
For example, among the Poaceae, maize is out-crossing, rye is 
self-incompatible,  and  sugarcane  is  vegetatively  propagated, 

while other major cereals are self-fertile. Thus it seems there 
are  no  “rules”  about  genome  structure  —  size,  number  of 
chromosomes, or ploidy — for plants selected as crops.

Superdomestication

Breeding of new plant varieties requires genetic variation. This 
can  come  from  wild  collections  of  germplasm  (see  Heslop-
Harrison, 2002), where extensive seed or plant collections are 
available for most major crops with allelic variation present in 
most genes. Many genes with the same function are present in 
different  species,  and  transgenic  approaches  mean  that  genes 
can  be  transferred  from  one  species  to  another.  Individual 
genes that are desirable in a crop can be transferred between 
species: the gene making the Cry toxin from Bacillus thuring-
iensis giving resistance to many lepidopteran pests in Bt crops 
is  not  found  in  any  plants  but  has  been  transferred  from  the 
bacterium.  It  is  also  possible  to  engineer  entire  biosynthetic 
pathways that are missing in one species and desirable for cul-
tivation (e.g., “golden rice” includes the pathway for beta-caro-
tene synthesis in the endosperm, Ye et al., 2000; or to alter oil 
properties,  Damude  and  Kinney,  2008).  New  mutations  can 
also be identified as beneficial for crop plants; some of the first 
genetic  changes  in  domestication  were  selected  by  farmers 
from  new  mutations.  Radiation  or  chemical  mutagenesis  has 
also  been  helpful  in  the  generation  of  new  genetic  variation, 
and  the  FAO/IAEA  mutant  variety  database  (2010)  shows 
that more than 3000 plant mutant cultivars have been released 

14

Genetics and genomics of crop domestication

C H A P T E R   1

Predominant breeding 
system

Propagation

Parts used

Commodity

Nutritional use

Storage

World 
production 
2009 (Million 
tonnes)

Self-fertile

Seed

Petiole, root or seed

Vegetable

cross-pollinating, self-
pollinating or parthenocarpic

Sterile

Self-pollinating, but out-
crossing possible

Out-crossing/dioecious

Dioecious

Bulb

Seed

Seed

Fruit

Stigma

Seed

Trunk

Fruit

Spice

Fiber/textiles

Timber/fiber

Dietary fiber, vitamins, 
spiceb

Fresh, weeks

Dietary fiber, vitaminsb

10

Week

Flavoring

One year

64

Decades

Decades

Decades

Eats and uses the rest

commercially worldwide by 2010. The range of characteristics 
covers nearly all breeding traits and has proved useful for cor-
recting weaknesses in existing varieties or generating new char-
acters where there is no accessible variation in germplasm.

We can expect that synthetic gene construction, random or 
site-directed mutagenesis, outside the plant cell may increase 
further  availability  of  gene  alleles  for  specific  crop  require-
ments. The current use of green fluorescent proteins (GFP) in 
plants may provide an indication of the power of this method. 
The  GFP  gene  used  in  plant  research  as  a  marker  for  gene 
expression  is  modified  from  that  in  its  source,  the  jellyfish 
Aequorea victoria, to make it more stable in plants, and sev-
eral  modifications  to  the  coding  sequence  give  variants  with 
different  colors  and  much  increased  brightness  (Chiu  et  al., 
1996). Better understanding of the genetic pathways involved 
in crops through systems biology (e.g., Kim et al., 2008, 2010) 
will also be valuable for identifying improvement targets.

With  the  understanding  of  both  the  genetics  and  the 
genomics  of  crop  species,  we  are  now  able  to  develop 
new  crop  genotypes  incorporating  designed  characteristics 
(Vaughan et al., 2007). Farmers will be able to deliver appro-
priate crops to a growing population by exploitation of appro-
priate  technology  and  use  of  the  gene  pool  (Tanksley  and 
McCouch, 1997) — the range of genes present in organisms — 
and  perhaps  beyond  through  synthetic  biology  approaches. 
Biotechnology  and  understanding  the  behavior  of  the  plant 
genome provides a range of tools and options that allow crop 
“superdomestication”  (the  planning  of  requirements  of  new 
characteristics in our crops).

In  most  plants,  conventional  crossing  programs  have  fol-
lowed  the  paradigm  of  intercrossing  pairs  of  optimum  vari-
eties  and  then  selecting  progeny,  following  inbreeding  for 
several generations, that performed better than either parent. 
This is summed up in the mantra of “cross the best with the 
best and hope for the best.” In the twenty-first century, crop 
improvement is accelerating through the use of genetic maps 
and  DNA  markers  to  identify  useful  variant  alleles  of  genes, 
to  plan  recombination  between  desirable  traits,  to  combine 
different  resistance  genes,  and  accelerate  selection,  particu-
larly  for  quantitative  traits.  Plant  breeding  is  an  increasingly 
targeted and quantitative process.

An  important  meta-study  by  van  de  Wouw  et  al.  (2010) 
addressed whether there is a continuing reduction in genetic 
diversity  in  crop  species.  Jarvis  and  Hodgkin  (1999)  rec-
ognized  hybridization  with  undomesticated  lines  in  many 
species,  thus  increasing  the  diversity  in  the  variation  avail-
able  to  plant  breeders.  Analyzing  a  large  amount  of  research 
reported in many papers, with a range of cereal (e.g., Huang 
et  al.,  2007),  leguminous,  and  other  crops,  van  de  Wouw 
et al. (2010) showed that in the last century there has been 
no overall decline in genetic diversity in varieties released over 
each  decade,  suggesting  that  introduction  of  new  germplasm 
has kept pace with the loss of diversity through inbreeding.

This volume cannot be divorced from social, economic, and 
political  areas,  not  least  because  research  can  foresee  future 
challenges  or  problems,  and  can  indicate  options  for  their 
solution.  Farming,  whether  for  food,  fuel,  or  fibers,  never 
assists  biodiversity,  uses  water,  leads  to  erosion,  uses  crop 

15

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

protection  chemicals,  and  uses  fertilizers.  Many  of  the  most 
pressing  problems  of  mankind  are  related  to  plants  and  the 
environment,  whether  for  health,  food  security,  or  response 
to climate change. Based on socioeconomic factors, including 
changes  in  national  and  global  trade  patterns,  recognition  of 
requirements  for  sustainability,  nutritional  and  health  needs, 
and  developing  crops  suitable  for  changed  climates,  targets 
can be set for new crop varieties and occasionally introduction 
of new crops. Appropriate technologies can then be applied to 
deliver solutions.

Acknowledgments

We  thank  IAEA-Coordinated  Research  Project  “Molecular 
Tools  for  Quality  Improvement  in  Vegetatively  Propagated 
Crops  Including  Banana  and  Cassava,”  the  Generation 
Challenge  programme,  and  the  EU  Agri  Gen  Res  project 
018  Crocusbank  for  supporting  a  portion  of  our  work.  We 
are  grateful  to  our  many  collaborators  and  fellows  who  have 
worked in our laboratory.

References

Angiosperm Phylogeny Group,  An update 

of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group 
classification for the orders and families of 
flowering plants: APG III. Botanical Journal 
of the Linnean Society, 161(2), 105–121.

Anhalt, U. C. M., Heslop-Harrison, J. S., 

Byrne, S., Guillard, A., & Barth, S. (2008). 
Segregation distortion in Lolium: Evidence 
for genetic effects. Theoretical Applied 
Genetics, 117, 297–306. doi: 10.1007/
s00122-008-0774-7

Anhalt, U. C. M., Heslop-Harrison, J. S., 

Piepho, H. P., Byrne, S., & Barth, S. (2009). 
Quantitative trait loci mapping for biomass 
yield traits in a Lolium inbred line derived 
F2 population. Euphytica, 170, 99–107. doi: 
10.1007/s10681-009-9957-9

Antonovics, J., Bradshaw, A. D., & Turner, R. G. 

(1971). Heavy metal tolerance in plants. 
In J. B. Cragg (Ed.), Advances in ecological 
research (pp. 2–86). London: Academic Press.

Arabidopsis Genome Initiative,  Analysis of 

the genome sequence of the flowering plant 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature, 408(6814), 
796–815. Available from: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/35048692/

Argout, X., Salse, J., Aury, J. M., Guiltinan, 

M. J., Droc, G., & Gouzy, J., et al. (2011, 
February). The genome of Theobroma cacao. 
Nature Genetics, 43(2), 101–108. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng.736/
Bailey, J. P., Bímová, K., & Mandák, B. (2007). 

The potential role of polyploidy and 
hybridisation in the further evolution of 
the highly invasive Fallopia taxa in Europe. 
Ecological Research, 22, 920–928.

Bassham, James A., & Calvin, M. (1955). 

Photosynthesis. Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory. LBNL Paper UCRL-2853. 
Retrieved from: http://escholarship.org/
uc/item/0j6008b4/

Buckler, E. S., IV, Thornsberry, J. M., & 

Kresovich, S. (2001, June). Molecular 
diversity, structure and domestication of 
grasses. Genetical Research, 77(3), 213–218. 
Available from: http://view.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/11486504/

Caldwell, K. S., Dvorak, J., Lagudah, E. S., 

Akhunov, E., Luo, M. C. C., & Wolters, P., 
et al. (2004, June). Sequence polymorphism 
in polyploid wheat and their D-genome 
diploid ancestor. Genetics, 167(2), 941–947. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1534/
genetics.103.016303/

Charlesworth, D. (2006, September 5). 

Evolution of plant breeding systems. Current 

16

Biology, 16, R726–R735. doi: 10.1016/
j.cub.2006.07.068

Chiu, W. I., Niwa, Y, Zeng, W., Hirano, T., 

Kobayashi, H., & Sheen, J. (1996, March). 
Engineered GFP as a vital reporter in plants. 
Current Biology, 6(3), 325–330. Available 
from: http://www.cell.com/current-
biology/abstract/S0960-9822(02)00483-
9/

Chory, J., Ecker, J. R., Briggs, S., Caboche, M., 
Coruzzi, G. M., & Cook, D., et al. (2000). 
National Science Foundation-sponsored 
workshop report: “The 2010 project 
functional genomics and the virtual plant. 
A blueprint for understanding how plants 
are built and how to improve them”. Plant 
Physiology, 123, 423–426. doi:10.1104/
pp.123.2.423

Cifuentes, M., Eber, F., Lucas, M. O., Lode, 

M., Chevre, A. M., & Jenczewski, E. (2010, 
July). Repeated polyploidy drove different 
levels of crossover suppression between 
homoeologous chromosomes in Brassica 
napus allohaploids. The Plant Cell, 22(7), 
2265–2276. Available from: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1105/tpc.109.072991/

Clark, R. M., Linton, E., Messing, J., & 

Doebley, J. F. (2004, January). Pattern of 
diversity in the genomic region near the 
maize domestication gene tb1. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 101(3), 700–707. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2237049100/

Clottes, J. 2010. Chauvet Cave (ca. 30,000 
B.C.). (2000). In Heilbrunn Timeline of 
Art History. New York: The Metropolitan 
Museum of Art. http://www.metmuseum.
org/toah/hd/chav/hd_chav.htm/ Accessed 
09.10.

Cong, B., Liu, J., & Tanksley, S. D. (2002, 

October). Natural alleles at a tomato 
fruit size quantitative trait locus differ 
by heterochronic regulatory mutations. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
99(21), 13606–13611. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.172520999/

Crawley, M. J., & Brown, S. L. (1995). Seed 

limitation and the dynamics of feral Oilseed 
Rape on the M25 motorway. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London Series B: 
Biological Sciences, 259(1354), 49–54. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/
rspb.1995.0008/

Damude, H. G., & Kinney, A. J. (2008). 
Enhancing plant seed oils for human 
nutrition. Plant Physiology, 147, 962–968. 
doi:10.1104/pp.108.121681

De Langhe, E., Hrˇibová, E., Carpentier, 
S., Doležel, J., & Swennen, R. (2010, 
December). Did backcrossing contribute to 
the origin of hybrid edible bananas? Annals 
of Botany, 106(6), 849–857. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcq187/

Doebley, J. (2004). The genetics of maize 
evolution. Annual Review of Genetics, 
38(1), 37–59. Available from: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev. 
genet.38.072902.092425/

Doebley, J. F., Gaut, B. S., & Smith, B. D. 

(2006, December). The molecular genetics 
of crop domestication. Cell, 127(7), 1309–
1321. Available from: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.12.006/

Doust, A. (2007, October). Architectural 

evolution and its implications for 
domestication in grasses. Annals of Botany, 
100(5), 941–950. Available from: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcm040/

Dubcovsky, J., & Dvorak, J. (2007, June). 

Genome plasticity a key factor in 
the success of polyploid wheat under 
domestication. Science, 316(5833), 1862–
1866. Available from: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1126/science.1143986/

Dwivedi, S., Perotti, E., Upadhyaya, H., 

& Ortiz, R. (2010, December). Sexual 
and apomictic plant reproduction in the 
genomics era: Exploring the mechanisms 
potentially useful in crop plants. Sexual 
Plant Reproduction, 23(4), 265–279. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00497-010-0144-x/

FAOstat (2010). Production data relating to food 

and agriculture. http://faostat.fao.org/

FAO/IAEA mutant variety database 

(2010). http://mvgs.iaea.org/
aboutMutantVarieties.aspx/

French-Italian Public Consortium for Grapevine 

Genome Characterization. The grapevine 
genome sequence suggests ancestral 
hexaploidization in major angiosperm 
phyla. Nature, 449, 463–468. doi:10.1038/
nature06148

Gailing, O., Vornam, B., Leinemann, L., & 

Finkeldey, R. (2009, December). Genetic 
and genomic approaches to assess adaptive 
genetic variation in plants: Forest trees as 
a model. Physiologia Plantarum, 137(4), 
509–519.

Gross, B. L., & Olsen, K. M. (2010, 

September). Genetic perspectives on crop 
domestication. Trends in Plant Science, 
15(9), 529–537. Available from: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2010.05.008/

Guo, J., Wang, Y., Song, C., Zhou, J., Qiu, L., 

& Huang, H., et al. (2010, September). 
A single origin and moderate bottleneck 
during domestication of soybean (Glycine 
max): Implications from microsatellites and 
nucleotide sequences. Annals of Botany, 
106(3), 505–514. Available from: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcq125/

Gurevitch, J., & Padilla, D. (2004, September). 

Are invasive species a major cause of 
extinctions? Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 
19(9), 470–474. Available from: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2004.07.005/

Hammer, K. (1984). Das Domestikations-

syndrom. Kulturpflanze, 32, 11–34.

Harlan, J., & de Wet, J. (1965, January). Some 

thoughts about weeds. Economic Botany, 
19(1), 16–24. Available from: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02971181/

Heaton, E. A., Dohleman, F. G., & Long, S. P. 
(2008). Meeting US biofuel goals with less 
land: The potential of Miscanthus. Global 
Change Biology, 14, 2000–2014.

Heslop-Harrison, J. S. (2002). Exploiting 
novel germplasm. Australian Journal of 
Agricultural Research, 53(8), 873–879.

Heslop-Harrison, J. S. (2004). Biotechnology 

of fruit and nut crops: Introduction. In R. E. 
Litz (Ed.), Biotechnology of Fruit and Nut 
Crops (pp. xix–xxiv). CABI.

Heslop-Harrison, J. S. (2010). Genes in 

evolution: The control of diversity and 
speciation. Annals of Botany, 106(3), 437–
438. Available from: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/aob/mcq168/

Heslop-Harrison, J. S., & Schwarzacher, T. 

(2007). Domestication, genomics and the 
future for banana. Annals of Botany, 100(5), 
1073–1084. doi: 10.1093/aob/mcm191
Heslop-Harrison, J. S., & Schwarzacher, T. 

(2011). Organisation of the plant genome 
in chromosomes. The Plant Journal, 66(1), 
18–33. Available from: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04544.x/
Heyduck, R. F., Baltensperger, D. D., Nelson, 

L. A., & Graybosch, R. A. (2008). Yield and 
agronomic traits of waxy proso in the central 
Great Plains. Crop Science, 48(2), 741–748. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.2135/
cropsci2007.02.0081/

Huang, X. Q., Wolf, M., Ganal, M. W., Orford, 

S., Koebner, R. M. D., & Röder, M. S. 
(2007). Did modern plant breeding lead to 
genetic erosion in european winter wheat 
varieties? Crop Science, 47(1), 343–349. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.2135/
cropsci2006.04.0261/

Hunt, H. V., Vander Linden, M., Liu, X., 

Motuzaite-Matuzeviciute, G., Colleridge, 
S., & Jones, M. K. (2008). Millets across 
Eurasia: Chronology and context of early 
records of the genera Panicum and Setaria 
from archaeological sites in the Old World. 
Vegetation History and Archaeobotany, 17, 
5–18.

Genetics and genomics of crop domestication

C H A P T E R   1

on soybean genome diversity. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 103(45), 
16666–16671. Available from: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0604379103/
Innan, H., & Kim, Y. (2008 July). Detecting 
local adaptation using the joint sampling 
of polymorphism data in the parental and 
derived populations. Genetics, 179(3), 
1713–1720. Available from: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1534/genetics.108.086835/

Janick, J. (2005). The origin of fruits, fruit 

growing, and fruit breeding. Plant Breeding 
Reviews, 25, 255–320.

Jarvis, D. I., & Hodgkin, T. (1999). Wild 
relatives and crop cultivars: Detecting 
natural introgression and farmer selection of 
new genetic combinations in agroecosystems. 
Molecular Ecology, 8, S159–S173.

Kell, D. B. (2011). Breeding crop plants with 

deep roots: Their role in sustainable carbon, 
nutrient and water sequestration. Annals 
of Botany, Sept. in press. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/aob/mcr175/ 

Kim, J., Kim, T. -G., Jung, S. H., Kim, J. -R., 

Park, T., & Heslop-Harrison, P., et al. 
(2008). Evolutionary design principles of 
modules that control cellular differentiation: 
Consequences for hysteresis and 
multistationarity. Bioinformatics, 24(13), 
1516–1522. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/
btn229

Kim, T. H., Kim, J., Heslop-Harrison, P., & 
Cho, K. H. (2010). Evolutionary design 
principles and functional characteristics 
based on kingdom-specific network motifs. 
Bioinformatics http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btq633/

King D., Heslop-Harrison J. S., & 23 other 

members of the GM Science Review Panel. 
(2003). GM science review: An open review 
of the science relevant to GM crops and 
food based on the interests and concerns of 
the public. www.gmsciencedebate.org.
uk/. 296pp.

King D., Heslop-Harrison J. S., & 25 other 

members of the GM Science Review Panel. 
(2004). GM science review: Second Report. 
An open review of the science relevant to 
GM crops and food based on the interests 
and concerns of the public. Full text from: 
http://gmsciencedebate.org.uk/. 116pp.

Koornneef, M., van Eden, J., Hanhart, C. J., 

Stam, P., Braaksma, F. J., & Feenstra, W. J. 
(1983, July). Linkage map of Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Journal of Heredity, 74(4), 
265–272. Available from: http://jhered.
oxfordjournals.org/content/74/4/265.
abstract/

Martin, C., Ellis, N., & Rook, F. (2010, 

October). Do transcription factors play 
special roles in adaptive variation? Plant 
Physiology, 154(2), 506–511. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1104/
pp.110.161331/

McClintock, B., Kato, T. A., & Blumenschein, 

A. (1981). Chromosome constitution 
of races of maize. Its significance in the 
interpretation of relationships between races 
and varieties in the Americas. Chapingo, 
Mexico: Colegio de Postgraduados.

Molnár, I., Cifuentes, M., Schneider, A., 

Benavente, E., & Molnar-Lang, M. (2011). 
Association between simple sequence 
repeat-rich chromosome regions and 
intergenomic translocation breakpoints in 
natural populations of allopolyploid wild 
wheats. Annals of Botany, 107(1), 65–76. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcq215/

Moose, S. P., & Mumm, R. H. (2008). 

Molecular plant breeding as the foundation 
for 21st century crop improvement. Plant 
Physiology, 147, 969–977. doi: 10.1104/
pp.108.118232

Neale, D. B. (2007, December). Genomics to 

tree breeding and forest health. Current 
Opinion in Genetics & Development, 17(6), 
539–544.

Nielsen, R., Williamson, S., Kim, Y., Hubisz, M. 

J., Clark, A. G., & Bustamante, C. (2005, 
November). Genomic scans for selective 
sweeps using SNP data. Genome Research, 
15(11), 1566–1575. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/gr.4252305/
Papa, R., Bellucci, E., Rossi, M., Leonardi, S., 

Rau, D., & Gepts, P., et al. (2007, October). 
Tagging the signatures of domestication 
in common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) by 
means of pooled DNA samples. Annals 
of Botany, 100(5), 1039–1051. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aob/
mcm151/

Paris, H. S., Daunay, M. C., & Janick, J. (2009, 

June). The Cucurbitaceae and Solanaceae 
illustrated in medieval manuscripts known 
as the Tacuinum Sanitatis. Annals of Botany, 
103(8), 1187–1205. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcp055/

Paterson, A. H., Lin, Y. R., Li, Z., Schertz, K. 
F., Doebley, J. F., & Pinson, S. R. M., et al. 
(1995). Convergent domestication of cereal 
crops by independent mutations. Science, 
269, 1714–1718.

Richardson, J. A. (1975). Physical problems 

of growing plants on colliery waste. M. 
J. Chadwick & G. T. Goodman (Eds.), 
The Ecology of Resource Degradation and 
Renewal. The Fifteenth Symposium of the 
British Ecological Society, Leeds, 10-12 July 
1973 (pp. 275-286). Oxford: Blackwell 
Scientific Publications.

Rieseberg, L. H., & Blackman, B. K. (2010, 
September). Speciation genes in plants. 
Annals of Botany, 106(3), 439–455. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
aob/mcq126/

Rubin, E. M. (2008, August 14). Genomics of 
cellulosic biofuels. Nature, 454, 841–845. 
doi: 10.1038/nature07190

Saeidi, H., Rahiminejad, M. R., & Heslop-
Harrison, J. S. (2008). Retroelement 
insertional polymorphisms, diversity and 
phylogeography within diploid, D-Genome 
Aegilops tauschii (Triticeae, Poaceae) sub-
taxa in Iran. Annals of Botany, 101(6), 
855–861. doi:10.1093/aob/mcn042
Salamini, F., Ozkan, H., Brandolini, A., 

Scafer-Pregl, R., & Martin, W. (2002). 
Genetics and geography of wild cereal 
domestication in the near East. Nature 
Reviews Genetics, 3, 429.

Hyten, D. L., Song, Q., Zhu, Y., Choi, I. Y., 

Nelson, R. L., & Costa, J. M., et al. (2006 
November). Impacts of genetic bottlenecks 

Millenium Ecosystem Assessment. (2010). Guide 

to the Millennium Assessment Reports. 
http://www.maweb.org/en/Index.aspx/

Sasaki, T., Matsumoto, T., Yamamoto, K., 

Sakata, K., Baba, T., & Katayose, Y., et al. 
(2002, November). The genome sequence 

17

Doebley, J. F., et al. (2005, November). A 
large-scale screen for artificial selection in 
maize identifies candidate agronomic loci 
for domestication and crop improvement. 
The Plant Cell, 17(11), 2859–2872. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1105/
tpc.105.037242/

Yamasaki, M., Wright, S. I., & McMullen, M. 

D. (2007, October). Genomic screening for 
artificial selection during domestication and 
improvement in maize. Annals of Botany, 
100(5), 967–973. Available from: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcm173/
Yano, M. (2001). Genetic and molecular 

dissection of naturally occurring variation. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 4, 
130–135.

Ye, X., Al-Babili, S., Klöti, A., Zhang, J., Lucca, 
P., & Beyer, P., et al. (2000). Engineering the 
provitamin A (beta-carotene) biosynthetic 
pathway into (carotenoid-free) rice 
endosperm. Science, 287(5451), 303–305. 
doi:10.1126/science.287.5451.303

Zeder, M. A. (2006). Documenting 
domestication: New genetic and 
archaeological paradigms. University of 
California Press.

Zhang, Y., Wang, J., Zhang, X., Chen, J. Q., 

Tian, D., & Yang, S. (2009, April). Genetic 
signature of rice domestication shown by 
a variety of genes. Journal of Molecular 
Evolution, 68(4), 393–402. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00239-009-
9217-6/

Zhu, Q., Zheng, X., Luo, J., Gaut, B. S., & 

Ge, S. (2007, March). Multilocus analysis 
of nucleotide variation of Oryza sativa and 
its wild relatives: Severe bottleneck during 
domestication of rice. Molecular Biology 
and Evolution, 24(3), 875–888. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/molbev/
msm005/

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

and structure of rice chromosome 1. Nature, 
420(6913), 312–316. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature01184/

Schulze, J., Stoll, P., Widmer, A., & Erhardt, 
A. (2011). Searching for gene flow from 
cultivated to wild strawberries in Central 
Europe. Annals of Botany, 107(4), 699–707. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
aob/mcr018/

Somerville, C. R., Youngs, H., Taylor, C., 

Davis, S. C., & Long, S. P. (2010, August 
13). Feedstocks for lignocellulosic 
biofuels. Science, 790–792. doi: 10.1126/
science.1189268

Tang, T., Lu, J., Huang, J., He, J., McCouch, 

S. R., & Shen, Y., et al. (2006, November). 
Genomic variation in rice: Genesis of 
highly polymorphic linkage blocks during 
domestication. PLoS Genetics, 2(11), e199. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pgen.0020199/

Tanksley, S. D., & McCouch, S. R. (1997, 

August). Seed banks and molecular maps: 
Unlocking genetic potential from the wild. 
Science, 277(5329), 1063–1066. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.277.5329.1063/

Tian, Z., Wang, X., Lee, R., Li, Y., Specht,  

J. E., & Nelson, R. L., et al. (2010, May). 
Artificial selection for determinate growth 
habit in soybean. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 107(19), 8563–8568. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1000088107/

Varshney, R. K., Hoisington, D. A., & Tyagi, 

A. K. (2006). Advances in cereal genomics 
and applications in crop breeding. Trends 
in Biotechnology, 24(11), 490–499. doi: 
10.1016/j.tibtech.2006.08.006

Vaughan, D. A., Balázs, E., & Heslop-Harrison, 

J. S. (2007). From crop domestication to 
super-domestication. Annals of Botany, 
100(5), 893–901. doi: 10.1093/aob/
mcm224

Vigouroux, Y., Mitchell, S., Matsuoka, Y., 

Hamblin, M., Kresovich, S., & Smith, J. 
S. C., et al. (2005, March). An analysis of 
genetic diversity across the maize genome 
using microsatellites. Genetics, 169(3), 
1617–1630. Available from: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1534/genetics.104.032086/

Wang, H., Nussbaum-Wagler, T., Li, B., Zhao, 

Q., Vigouroux, Y., & Faller, M., et al. (2005, 
August). The origin of the naked grains 
of maize. Nature, 436(7051), 714–719. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nature03863/

Wang, J. X., Gao, T. G., & Knapp, S. (2008, 

December). Ancient Chinese literature 
reveals pathways of eggplant domestication. 
Annals of Botany, 102(6), 891–897. 
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
aob/mcn179/

Weeden, N. F. (2007, October). Genetic 

changes accompanying the domestication of 
pisum sativum: Is there a common genetic 
basis to the “Domestication Syndrome” for 
Legumes? Annals of Botany, 100(5), 1017–
1025. Available from: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/aob/mcm122/

Wouw, M.  van de, van Hintum, T., Kik, C., 

van Treuren, R., & Visser, B. (2010, April). 
Genetic diversity trends in twentieth 
century crop cultivars: A meta analysis. 
TAG Theoretical and Applied Genetics 
Theoretische und angxewandte Genetik, 
120(6), 1241–1252. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00122-009-1252-6/

Wright, S. I., Bi, I. V., Schroeder, S. G., 

Yamasaki, M., Doebley, J. F., & McMullen, 
M. D., et al. (2005, May). The effects of 
artificial selection on the maize genome. 
Science, 308(5726), 1310–1314. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.1107891/

Yamasaki, M., Tenaillon, M. I., Vroh, Bi I, 

Schroeder, S. G., Sanchez-Villeda, H., & 

18

The scope of things to come:  
New paradigms in biotechnology

Maheshi Dassanayake1 Dong-Ha Oh1 Dae-Jin Yun2 
Ray A. Bressan2,3,4 John M. Cheeseman1 J. Hans Bohnert1,2,5
1Department of Plant Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, 
2Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 program) and Environmental Biotechnology, National 
Core Research Center, Graduate School of Gyeongsang National University, Korea, 3Department of 
Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, 4Center for 
Plant Stress Genomics, King Abdallah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia, 
5Department of Crop Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, Illinois

2

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19
Progress Enabled by Next-Generation DNA  
Sequencing   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  20

Mapping of comprehensive, genome-wide,  
treatment-specific transcript profiles   . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
Current next-gen sequencing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
Behold the third generation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
The Elephant in the Laboratory: Data Handling    .  .  .   24
From Sequences to Comparative Genomics   .  .  .  .  .  .   24
Transcriptome profiling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25

Broadening the Genomics Toolbox: Proteins and 
Metabolites    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  26
Proteomics advances  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
Metabolomics highlights  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
Genomics Unlimited: Getting Beyond Mere Genes   .  .  .  .  .  27
Into the Future: Genomics-Based  
Biotechnology and Agriculture   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  28
From models to crops, from labs to fields   . . . . . . . .   28
Genetic resources from extremophile species  . . . . .   29
Exploring “unknown unknowns”  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
The importance of stress “tolerance” engineering  . .   29
Acknowledgments   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  30

Introduction

For  more  than  8000  years  after  the  transition  from  hunter–
gatherer societies to sessile, farming communities, the domes-
tication and improvement of crops proceeded in an informal, 
yet  purposeful  way.  This  trajectory  is  obvious  from  archaeo-
logical  excavations  as  well  as  from  descriptions  of  agricul-
tural practices left behind by early travelers (e.g., Columella, 
~60  CE;  Pliny  the  Elder,  ~100CE).  Although  all  cultures 
that  developed  agriculture  participated  in  the  process,  par-
ticularly  complete  records  were  kept  in  China  (Bray,  1986). 
© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00002-X

2012

Later records of the progress of crop improvement appeared 
in  the  Middle  East  during  Islam’s  golden  age,  and  were  sub-
sequently  expanded  by  the  monastic  culture  of  medieval 
Europe  (Postan,  1973;  Watson,  1983;  Astill  and  Langdon, 
1997;  Stone,  2005).  New  World  cultures  also  contributed 
significantly.  Their  crops,  among  them  maize,  tomato,  and 
potato,  have  since  marched  triumphantly  across  the  world 
(Doebley et al., 2006). As in other fields of science, the Age 
of Enlightenment in the mid-seventeenth century accelerated 
agricultural  innovation  by  initiating  fundamental  changes  in 
the scientific thought process.

Fundamentally new insights, however, had to wait until the 
lucid  outline  of  evolution  by  Darwin  (1868),  and  the  intro-
duction of the gene concept by Mendel’s studies on heritable 
quanta  (Anonymous,  1951).  Ultimately,  these  have  inspired 
new experimental approaches, usually accompanied and sup-
ported by novel technologies, culminating in the age of mole-
cular biology and molecular genetics.

The last two decades, however, have seen yet another sea 
change. Enabled initially by high-throughput sequencing tech-
nologies  and  advances  in  bioinformatics  that  seem  quaint  by 
now, a much altered view of the genetic structures that shape 
organisms has begun to emerge. The concept of a gene as an 
isolated  unit  of  inheritance  is  rapidly  being  replaced  by  the 
idea  of  a  genetic  continuum  or  field  along  chromosome  seg-
ments  that  encompasses  a  memory  of  the  past.  In  such 
domains,  units  can  change  their  character,  expression,  and 
function in a flexible, environmentally responsive, way. These 
concepts are now the focus of both theoretical considerations 
and experimental enquiry (Jablonka and Lamb, 2006; Pfluger 
and Wagner, 2007; Swiezewski et al., 2009).

In  parallel,  fostered  by  the  ease  with  which  primary 
sequence information can be acquired, biology is heading into 
a “post-modelian” era. No longer are ideas of how plants oper-
ate  dependent  on  a  few  convenient  but  often  inappropriate 
“model”  systems.  Now,  each  species,  genotype,  or  ecotype 
can serve as a model.

Each one of the technological advances that broadened our 
horizon has brought us closer to a new, and equally massive, 

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

barrier  —  data  overload.  Desktop  computers  are  no  longer 
able to deal with datasets measured in terabytes or petabytes, 
or with memory usage in the hundreds of gigabyte ranges, and 
most biologists need computer science to contribute to com-
putational  solutions.  Assuming  that  competent  programmers 
exist to solve these (and there are certainly many who are try-
ing) issues, the real goals still remain over the horizon — the 
synthesis  of  genetic  and  molecular  information  with  pheno-
typic, physiological, and even ecological data through integra-
tive and responsive databases (Rhee et al., 2003; Stein, 2008).
The  progress  of  the  last  decade  has  brought  us  to  a  point 
at  which  knowledge-based  biotechnology  in  the  agricultural 
arena  will  enable  unprecedented  precision  in  the  application 
of genetic knowledge for crop improvement. In paraphrasing 
a  concept  increasingly  used  in  medical  literature,  plant  bio-
technology  is  poised  to  enter  an  era  of  “personalized  breed-
ing.”  Breeders  have  always  selected  combinations  of  alleles 
approaching optimal adaptation to a specific climate and local 
soil conditions, but integrated genomics can provide not only 
the how, but the why, when, and where with respect to which 
allele combinations should be put together.

This  chapter  will  discuss  new  technologies  in  DNA 
sequence  acquisition  in  monitoring  the  dynamic  behavior 

of  transcript  populations  on  a  global  scale,  recording  protein 
composition and modification, and assembling metabolite pro-
files in unprecedented complexity and in plant response path-
ways to the physical and biotic environments. The advances, 
filtered  and  organized  by  bioinformatics,  signify  nothing 
less  than  the  emergence  of  a  new  organismic  biology  with 
immense potential for biotechnology.

Progress Enabled by Next-Generation 
DNA Sequencing

We  will  briefly  discuss  how  new  technologies  —  primarily 
“next-generation”  (next-gen)  sequencing  tools  —  have  made 
possible  the  acquisition  of  genome  sequence  information  for 
a  rapidly  increasing  number  of  species  and  the  recording  of 
the dynamic pattern of gene expression in response to exter-
nal  manipulations  (Wilhelm  and  Landry,  2009;  Kircher  and 
Kelso,  2010;  Lu  et  al.,  2010).  Figure  2.1  and  Table  2.1  pro-
vide a graphic and condensed view of the processes required 
for  a  complete  description  of  the  genetic  makeup  of  an 
organism. Figure 2.1 introduces terms and organizes the flow 
of  information  for  a  complete  picture,  with  more  detailed 

Figure 2 .1 l Studying genomes and transcriptomes in the “post-modelian” era. 

20

The scope of things to come: New paradigms in biotechnology 

C H A P T E R   2

Table 2.1  A compilation of tools for next-gen DNA sequencing and analysis

1 .  Genome assembly

i .  De novo

a .  Short reads

1)  Velvet — http://www.ebi.ac.uk/~zerbino/velvet/
2)  ABySS — http://www.bcgsc.ca/platform/bioinfo/software/abyss/
3)  SOAPdenovo — http://soap.genomics.org.cn/soapdenovo.html
4)  Newbler — Roche/454
5)  Contrail — http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/contrail-bio/index.php?title  Contrail

b . Sanger-type reads

1)  Phred/Phrap — http://www.phrap.org/phredphrapconsed.html
2)  CAP3 — http://deepc2.psi.iastate.edu/aat/cap/capdoc.html
3)  Celera assembler — http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/wgs-assembler/index.php?title  Main_Page
4)  Arachne — http://www.broadinstitute.org/crd/wiki/index.php/Arachne_Main_Page

ii .  Reference aided

1)  AMOScmp — http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/amos/index.php?title  AMOScmp
2)  Bambus — http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/amos/index.php?title  Bambus

iii . Hybrid assembly

1)  MIRA — http://www.chevreux.org/projects_mira.html
2)  Minimus2 — http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/amos/index.php?title  Minimus2

2.  Transcriptome annotation

1)  BLAST — http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/staff/tao/URLAPI/netblast.html
2)  BLAT (Blast-Like Alignment Tool) — http://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/blatSpec.html

3.  RNA-seq processing

1)  Qseq by DNASTAR — http://www.dnastar.com/t-nextgen-qseq.aspx
2)  Myrna — http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/myrna/index.shtml
3)  Cufflinks — http://cufflinks.cbcb.umd.edu/
4)  Custom pipelines using bowtie for alignment of RNA-seq data
5)  DEGseq — http://bioconductor.org/packages/2.6/bioc/html/DEGseq.html

4.  miRNA identification 

1)  Rfam — http://rfam.sanger.ac.uk/
2)  miRBase — http://www.mirbase.org/
3)  eumiR — http://miracle.igib.res.in/eumir/
4)  miRNAFinder — http://bioinfo3.noble.org/mirna/
5)  MiRscan — http://genes.mit.edu/mirscan/index.html

5.  Align transcriptome/EST to genome

1)  GMAP — http://research-pub.gene.com/gmap/
2)  Exonerate — http://www.genome.iastate.edu/bioinfo/resources/manuals/exonerate/
3)  ssahaEST — http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/ssahaest/
4)  EXALIN — http://blast.wustl.edu/exalin/
5)  Spidey — http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/IEB/Research/Ostell/Spidey/

6.  ORF prediction

1)  FGENESH — http://linux1.softberry.com/berry.phtml
2)  GeneMark — http://exon.biology.gatech.edu/
3)  GENSCAN — http://genes.mit.edu/GENSCAN.html
4)  ORF Finder — http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gorf/gorf.html
5)  Glimmer — www.cbcb.umd.edu/software/glimmer/
6)  GenomeThreader — http://www.genomethreader.org

(Continued )

21

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Table 2.1  (Continued)

7)  Gismo — http://www.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de/groups/brf/software/gismo/
8)  mGene — www.fml.tuebingen.mpg.de/raetsch/suppl/mgene

  7 .  Correlating miRNA and mRNA expression and target prediction

1)  Custom pipelines
2)  microRNA.org — http://www.microrna.org/microrna/home.do
3)  miRU — http://bioinfo3.noble.org/miRNA/miRU.htm
4)  RNAhybrid — http://bibiserv.techfak.uni-bielefeld.de/rnahybrid/

  8 .  Repeat identification and distribution

1)  RepeatMasker — http://www.repeatmasker.org/
2)  SSRIT — http://www.gramene.org/db/markers/ssrtool
3)  RECON — http://selab.janelia.org/recon.html
4)  REPET — http://urgi.versailles.inra.fr/Tools/REPET

  9 .  Categorization of gene function

1)  GO — http://www.geneontology.org/
2)  KOG — http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/
3)  KEGG — http://www.genome.jp/kegg/
4)  Blast2GO — http://www.blast2go.org

10 .  Alternative splicing recognition

1)  Tophat — http://tophat.cbcb.umd.edu
2)  ASmodeler — http://genome.ewha.ac.kr/ECgene/ASmodeler/
3)  AceView — http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/IEB/Research/Acembly/

11 .  Network

1)  ATTED-II — http://atted.jp/
2)  AraNet — http://www.functionalnet.org/aranet/about.html
3)  GGM (Ma et al., 2007).

12 .  Viewing synteny

1)  Circos — http://mkweb.bcgsc.ca/circos/
2)  Mauve — http://gel.ahabs.wisc.edu/mauve/
3)  3 OSLay — http://www-ab.informatik.uni-tuebingen.de/software/oslay
4)  Synbrowse — http://www.synbrowse.org/
5)  Sybil — http://sybil.sourceforge.net/
6)  SyMAP — http://www.symapdb.org/

13 . 

Identification of SNPs

1)  Crossbow — http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/crossbow/index.shtml
2)  SOAPsnp — http://soap.genomics.org.cn/soapsnp.html

14 .  Visualization and integration of data

1)  gBrowse 2 — http://gmod.org/wiki/Ggb/
2)  EagleView — http://bioinformatics.bc.edu/marthlab/EagleView
3)  Hawkeye — http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/amos/index.php?title  Hawkeye
4)  ABySS-Explorer — http://www.bcgsc.ca/platform/bioinfo/software/abyss-explorer/releases/1.0

This table does not contain an exhaustive list of programs and tools. Many tools have multiple and overlapping uses, whereas a particular tool may have been included under 
just one task. Programs are constantly evolving and new programs are introduced. Participating in an online discussion forum like http://seqanswers.com/ is suggested for an 
idea about current programs. Generally, for a given task, any one tool does not provide a complete answer; more often it requires a combination of tools, simple in-house scripts 
to customize the general output of the program used, and/or use of custom or publicly available pipelines to efficiently adjust programs for the specific project. Numbers for 
categories 1–14 are indicated in Figure 2.1.

22

The scope of things to come: New paradigms in biotechnology 

C H A P T E R   2

explanations of the necessary activities in Table 2.1. Examples 
of  the  computational  and  bioinformatics-type  tools  required 
for  analysis  of  the  data  are  provided,  although  we  wish  to 
again point to the transitory nature of these tools.

Mapping of comprehensive, genome-wide, 
treatment-specific transcript profiles

For  the  last  quarter  of  the  twentieth  century,  the  piecemeal 
acquisition  and  isolation  of  genes  and  transcripts,  beginning 
with  chloroplast  functions  and  photosynthesis-specific  mole-
cular biochemistry, eventually birthed a molecular interpreta-
tion  of  developmental  and  physiological  parameters  of  plant 
life.  By  the  1990s,  it  was  becoming  increasingly  recognized 
that the random use of over- (CaMV35S- or actin promoter-
driven)  or  under-expressed  (antisense)  coding  regions  was 
producing experimental results of questionable value (Thomas 
et al., 1995). While replacement of these approaches by con-
dition-, cell-, tissue-, or developmental stage-specific promot-
ers  or  the  use  of  gene  knockout  mutations  might  improve 
specificity  (Rivero  et  al.,  2007),  the  majority  of  transgenic 
approaches at plant improvement have shown marginal, albeit 
reproducible,  effects  while  confirmations  through  studies  in 
the  field  have  until  recently  been  missing  (Tarczynski  et  al., 
1993; Apse et al., 1999; Nelson et al., 2007).

There  are  still  few  examples,  notwithstanding  the  gen-
eration  of  crops  that  are  temporarily  transgenically  protected 
against  root-feeding  organisms  or  herbicide  action,  where 
additions or removals of coding regions have had the biotech-
nological  effects  hoped  for  at  the  start  of  the  experiments. 
Given this, any scientist would argue that the reasons for the 
shortcomings are largely centered in incomplete data. A major 
emphasis for the last 20 years has been overcoming this limi-
tation.  The  pace  of  data  acquisition,  at  least  with  respect  to 
gene, genome, and transcriptome sequences, has been rapidly 
accelerating during the first decade of the twenty-first century.

eukaryotic  genomes  (Wheeler  et  al.,  2008)  and  transcrip-
tomes (Vera et al., 2008; Maher et al., 2009).

Since  its  introduction,  the  454  approach  has  continued 
to  evolve  rapidly,  spurred  on  by  competition  from  several 
other  technologies  and  sequencing  strategies  (Bentley,  2006; 
Shendure  and  Ji,  2008).  Two  major  alternatives  include  the 
Illumina/Solexa  Illumina®  Genome  Analyzer,  and  the  ABI 
SOLiD® sequencing platform. Although it will upset both afi-
cionados  and  manufacturers,  the  major  differences  between 
the  platforms  are  with  respect  to  error  types,  sequence 
lengths, and total outputs. Sequencing errors in particular are 
likely  to  be  a  major  concern  for  the  near  future.  The  major 
drawback of 454 sequencing, for example, is a high error rate 
associated  with  homopolymers.  Because  the  length  of  the 
homopolymers are determined by a signal intensity that is not 
directly proportional to the number of bases added, the domi-
nant error type in 454 sequencing is insertion–deletion rather 
than  substitution  (Wicker  et  al.,  2006).  However,  currently, 
the  Roche  454  platform  generates  the  longest  read  lengths, 
several  hundred  bases,  among  second  generation  sequencing 
platforms.  An  improved  platform  —  with  less  error,  higher 
numbers of reads, and longer reads — should be available in 
the summer of 2010.

With  the  Illumina  sequencing  platform,  in  contrast,  the 
dominant  error  type  is  substitution,  and  a  major  difference 
and  limitation  is  read  length,  which  is  below  one  hundred. 
However,  massive  throughput  can  be  gained  with  the  cur-
rent  Illumina  Genome  Analyzer  series;  2    100 bp  reads  up 
to 200 GB in total sequences are returned in eight days. This 
is  sufficient  to  enable  de  novo  sequencing  of  large  genomes 
(Li et al., 2010). The ABI SOLiD® system also returns mas-
sive numbers of short sequences. To increase overall accuracy, 
it uses a two base encoding system that enables unique inter-
nal error checking. The result, however, is error rates that are 
not significantly lower than other second generation platforms 
(Harismendy et al., 2009).

Current next-gen sequencing

Behold the third generation

DNA  sequencing  based  on  Sanger  chemistry  (Sanger  et  al., 
1977)  was  the  prevalent  technology  from  the  late  1970s 
to  the  mid-2000s.  Although  the  seminal  contributions  in 
genome  sequencing  of  primary  model  organisms  from  bacte-
ria to humans by Sanger sequencing are real, it is a laborious 
and expensive technique. Nevertheless, it evolved into an ini-
tial  high-throughput  sequencing  phase  with  the  introduction 
of  fluorescently  labeled  terminators  (Prober  et  al.,  1987), 
parallelized  high-resolution  capillary-based  polymer  gel  elec-
trophoresis  (Hunkapiller  et  al.,  1991;  Dolnik,  1999),  and 
automated fluid handling robotic systems (Wada et al., 1989; 
Meldrum, 2000).

The  next-gen  sequencing  began  around  2006  with  Roche 
454 pyrosequencing. This new technique reduced sequencing 
costs  and  increased  high-throughput  yields  by  several  orders 
of  magnitude,  and  similarly  increased  the  pool  of  investiga-
tors who could enter the arena. This 454 sequencing was the 
first technology other than Sanger to sequence and assemble 
de novo bacterial (Hiller et al., 2007; Tauch et al., 2008) and 

Although  second  generation  sequencing  tools  have  led  to 
an  explosion  of  data  of  record-shattering  proportions,  their 
time is unquestionably limited. The third generation is in the 
wings.  Third  generation  sequencing  platforms  involve  com-
pletely different approaches compared to the earlier sequenc-
ing platforms. Generally they target real-time single molecule 
sequencing. At present the third generation sequencing tech-
nologies have shown proof of concept, some instruments are 
in a beta-testing loop, but further development is expected to 
improve their performance. There are at least two approaches 
close to being marketed. NanoPore® sequencing offers single-
molecule  detection  via  electrophoretically  driven  DNA  (or 
RNA)  molecules  in  solution  through  a  membrane  of  nano-
scale  pores  at  rates  ranging  from  micro-  to  milliseconds  per 
molecule.  Alternately,  single  molecule  real-time  (SMRT) 
DNA  sequencing  introduced  by  Pacific  Biosciences  (PacBio; 
Menlo  Park,  CA)  involves  the  real-time  monitoring  of  DNA 
polymerase activity. With either of these, it is to be expected 
that  DNA  sequencing  rates  exceeding  a  thousand  bases  per 

23

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

second can be achieved at very low costs enabling the target 
of “one genome per $1000” set by NIH in 2004 (Deamer and 
Akeson, 2000; Rhee and Burns, 2006; Bayley, 2006; Branton 
et al., 2008).

This  century,  however,  is  still  young.  Second  generation 
sequencing will enjoy a period of dominance that will last less 
than 10 years, and third generation sequencing is unlikely to 
be the ultimate answer. We expect continued rapid advance-
ment with competition based on improved speed, lower cost, 
and acceptable (very high) accuracy in single reads.

Modifications  of  sequencing  tools  and  protocols  that  deal 
with the structure of the emerging epigenome will not be far 
behind. It is conceivable that we will be able to have simul-
taneous  knowledge  of  the  sequence  and  the  methylations 
or  other  modifications  in  both  the  DNA  sequence  and  the 
histone  modification  dynamics  that  indicate  the  epigenetic 
state.  First  results  have  been  reported.  Large-scale  DNA 
methylation analysis via bisulfite sequencing of human fibro-
blasts and stem cells has revealed patterns in nuclear repro-
gramming  (Deng  et  al.,  2009).  Short  read  sequences  from 
non-model plants have also been used in comparative genom-
ics without going through an assembly phase. Studies looking 
into transcription regulation via small RNAs are beginning to 
become  widely  explored  with  pyrosequencing  technologies 
(Ha  et  al.,  2009;  Zhou  et  al.,  2009;  Fahlgren  et  al.,  2009). 
This has also been applied to metagenomic ocean water col-
umn microbial populations that revealed unique small RNAs 
(Shi et al., 2009).

Instruments  may  be  conceived  that  accomplish  disentan-
glement  of  protein–DNA  complexes  in  chromatin,  which 
would then unravel the next level of complexity.

The Elephant in the Laboratory:  
Data Handling

An  outstanding  characteristic  of  genomics,  in  fact  of  all 
“omics”  approaches,  is  that  they  produce  immense  amounts 
of  data  that  require  statistical  and  bioinformatics  tools  for 
handling  (Table  2.1).  Required  are:  (1)  programs  for  sorting 
and assembling the raw data by specific criteria, (2) tools for 
visualizing  and  curating  intermediate  and  final  results  and, 
finally,  (3)  ways  for  generating  neutral  hypotheses,  which 
list,  explain,  and  signify  the  important  aspects  of  the  omics 
approaches  that  result  from  the  immense  flood  of  data. 
Examples  of  the  tools  for  raw  data  processing  are  sequence 
assembly  pipelines  for  next-gen  DNA  sequencing  tools.  The 
relevant  algorithms  and  programs  are  still  being  updated, 
often  in  short  succession.  They  are  indispensible  factors 
enhancing the quality of the sequencing. In addition, basically 
every  step  of  genomics  required  pipelines  involving  bioinfor-
matics (Table 2.1). For the visualization, curation, and integra-
tion tools, one example is Gbrowse, which — with constant 
upgrades  since  2002  (Stein  et  al.,  2002;  Donlin,  2009)  — 
now includes functions not only in browsing and data retriev-
ing, but also for multi-species comparisons.

The  financial  driver  for  sequencing  technology  has  been 
medical  applications,  and  bioinformatics  has  equally  profited 
from  the  prospect  of  personalized  medicine  based  on  DNA 

sequences. The tools are most likely already available, but hid-
den  in  the  Babylonian  towers  erected  by  companies,  admin-
istrations,  and  the  pet  algorithms  of  individual  researchers. 
To  describe  the  many  tools  in  detail  is  beyond  the  scope  of 
this chapter, but an example may outline one of the problems 
that  characterize  the  difficulties  (Le  Novere  et  al.,  2009). 
This  article  suggests  that  the  community  accepts  a  graphical 
notation  system  to  represent  diagrams  that  delineate  proc-
esses  and  pathways.  Underlying  is  the  idea  that  a  graphical 
language  must  be  developed.  This  language,  comparable  to 
Internet protocols, should be universal. The authors present a 
“Systems Biology Graphical Notation” language with defined 
symbols,  whereas  in  the  past  inconsistency  and  ambiguity 
characterized notations of genes, pathways, and processes.

To truly harness the wealth of the data, simply to sort, cat-
egorize,  and  statistically  buttress  their  degree  of  significance 
is  not  sufficient.  Needed  are  mathematical  tools  that  estab-
lish  correlations  or  partial  correlations  that  arrange  genes, 
proteins, metabolites, and activities into networks in depend-
ence  on  development  or  environmental  influences.  Examples 
of  bioinformatics  tools  for  hypothesis  generation  are  found 
among  the  attempts  to  draw  inferences  from  large  sets  of 
microarray  results.  Clustering  and  visualization  have  already 
revealed  the  structure  of  co-expressed  genes  and  have  been 
powerful  tools  when  combined  with  ingenious  ways  of  sam-
pling (Gong et al., 2005; Brady et al., 2007; Ma and Bohnert, 
2007;  Dinneny  et  al.,  2008)  and  the  attempts  lead  to  net-
works  based  on  graphic  theory,  depicting  either  correlations 
or partial correlations based on the gene expression (Ma et al., 
2007;  Obayashi  et  al.,  2009;  Lee  et  al.,  2010).  The  new 
hypothesis  and  prediction  can  be  generated  from  the  con-
structed  network  by  using  “guilt  by  association”  of  genes 
of  unknown  functions  with  known  ones  or  by  analyzing  the 
topology  of  the  network  and  identifying  its  modules  (Mao 
et  al.,  2009;  Bonnet  et  al.,  2010;  MacLean  et  al.,  2010). 
Co-expression tools are integrated with data from proteomics 
and metabolomics data to infer the gene functions (Hirai et al., 
2007; Popescu et al., 2009).

Future  developments  will  include  networks  that  follow 
timescales,  for  example,  predictive  networks.  An  example 
for such a network is with yeast, where changes over time are 
recorded in strains with defined deletions (Yip et al., 2010). 
Also,  the  integration  of  gene  expression  with  protein:protein 
interactions,  protein  modifications,  and  metabolite  dynam-
ics  will  become  more  widespread.  While  most  attention 
has  been  devoted  to  Arabidopsis  (and  rudimentary  data  for 
some crops), networks will be extended to other species (for 
reviews,  see  Fukushima  et  al.,  2009;  Moreno-Risueno  et  al., 
2010).

From Sequences to Comparative 
Genomics

At  present,  the  genomic  sequences  of  nine  angiosperm  spe-
cies  have  been  published;  the  latest  addition  is  the  genome 
of  the  diploid  monocot  Brachypodium  distachyon,  which 
provides  a  glimpse  of  the  grass  ancestral  genome  (The 
International  Brachypodium  Initiative,  2010).  Driven  by  the 

24

The scope of things to come: New paradigms in biotechnology 

C H A P T E R   2

availability  of  second  generation  sequencing,  however,  new 
genome sequences are emerging at a very fast pace (Paterson 
et  al.,  2010).  To  our  knowledge,  in  July  2010,  at  least  eight 
more  higher  plant  genomes  are  now  in  the  publication  pipe-
line  or  the  sequences  are  through  the  final  assembly  pipe-
line  (Arabidopsis  lyrata,  Thellungiella  salsuginea,  T.  parvula, 
cacao, castor bean, soybean, and tomato). In addition, genome 
sequences  for  a  number  of  algal  species  in  phylogenetically 
widely  separated  lineages,  from  diatoms  to  brown  algae  and 
Chlorophytes,  and  the  moss  Physcomitrella  patens  are  pub-
lished (Merchant et al., 2007; Rensing et al., 2008). Within a 
year’s time, this list will be significantly longer.

As limited as it is, with the current collection of completed 
genomes comparisons are underway to define the angiosperm 
ancestral gene complement. With this yardstick, we can then 
trace  how  different  orders,  families,  clades,  and  individual 
species modified the basal set of genes and have enlarged spe-
cific  characters.  We  can  then  identify  orthologs  and  distin-
guish paralogous genes in families that precede the monocot/
dicot divide, and those genetic changes that define angiosperm 
orders (Wicker and Keller, 2007; Sunkar and Jagadeeswaran, 
2008).  While  it  is  not  an  absolute  requirement  for  analyses 
of  transcriptomes,  genome  sequences  are  more  informative 
because they allow for easier evolutionary analysis due to the 
presence  of  introns.  To  correlate  gene  family  number,  struc-
ture,  and  expression  characteristics  across  species  with  phe-
notypic  markers  in  these  species  is  considered  a  means  for 
understanding  physiological  and  developmental  differences. 
For example, orthologous gene identification of SOS1, HKT1, 
NHX1,  NHX5,  AVP1,  and  AVP2  in  Lophopyrum  elongatum, 
a  wild  relative  of  wheat,  was  established  by  comparisons  to 
the  Arabidopsis  and  rice  genomes  in  an  effort  to  improve 
salt tolerance in wheat (Mullan et al., 2007). With a comple-
ment  estimated  as  ~12,000  ancestral  genes  (Sterck  et  al., 
2007),  it  is  already  possible  to  address  questions  of  specia-
tion. Expansions and contractions of gene numbers and modi-
fications of functions can be traced against the background of, 
often  repeated,  ploidy  changes  and  elimination  of  genes  for 
which  many  extant  plants  carry  markers  (Tang  et  al.,  2008). 
Many  of  these  will  be  found  to  contribute  to  biotechnologi-
cally  relevant  genes  or  identify  novel  pathway  repertoires. 
Important in this respect will be lineage-specific genes. These 
will  undoubtedly  be  instrumental  to  elucidate  both  distant 
relationships relevant to environmentally associated lifestyles, 
features,  and  processes  that  distinguish  closely  related  spe-
cies  or  genotypes.  Arabidopsis  thaliana  accessions  undoubt-
edly  have  contributed  most  to  comparative  genomics  within 
ecotypes  (Alonso-Blanco  et  al.,  2005).  Even  in  a  compact 
genome  like  that  of A.  thaliana,  Clark  et  al.  (2007)  showed 
that 9.4% of protein coding genes in the reference genome are 
altered or deleted by naturally existing polymorphisms in wild  
accessions. The significance of epigenetic variation among eco-
types  of  Arabidopsis  has  also  been  demonstrated  in  several 
studies  (Vaughn  et  al.,  2007;  Zhai  et  al.,  2008).  Extending 
such studies and the identification of differences to crop spe-
cies  will  make  it  possible  to  trace  allele  structures  in  breed-
ing lines and to correlate them to quality traits. Quality trait 
loci  (QTLs)  and  association  mapping  to  explore  genotypic 
variation  in  crop  improvement  are  being  complemented  by 

next-gen sequencing (Alonso-Blanco et al., 2005; Myles et al., 
2009).

Among these are questions about how chromosome struc-
ture  influences  gene  expression  by  the  distribution  and 
dynamic  behavior  of  chromatin  condensation  processes. 
Epigenomics  has  gained  a  central  role  in  physiological  proc-
esses  from  plant  development  to  adaptations  to  different 
environmental  conditions.  Although  significant  recognition 
was  given  to  DNA  methylation,  small  non-coding  RNAs, 
and  histone  post-translational  modifications  in  epigenomics 
in  the  past  decade,  next-gen  sequencing  technologies  have 
begun  to  open  floodgates  to  large  datasets  enabling  global 
mapping  of  epigenetic  modification  at  single-base  resolu-
tion.  Further  epigenetic  analysis  is  explored  with  chromatin 
immunoprecipitation  followed  by  sequencing  (ChIP–seq). 
This  allows  genome-wide  profiling  of  DNA-binding  proteins, 
histone  modifications,  or  nucleosomes  (Park,  2009).  We  will 
finally  be  able  to  analyze  in  depth  the  functions  associated 
with non-coding but highly conserved stretches of sequences 
in  different  clades  (Inada  et  al.,  2003).  Genetic  structures, 
represented  by  the  type,  number,  and  domain  structure  of 
genes  in  diverse  pathways,  can  be  analyzed  for  traces  that 
guide  major  plant  developmental  decisions,  such  as  vegeta-
tive  growth;  circadian  rhythmicity;  flowering  time;  and  flow-
ering, seed set, and maturation; and dormancy. Likewise, the 
gene  complements  and  chromosomal  complexities  underly-
ing  innate  immunity  and  pathogen  or  abiotic  stress  response 
pathways can be approached holistically rather than in single-
gene by single-gene mutant fashion that has characterized the 
last several decades. Such a holistic view replaces attempts to 
find “silver bullets” that define a phenotype, generally without 
any  knowledge  of  the  context  in  which  individual  genes  are 
embedded.

Transcriptome profiling

Beyond sequencing of genomes alone, next-gen sequencing has 
also  accelerated  our  knowledge  of  plant  transcriptomes  and 
their  dynamics  (Bellin  et  al.,  2009;  Wall  et  al.,  2009;  Buggs 
et al., 2010; Dassanayake et al., 2010; Parchman et al., 2010). 
It  is  now  possible  to  acquire  an  essentially  complete  picture 
of  a  plant’s  transcriptome  by  a  single  or  very  few  sequence 
runs with cDNAs from RNAs isolated from plant tissues and 
developmental  stages  that  have  been  subjected  to  a  number 
of  different  conditions.  Preliminary  large-scale  transcriptome 
sequencing efforts have already attempted to investigate phys-
iological  processes  in  non-model  plant  systems.  For  example, 
transcriptome  characterization  and  expression  was  examined 
in the healthy and infected tissues of the American chestnut 
and  blight-resistant  Chinese  chestnut  to  explore  candidate 
genes and pathways important in biotic stress (Barakat et al., 
2009). Because this is not limited to model plants, the twenty-
first  century  will,  we  hope,  see  a  transition  from  addressing 
important  plant  related  problems  using  model  systems  inap-
propriate  to  the  questions  at  hand,  to  addressing  them  by 
selecting  new  models  that  have  already  solved  the  problem 
through  evolution.  These  include  extrem ophiles,  plants  that 
are known for their exquisite adaptation to almost any of the 

25

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

most  highly  stressful  environments  on  Earth  (Bressan  et  al., 
2001; Amtmann et al., 2005; Amtmann, 2009).

Next-gen-based recordings of plant transcriptomes provide 
other advantages. Until now we had to resort to the analysis 
of  microarray  hybridizations  to  shed  light  on  regulated  proc-
esses that affect multiple genes and pathways (Bohnert et al., 
2006; Deyholos, 2010; Schnable et al., 2004). However, com-
parative chromosome-based genomics and complete transcrip-
tome dynamics based on next-gen sequencing are now within 
the means of many labs. Such studies promise to truly eluci-
date  the  connections  in  genetic  response  networks  in  depth. 
In  the  past,  transcript  changes  have  been  measured  through 
array  hybridizations  in  time  series  that  have  typically  been 
based on a few points, whereas next-gen sequencing allows for 
time series to be more complete, more accurate, specific, and 
faster to assemble and to analyze once a genome sequence for 
a species exists. Faster assemblies based on constantly improv-
ing programs also contribute.

As a final example, it is now also possible to consider how 
genome  information  contributes  to  our  understanding  that 
comes  from  transcription-related  behavior  of  gene  families 
and  duplicated  genes  with  apparently  identical  functions. 
How  and  to  what  degree  such  duplicated  genes,  which  we 
now will know for certain in a species, have undergone func-
tional  specialization  in  space,  time,  or  biochemistry  can  be 
determined. The contribution of duplicated genes to morpho-
logical complexity and the phenotype can be studied by com-
parison in many species (Freeling and Thomas, 2006).

Broadening the Genomics Toolbox: 
Proteins and Metabolites

Proteomics advances

Progress in proteomics has been equally impressive. It is irref-
utable  that  gazing  at  genomes  and  transcriptomes  alone  can-
not explain a biological system at the cellular level. Certainly, 
the proteome is as dynamic as the transcriptome. The chemi-
cal complexity — the primary sequence of amino acids, sec-
ondary  aspects  of  protein  folding,  and  post-translational 
modifications — and the large dynamic range of proteins pre-
cludes single approaches to complete proteome analysis, even 
disregarding  problems  originating  from  secondary  structure 
changes  and  complex  tertiary  or  quaternary  structures.  To 
understand  the  scope  of  current  methodologies  in  studying 
plant proteomes, see the reviews by Jorrin et al. (2007) and 
Carpentier et al. (2008a, b).

The  effects  of  mechanisms  that  lead  to  post-transcrip-
tional  and  -translational  modifications  are  apparent  only 
when a transcript’s final cause, a protein or the product of a 
pathway, is known. In turn, the dynamic of proteins, protein 
modifications,  and  intra-  and  intercellular  protein  trafficking 
exert deterministic influences on the phenotype (Sullivan and 
Green, 1993; Boston et al., 1996; Zivy and de Vienne, 2000; 
Mazzucotelli  et  al.,  2006;  Inaba  and  Schnell  et  al.,  2008). 
Of  particular  importance  are  studies  that  trace  connections 
between  post-translational  modifications  to  proteins  and  the 

dynamics  of  protein:protein  interactions  related  to  develop-
mental states, tissues, and environmental conditions.

The biotechnological advances in genomics have had a recip-
rocal  effect  on  the  advancement  of  proteomics.  Mechanisms 
in  transcription  are  targets  of  modifications  and  adjustments; 
processes like transcription initiation, splicing, or transcript des-
tination are highly regulated and exert a determining influence 
that is as fundamental as the mere presence of a gene or tran-
script. Mechanisms that control translation preference and effi-
ciency, as well as stability and decay of mRNAs, can be traced 
in  combinations  of  transcript  profiles  and  mutants  that  gener-
ate  deficiencies  in  the  protein  folding,  distribution,  and  turn-
over machineries (Wei et al., 2008; Murphy et al., 2009; Lois, 
2010; Li and Chiu, 2010). To understand the scope of current 
methodologies  in  studying  plant  proteomes,  several  reviews 
provide  an  excellent  basis  (Jorrin  et  al.,  2007;  Carpentier 
et  al.,  2008b;  Rose  et  al.,  2004).  In  the  past  proteomics  has 
been characterized by a two-dimensional separation of proteins 
or  peptides  or  subsequently  by  gel-free  techniques  combined 
with mass spectrometry (Baerenfaller et al., 2008); the future 
will belong to methods based on mass spectroscopy (MRI) that 
can resolve large, complex mixtures of oligopeptides (Gevaert 
and Vandekerckhove, 2000; Junqueira et al., 2008).

Many  recent  studies  in  proteomics  have  attempted  to 
address the gap between transcriptome knowledge and func-
tional protein interactions. For example, in systemic acquired 
resistance (SAR), NPR1 is a coactivator responsible for tran-
scription regulation. A recent study showed that proteosome-
mediated  turnover  of  phosphorylated  NPR1  is  required 
for  full  induction  of  target  genes  and  establishment  of  SAR 
(Spoel  et  al.,  2009).  Similarly,  identification  of  specific  pro-
tein complexes and their physical interaction with amylo-pec-
tin biosynthesis enzymes in developing wheat endosperm has 
been explored (Tetlow et al., 2008).

Databases  such  as  GabiPD  (http://www.gabipd.org/) 
attempt  to  integrate,  analyze,  and  visualize  heterogeneous 
data from different omics platforms containing high-through-
put  experiments  of  different  plant  species  (Riano-Pachon 
et al., 2009).

Metabolomics highlights

The  metabolomics  node  in  post-genome  analysis  assumes 
eminent  importance  in  functional  genomics.  It  traces  the 
effects  of  genes  and  proteins  in  how  metabolites  appear  and 
change  and  the  reciprocal  roles  of  metabolites  in  orchestrat-
ing gene and protein action. The complement of metabolites, 
the  metabolome,  with  its  dynamic  fluctuations  within  and 
between cells defines the biochemical phenotype of cells and 
tissues. As an emerging tool in functional genomics it is differ-
ent  from  the  biochemical  analysis  of  a  metabolite  because  it 
strives to become a high-throughput analysis tool that comple-
ments the other omics technologies (Fiehn, 2001; Bino et al., 
2004) by providing qualitative and quantitative identification 
of all metabolites present in an organism under a given set of 
conditions (Allwood et al., 2008).

Even  more  than  for  the  proteome,  it  is  impractical  to 
identify  the  complete  metabolome  of  any  organism.  As  with 

26

The scope of things to come: New paradigms in biotechnology 

C H A P T E R   2

proteins,  there  is  no  single  extraction  technique  or  analyti-
cal  method  that  can  isolate  and  detect  every  metabolite  in 
any  biological  sample  (Sekiyama  et  al.,  2010).  This  is  fur-
ther  compounded  by  the  diversity  of  compounds  which,  in 
plants, are estimated to include 1–2 million different metabo-
lites  (Oksman-Caldentey  and  Inze,  2004).  To  reduce  addi-
tional  ambiguities  related  to  sample  processing,  analysis,  and 
reporting,  and  to  standardize  workflows,  the  Metabolomics 
Standards Initiative (http://msi-workgroups.sourceforge.net/) 
has recommended that protocols be kept to report, in detail, 
the  growth  of  the  material,  analysis  details,  and  the  ways  of 
data  processing  in  the  framework  of  a  controlled  vocabulary 
for  data  reporting  (Fiehn,  2002;  Jenkins  et  al.,  2004;  Fiehn, 
et al., 2006). This is certainly an essential first step in making 
some sense of the mind-boggling large datasets these analyses 
can produce.

Central 

to  metabolomics  are 

two  complementary 
approaches  of  metabolite  analysis:  metabolite  fingerprinting 
and  profiling.  Metabolic  fingerprinting  involves  identification 
of  metabolite  signatures  in  samples  via  techniques  such  as 
NMR,  Fourier  transform  ion  cyclotron  resonance  mass  spec-
trometry,  Fourier  transform  (FT)-IR  spectroscopy,  Raman 
spectroscopy,  and  electrospray  ionization  (ESI)-MS.  This 
approach is usually limited to a small number of metabolites, 
and is at least relatively fast and low cost. Metabolic profiling, 
in contrast, involves the detection, quantification, and identifi-
cation of much larger numbers of metabolites within a sample 
via techniques such as gas or liquid chromatography coupled 
to mass spectroscopy, and comparison of outputs to pre-ana-
lyzed “libraries.” A major limitation, hindering metabolic pro-
filing from taking on its full role in the genomic toolbox, is the 
lack of availability of pure compounds to make those libraries. 
A number of reviews discuss benefits and drawbacks of indi-
vidual methods and critical bioinformatics-type analyses used 
in these approaches (Kopka et al., 2004; Allwood et al., 2008; 
Shulaev et al., 2008; Hegeman, 2010).

Given  that  these  problems  will  be  solved,  probably  with 
much of the twenty-first century to go, a goal for the integra-
tion of genomic, proteomic, and metabolomic analyses will be 
to provide the correlations needed to clarify the many, poorly 
understood metabolic networks and pathways. It will be pos-
sible  to  explain  their  broader  biological  significance  with 
respect  to  the  environmental,  developmental,  or  other  test 
conditions, and then, to assign gene functions, for example, by 
the “clique metabolite matrices” method (Kose et al., 2001). 
The  algorithm  searches  for  linear  metabolite  correlations 
(2-cliques),  defines  maximal  cliques  of  metabolites  that  are 
separated  from  others,  and  establishes  hierarchical  network 
models.

This  will  provide  important  insight  into  plant  metabolic 
regulation  and  gene-to-metabolite  relationships  (Bohnert 
et  al.,  2006).  The  predictive  power  of  combined  omics  data 
is  highly  enhanced  when  coupled  with  mathematical  mod-
eling.  Although  such  experiments  are  still  limited,  with  the 
most  complete  analysis  available  for  bacteria  and  yeasts 
(Yamada  and  Bork,  2009),  a  pioneering  study  conducted  by 
Morioka  et  al.  (2007)  showed  successful  modeling  of  gene 
expression linked to metabolic accumulation in sulfur-starved 
Arabidopsis  plants.  Similarly,  spearheaded  by  groups  at  the 

Max Planck Institute for Plant Physiology in Golm, Germany, 
major  advances  have  been  made  into  the  description  of  the 
Arabidopsis  metabolome,  in  many  cases  combined  with 
detailed  enzymatic  measurement  (Steinhauser  et  al.,  2010). 
One  promising  aspect  for  the  future  is  the  integration  of 
metabolite  and  enzyme  activity  data  with  transcript  analyses 
as they are mirrored in the MapMan program. Although origi-
nally  developed  for  Arabidopsis,  this  program  has  sufficient 
flexibility to be adapted to other plants (Urbanczyk-Wochniak 
et al., 2006).

Genomics Unlimited: Getting Beyond 
Mere Genes

For  decades,  plant  biologists  have  discussed  the  best 
approaches  to  finding  and  understanding  pathways,  proteins, 
and  genes  that  confer  abiotic  stress  tolerance.  The  goal  is  to 
develop methods to utilize this information in crop improve-
ment as climate change, degradation of agricultural lands, and 
an increasing population loom large.

Within  species,  recording  of  single  nucleotide  polymor-
phisms  (SNPs)  and  QTL  information  that  uses  molecular 
markers for increasingly finer resolution have at least partially 
brought progress. By utilizing the power of next-gen sequenc-
ing and statistics, associating genetic variations (mostly SNPs) 
and  QTLs  in  a  genome-wide  scale,  genome-wide  association 
(GWA)  studies  become  feasible.  The  GWA  was  initiated  by 
human geneticists to discover the genetic basis of human dis-
ease (Hirschhorn and Daly, 2005). It was adopted rapidly to 
plants starting with the model plant Arabidopsis for varieties 
of  phenotypes  (Atwell  et  al.,  2010;  Nemri  et  al.,  2010)  and 
crop plants (Waugh et al., 2009; Cirulli and Goldstein, 2010). 
Although the GWA has its own limitations — that each single 
genetic polymorphism usually exerts very little effect on the 
phenotype, which often is a result of complex interaction of 
multiple genetic variation (Galvan et al., 2010) — approaches 
to  identify  QTLs  more  targeted  to  more  specific  traits  were 
also becoming fruitful. In rice, for example, it has been pos-
sible  to  definitively  associate  a  strong  QTL  for  traits  such  as 
germination at low temperature with grain yield and identify 
highly likely candidate genes (Fujino et al., 2008; Wang et al., 
2008; Huang et al., 2009). Concepts and databases are emerg-
ing that correlate QTL information, transcript expression, and 
genome structure, as well as for pyramiding beneficial alleles 
(Ashikari  and  Matsuoka,  2006;  Zeng  et  al.,  2007).  Due  to 
public concerns and policy limitation in the use of genetically 
modified  plants,  genomics  assisted  QTL  mapping  provides  a 
desirable alternative to transgenic modifications in crops. This 
is  explored  for  many  crop  species  exploiting  the  plethora  of 
draft  genome  sequences  that  are  emerging  (Barone  et  al., 
2009).

Also poised to become a defining field for the twenty-first 
century is epigenomics (Katsnelson, 2010). Again, progress in 
understanding this major influence on organismal behavior will 
be  enabled  by  whole  genome  sequencing  capacities,  but  also 
by  the  ability  to  compare  diverse  genomes.  For  efficiency  it 
may  be  necessary  to  recruit  ever  more  computing  power  to 
the  problem,  which  will  require  large  research  project  units 

27

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

and  may  ask  for  commercialization,  comparative  genom-
ics,  and  transcriptomics  on  an  increasingly  higher  scale  and 
throughput. The problem and challenge in epigenomics is its 
superimposition  on  the  classical  genetic  landscape  in  multi-
ple  layers,  including  ATP-dependent  chromatin  remodeling, 
post-translational  histone  modifications,  variances  in  histone 
combination,  and  RNA-based  epigenetic  control  mechanisms 
and  DNA  methylation,  both  of  which  are  engrained  by  the 
organism’s  history  and  previous  lifestyle  as  well  as  by  recent 
environmental that define the organism’s future. Omics-scale 
characterization  of  DNA  methylation  and  small  RNAs  are 
among those expected to capitalize on the most recent tech-
nical advances including direct single molecule sequencing of 
methylated  DNA  (Flusberg  et  al.,  2010)  and  deep  sequenc-
ing of small RNA species (Creighton et al., 2009). A genome-
wide methylome map was developed for Arabidopsis (Zhang 
et al., 2006; Zilberman et al., 2007), and deep sequencing was 
widely  used  to  identify  both  species  and  expression  of  plant 
miRNAs (Zhan and Lukens, 2010).

Irrefutable  evidence  documents  the  immense  importance 
of the epigenetic machinery for the functioning of eukary otic 
organisms.  The  dynamically  imprinted  state  includes  first  a 
memory of the past of an individuum or a line and also carries 
the possibility of responding to future adverse environmental 
challenges. Both ways have, at least in plants, been recognized 
long  ago,  although  analysis  and  understanding  has  been  lack-
ing until recently. Epigenetics constitutes a set of mechanisms 
that establishes a memory of past experiences and challenges 
to  the  genome  that  have  been  successfully  counteracted  and 
incorporated  into  an  appropriate  gene  expression  program 
through which the phenotype adapted to the prevailing envi-
ronment  (Jablonka  and  Lamb,  2006;  Matzke  et  al.,  2009; 
Turner et al., 2010; Iorio et al., 2010). However, the process 
is fluid, not a dead end, for which terms such as acclimation, 
priming,  or  somaclonal  variation  provide  examples  of  recur-
rent epigenetic events.

Into the Future: Genomics-Based 
Biotechnology and Agriculture

We  can  live  without  oil  but  we  cannot  live  without  water. 
Every successful high culture has had access to ample water, 
has  modified  the  use  of  water  through  irrigation  schemes 
and,  in  the  process,  established  organized  public  interac-
tions. Every culture that let slip its control of water has dis-
appeared.  At  present  2  billion  people  are  without  reliable 
access  to  clean  water  (UN  World  Water  Assessment  Report, 
http://www.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr).  We  can 
live 
without computer chips but we cannot live without food that 
is produced utilizing approximately two-thirds of the renew-
able fresh water on Earth. Water shortages constitute the big-
gest barrier to enhancing food production. In the near future, 
crops will have to be grown on less land, or less suitable land, 
and with less water. The climatic conditions of this future are 
such  that  most  crops  do  not  have  experience  and  memory, 
and lack an appropriate allele structure.

This  outlook,  considered  realistic  by  many  (Foley  et  al., 
2005; Vorosmarty et al., 2000; Wood, 2003; Piao et al., 2007; 

Nord  and  Lynch,  2009;  Godfray  et  al.,  2010),  will  require 
accelerated  breeding  efforts  that  begin  the  adaptation  of 
extant crops to a variety of new environments by focusing on 
fundamental  plant  functions.  While  breeding  will  remain  the 
backbone of genetic adaptation, solutions will also need trans-
genic  approaches.  Next-gen  sequencing  and  the  omics  tools 
are  already  supporting  both  strategies.  For  example,  utilizing 
the more economical and efficient sequencing of genomes and 
transcriptomes enables development of molecular markers and 
identification of genomic variations by extensive re-sequencing 
of  plant  ecotypes,  and  enhanced  mapping  and  association  of 
QTLs  of  species  for  which  until  recently  no  genomics-type 
data  were  available  (Varshney  et  al.,  2009;  Barone  et  al., 
2009). There remain as yet various barriers before connections 
can  be  made  between  laboratory  findings  and  field  data.  We 
conclude  this  review  by  highlighting  a  few  of  those  barriers 
and the potentials of genomics tools to solving problems.

From models to crops, from labs to fields

The knowledge and data accumulated for model species must 
be transferred to crop species. Next-gen sequencing is already 
providing the basis for such a change, and gradually and inevi-
tably making the concept of “model” obsolete. The continuing 
reduction  of  sequencing  cost  will  enable  genome  sequencing 
on an immense scale such that breeders may obtain whatever 
DNA  sequence  is  necessary  from  hundreds  to  thousands  of 
lines during a growing season for comparison with last year’s 
lines. Not to belittle the tasks ahead, accumulation of pheno-
typic information of crop plants modified by either transgenic 
or breeding approaches will require time and effort, in partic-
ular in how information is analyzed and statistically prepared. 
Also, sequencing and analyzing the large and, often, polyploid 
genomes  of  many  crop  species  will  be  challenging  and  will 
drive  further  improvements  in  DNA  sequencing,  assembly 
methods,  and  self-learning  algorithms  that  draw  conclusions 
from the immense data flood. Along this process, we will find 
the  tools  that  will  allow  us  to  define  the  roles  of  repetitive 
sequences  and  non-coding  yet  transcribed  regions,  seemingly 
junk  DNA.  Their  cryptic  functions,  if  any,  for  phenotypic 
characters can only be unraveled on a genomic scale and view.
A second aspect is realism in experimentation — the trans-
fer  of  laboratory  knowledge  to  knowledge  about  field  per-
formance.  It  is  already  known  that  a  large  number  of  gene 
expression  characteristics  that  laboratory  scientists  term 
“stress-induced”  are  constitutively  expressed  in  the  field 
(Miyazaki et al., 2004). Over the last two decades a number 
of engineering attempts have been made. In many instances a 
marginal  effect  could  be  documented,  but  to  our  knowledge 
genuinely  improved  performances  under  field  or  field  stress 
conditions  have  not  been  reported.  For  example,  numer-
ous numbers of transgenic plants were developed with genes 
for  ion  transport  and  compatible  solutes  accumulation,  to 
enhance  salinity  stress  tolerance,  while  performance  tests 
used greenhouse conditions (Ashraf and Akram, 2009).

Only  few  recent  experiments  have  shown  improvement 
of  transgenic  plants  in  the  field  or,  in  addition,  attempted 
to  monitor  unexpected  interactions  with  the  environment 

28

The scope of things to come: New paradigms in biotechnology 

C H A P T E R   2

(Zeller  et  al.,  2010).  Expression  of  a  transcription  factor 
gene  under  the  control  of  a  stress  condition-specific  pro-
moter resulted in maize plants that could withstand moderate 
drought conditions better than the control line (Nelson et al., 
2007). Another transgenic attempt was made to improve the 
resistance of bread wheat against powdery mildew. Here, the 
transgenic  lines  did  show  the  expected  improved  resistance. 
However, reactions of the plants to other prevailing environ-
mental  factors  indicated  differences  between  greenhouse 
and  field,  in  part  revealing  adverse  effects  by  the  transgene 
(Zeller  et  al.,  2010).  We  are  clearly  not  able  to  predict  the 
unintended  consequences  caused  by  transgenes  and  transfor-
mation. Instead, many more experiments will be required in 
which field conditions and genomic sequences, multifactorial 
transcriptome  profiles,  phenotypes,  and  yield  characteristics 
in the field are monitored. Very likely, better success will have 
to rely on a more controlled and specific expression of trans-
genes.  Attempts  are  being  made  to  utilize  or  develop  pro-
moters that are tissue-, condition-, or signal-specific (Venter, 
2007; Lv et al., 2009; Kovalchuk et al., 2010). Also, transfer 
of multiple genes in the pathway will have a better chance of 
providing more viable solutions than a single transgene. As one 
example, the transfer of four genes that had been associated 
with water deficit and salt tolerance in Arabidopsis, which is 
certainly  not  a  stress-tolerant  species,  resulted  in  consider-
able  tolerance  to  drought  in  cotton  (Z.  Gong,  R.A.  Bressan, 
J-K  Zhu  et  al.,  personal  communication).  Accumulation  of 
genomics data and better ways of networking similar experi-
ments  and  solutions  will  help  in  identifying  regulatory  ele-
ments  as  well  as  genetic  resources  in  specific  pathways  and 
the  interactions  between  pathways.  Next-gen  sequencing 
will play a crucial role for assessing interactions of transgenes 
with  the  allele  structure  of  the  target  species  and  with  the 
environment.

Genetic resources from extremophile 
species

Extant  crops  have  generally  been  adapted  for  growth  in  the 
most  productive  environments,  which,  at  least  to  some 
degree,  was  at  the  expense  of  traits  that  characterize  less 
ideal,  more  stressful  conditions.  For  the  future  species  that 
show  natural  adaptations  to  heat,  cold,  freezing,  salinity, 
flooding,  and,  especially,  low  water  availability  are  of  partic-
ular  importance.  It  will  be  important  that  their  genome  will 
be sequenced. These extremophile species include genes and 
proteins, protein modification characteristics, biochemical and 
metabolic  pathways,  and  epigenetic  characters  that  support 
their  protection.  Most  important  will  be  those  extremophile 
species  that  are  close  relatives  of  established  models  and/
or  crops.  The  importance  of  work  with  extremophile  spe-
cies,  and  in  particular  extremophile  relatives  of  Arabidopsis, 
has been pointed out before (Bressan et al., 2001; Amtmann 
et  al.,  2005;  Amtmann,  2009).  Another  alternative  strat-
egy  will  be  to  analyze  species  from  different  orders  or  fami-
lies  that  grow  under  similar  stressful  conditions.  As  a  point 
in  favor  of  such  an  approach,  an  analysis  of  two  mangroves 
in  different  orders,  their  transcriptomes  (Dassanayake  et  al., 

2009, 2010) have been instrumental in defining how an extre-
mophile lifestyle leads to transcript populations distinguished 
from those of glycophytes.

Exploring “unknown unknowns”

A powerful aspect of the holistic approach underlying genom-
ics  is  to  begin  without  preconceived  views  and  let  the  data 
create  hypotheses.  Up  to  now  gene  additions,  subtractions 
(knockouts),  or  modifications  of  genes  in  existing  pathways 
rely  on  the  chance  discovery  of  a  desired  mutant  phenotype 
or,  worse,  begin  by  relying  on  what  we  seem  to  know  about 
a  known  gene.  The  years  of  work  using  Arabidopsis  tagged 
mutants  and  work  on  protein:protein  interactions  revealed 
functional  complexity  for  many  individual  proteins.  The 
multiple  functions  may  affect  different  biochemistries,  and 
removing a protein can have quite unexpected consequences.

Adding  to  protein  multifunctionality,  the  hand-waving 
associated with the term “position effect” in explaining unex-
pected results of transgenes will be another unknown on which 
genomics  approaches  can  focus.  Next-gen  DNA  sequencing 
can  monitor  the  place  of  a  transgene  in  the  vicinity  of  tran-
scribed  regions  that  may  be  translated  or  may  be  functional 
by  carrying  epigenetic  signals.  Not  that  we  know  all  about 
how  promoter  regions  are  controlled  during  development 
and  under  environmental  challenges,  about  transcriptome 
to  proteome  dynamic  interactions,  or  about  the  influence  of 
genomic memory — but these are known unknowns. Only by 
integrating the wealth of available and emerging data, and pre-
dominantly  genomics-type  data,  can  the  remaining  unknown 
unknowns be found. Predominantly among those are the elu-
cidation  of  epigenetic  effects  governing  genome  memory, 
maintenance  of  this  memory,  or  interactions  by  which  the 
environment  generates  non-mutational  genome  alterations. 
Also related are questions about the cryptic functions of repet-
itive elements and non-coding sequences, and about the evolu-
tion of mechanisms for silencing invading genetic elements and 
how this necessity became incorporated into chromatin correc-
tion,  chromosome  composition,  and  genome  complexity  con-
trol mechanisms.

The importance of stress “tolerance” 
engineering

Whether by breeding or transgenic engineering, abiotic stress 
tolerance is a most important character to achieve. Increased 
stress tolerance and increased ability to grow and produce in 
a variety of stressful environments is sought after even when 
productivity  becomes  partially  compromised.  The  character 
most  desirable  is  water  productivity,  and  typically,  but  in  a 
more narrow sense, labeled water use efficiency.

Over  the  last  two  decades  a  number  of  genetic  engineer-
ing  attempts  have  been  made.  In  many  instances  a  marginal 
effect could be documented, but to our knowledge improved 
performance under field or field stress conditions has not been 
shown. One recent experiment, however, has shown just such 
an improvement in the field (Nelson et al., 2004). The expres-
sion of a transcription factor gene under the control of a stress 

29

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

condition-specific promoter resulted in maize plants that could 
withstand some drought stress better than the control line. An 
increased  amount  of  genomics  data  and  better  ways  of  net-
working  similar  experiments  and  solutions  will  likely  result 
in  similar  successes.  It  must  be  questioned  whether  marginal 
improvements  from  single-gene  transfers  will  provide  viable 
solutions; it seems that the accumulation of several genes will 
be  superior.  Also,  the  transfer  of  multiple  genes  into  a  trans-
genic  crop  line  may  protect  against  stress  parameters  that 
affect more than one resistance or recovery pathway.

For  example,  a  comparison  of  genome  sequences  from  
A.  thaliana  and  the  stress-tolerant,  halophytic  close  relative 
T. parvula indicated high sequence identity in translated regions 
of  genes.  In  contrast  low  sequence  homology  was  observed  in 
the promoter regions of salt-tolerance determinant genes, such 
as SOS1, to a degree that suggests expression strength or tran-
script  stability  as  a  major  component  of  T.  parvula’s  extraor-
dinarily  high  salinity  tolerance  (Orsini  et  al.,  2010;  Oh  et  al., 
2010). The availability of the T. parvula nuclear genome — at 
approximately  163  Mbp  only  slightly  larger  than  the  A.  thal-
iana genome — promises to provide an exceptional insight into 
the differences between a glycophyte and an extremophile rela-
tive  (Dassanayake  et  al.,  2011).  Our  recent  and  ongoing  anal-
ysis  of  the  genome  of  the  extremely  salt-tolerant  Arabidopsis 
relative T. parvula reveals surprising differences that affect how 
both species deal with saline water.

Genomics and its related cousins have already generated and 
will generate unprecedented deeper understanding of plant life. 

Among  the  species  whose  genome  will  be  sequenced,  those 
that  show  natural  adaptations  to  heat,  cold,  freezing,  salinity, 
flooding  and,  especially,  low  water  availability  are  of  particu-
lar importance. In this century, studies will not be limited to a  
few — much less a single — model species. The enduring value 
of  model  species  will  be  to  use  what  we  have  learned  in  the 
struggle  to  assemble  them  and  in  providing  archetypical  gene 
models and the understanding of gene complexity against which 
other species can be measured. For the first time we can hope 
to view plants as an integrated system — we are no longer like 
blind men touching an elephant — with the prospect of trans-
ferring  this  knowledge  into  crop  improvement  that  will,  we 
hope, let us meet the challenges of feeding the additional 1.5 to 
2 billion people expected to challenge the food chain in this cen-
tury.  The  enabling  technologies  to  which  next-gen  sequencing 
has recently significantly contributed have been developed, but 
overall success does not depend on science as solving the prob-
lems does not have a simple science-based solution.

Acknowledgments

The  work  on  this  article  has  been  made  possible  by  funds 
from  the  World  Class  University  (WCU  grant  number  R32 
and 8211; 10148) and BK 21 programs, Gyeongsang National 
University,  by  the  Government  of  Korea,  and  by  the  King 
Abdallah University for Science and Technology (KAUST) in 
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.

References

Allwood, J. W., Ellis, D. I., & Goodacre, 

R. (2008). Metabolomic technologies and 
their application to the study of plants 
and plant-host interactions. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 132, 117–135.

Alonso-Blanco, C., Gomez-Mena, C., Llorente, F., 

Koornneef, M., Salinas, J.,  
& Martinez-Zapater, J. M. (2005). Genetic 
and molecular analyses of natural variation 
indicate CBF2 as a candidate gene for 
underlying a freezing tolerance quantitative 
trait locus in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 
139, 1304–1312.

Amtmann, A. (2009). Learning from evolution: 

Thellungiella generates new knowledge on 
essential and critical components of abiotic 
stress tolerance in plants. Molecular Plant, 
2, 3–12.

Amtmann, A., Bohnert, H. J., & Bressan, R. 

A. (2005). Abiotic stress and plant genome 
evolution. Search for new models. Plant 
Physiology, 138, 127–130.

Anonymous,  (1951). FACSIMILE of 

Gregor Mendel’s “Experiments in plant 
hybridation.” The Journal of Heredity, 42, 
3–47.

Apse, M. P., Aharon, G. S., Snedden, W. A., 

& Blumwald, E. (1999). Salt tolerance 
conferred by overexpression of a vacuolar 
Na/H antiport in Arabidopsis. Science, 
285, 1256–1258.

Ashikari, M., & Matsuoka, M. (2006). 

Identification, isolation and pyramiding 

30

of quantitative trait loci for rice breeding. 
Trends in Plant Science, 11, 344–350.

Ashraf, M., & Akram, N. A. (2009). 

Improving salinity tolerance of plants 
through conventional breeding and genetic 
engineering: An analytical comparison. 
Biotechnology Advances, 27, 744–752.
Astill, G., & Langdon,  J. (Eds.), (1997). 
Medieval farming and technology – the 
impact of agricultural change in northwest 
europe. Leiden and Boston: Brill.

Atwell, S., Huang, Y. S., Vilhjalmsson, B. J., 
Willems, G., Horton, M., & Li, Y., et al. 
(2010). Genome-wide association study 
of 107 phenotypes in Arabidopsis thaliana 
inbred lines. Nature, 465(7298), 627–631.
Baerenfaller, K., Grossmann, J., Grobei, M. A., 
Hull, R., Hirsch-Hoffmann, M., & Yalovsky, 
S., et al. (2008). Genome-scale proteomics 
reveals Arabidopsis thaliana gene models 
and proteome dynamics. Science, 320, 
938–941.

Barakat, A., DiLoreto, D. S., Zhang, Y., Smith, 
C., Baier, K., & Powell, W. A., et al. (2009). 
Comparison of the transcriptomes of 
American chestnut (Castanea dentata) and 
Chinese chestnut (Castanea mollissima) in 
response to the chestnut blight infection. 
BMC Plant Biology, 9, 51.

Barone, A., Di Matteo, A., Carputo, D., & 
Frusciante, L. (2009). High-throughput 
genomics enhances tomato breeding 
efficiency. Current Genomics, 10, 1–9.

Bayley, H. (2006). Sequencing single molecules 

of DNA. Current Opinion in Chemical 
Biology, 10, 628–637.

Bellin, D., Ferrarini, A., Chimento, A., 

Kaiser, O., Levenkova, N., & Bouffard, 
P., et al. (2009). Combining next- 
generation pyrosequencing with 
microarray for large scale expression 
analysis in non-model species. BMC 
Genomics, 10, 555.

Bentley, D. R. (2006). Whole-genome 

re-sequencing. Current Opinion in Genetics 
& Development, 16, 545–552.

Bino, R. J., Hall, R. D., Fiehn, O., Kopka, J., 

Saito, K., & Draper, J.,  
et al. (2004). Potential of metabolomics as 
a functional genomics tool. Trends in Plant 
Science, 9, 418–425.

Bohnert, H. J., Gong, Q., Li, P., & Ma, S. 

(2006). Unraveling abiotic stress tolerance 
mechanisms – getting genomics going. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 9, 
180–188.

Bonnet, E., Tatari, M., Joshi, A., Michoel, T., 

Marchal, K., & Berx, G., et al. (2010). 
Module network inference from a cancer 
gene expression data set identifies 
microRNA regulated modules. PLoS ONE, 
5, e10162.

Boston, R. S., Viitanen, P. V., & Vierling, E. 

(1996). Molecular chaperones and protein 
folding in plants. Plant Molecular Biology, 
32, 191–222.

The scope of things to come: New paradigms in biotechnology 

C H A P T E R   2

Brady, S. M., Orlando, D. A., Lee, J. Y., 

Wang, J. Y., Koch, J., & Dinneny, J. R., 
et al. (2007). A high-resolution root 
spatiotemporal map reveals dominant 
expression patterns. Science, 318, 801–806.

Branton, D., Deamer, D. W., Marziali, A., 

Bayley, H., Benner, S. A., & Butler, T., et al. 
(2008). The potential and challenges of 
nanopore sequencing. Nature Biotechnology, 
26, 1146–1153.

Bray, F. (1986). Agriculture. Science and 

Civilization in China. Cambridge University 
Press.

Bressan, R. A., Zhang, C., Zhang, H., 
Hasegawa, P. M., Bohnert, H. J., &  
Zhu, J. K. (2001). Learning from the 
Arabidopsis experience. The next gene 
search paradigm. Plant Physiology, 127, 
1354–1360.

Buggs, R. J., Chamala, S., Wu, W., Gao, 

L., May, G. D., & Schnable, P. S., et al. 
(2010). Characterization of duplicate gene 
evolution in the recent natural allopolyploid 
Tragopogon miscellus by next-generation 
sequencing and Sequenom iPLEX 
MassARRAY genotyping. Molecular Ecology, 
19(Suppl 1), 132–146.

Carpentier, S. C., Coemans, B., Podevin, N., 

Laukens, K., Witters, E., & Matsumura, H., 
et al. (2008a). Functional genomics in a non-
model crop: Transcriptomics or proteomics? 
Physiologia Plantarum, 133, 117–130.

Carpentier, S. C., Panis, B., Vertommen, A., 

Swennen, R., Sergeant, K., &  
Renaut, J., et al. (2008b). Proteome analysis 
of non-model plants: A challenging but 
powerful approach. Mass Spectrometry 
Reviews, 27, 354–377.

Cirulli, E. T., & Goldstein, D. B. (2010). 

Uncovering the roles of rare variants in 
common disease through whole-genome 
sequencing. Nature Reviews Genetics, 11, 
415–425.

Clark, R. M., Schweikert, G., Toomajian, C., 
Ossowski, S., Zeller, G., & Shinn, P., et al. 
(2007). Common sequence polymorphisms 
shaping genetic diversity in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Science, 317, 338–342.

Creighton, C. J., Reid, J. G., & Gunaratne, 

P. H. (2009). Expression profiling of 
microRNAs by deep sequencing. Briefings in 
Bioinformatics, 10, 490–497.

Darwin, C. (1868). The variation of animals 
and plants under domestication. London: 
John Murray.

Dassanayake, M., Haas, J. S., Bohnert, H. J., 
& Cheeseman, J. M. (2010). Comparative 
transcriptomics for mangrove species: An 
expanding resource. Functional & Integrative 
Genomics, 10(4), 523–532.

Dassanayake, M., Haas, J. S., Bohnert, H. J., 

& Cheeseman, J. M. (2009). Shedding 
light on an extremophile lifestyle through 
transcriptomics. The New Phytologist, 183, 
764–775.

Dassanayake, M., Oh, D.-H., Haas, J.S., 

Hernandez, A., Hong, H., Shahjhan Ali, 
S., et al., (2011). The genome of the 
extremophile crucifer Thellungiella purvula. 
Nature Genetics. (AOP, 07 August 2011; 
DOI 10.1038/ng.889.

Deamer, D. W., & Akeson, M. (2000). Nanopores 

and nucleic acids: Prospects for ultrarapid 

sequencing. Trends in Biotechnology, 18, 
147–151.

Deng, J., Shoemaker, R., Xie, B., Gore, A., 

LeProust, E. M., & Antosiewicz-Bourget, J., 
et al. (2009). Targeted bisulfite sequencing 
reveals changes in DNA methylation 
associated with nuclear reprogramming. 
Nature Biotechnology, 27, 353–360.

Deyholos, M. K. (2010). Making the most of 
drought and salinity transcriptomics. Plant 
Cell And Environment, 33, 648–654.

Dinneny, J. R., Long, T. A., Wang, J. Y., Jung, J. 

W., Mace, D., & Pointer, S., et al. (2008). 
Cell identity mediates the response of 
Arabidopsis roots to abiotic stress. Science, 
320, 942–945.

Doebley, J. F., Gaut, B. S., & Smith, B. D. 
(2006). The molecular genetics of crop 
domestication. Cell, 127, 1309–1321.

Dolnik, V. (1999). DNA sequencing by 

capillary electrophoresis (review). Journal 
of Biochemical and Biophysical Methods, 41, 
103–119.

Donlin, M. J. (2009). Using the Generic 
Genome Browser (GBrowse). Current 
Protocols in Bioinformatics (Chapter 9, 
Unit 9 9).

Fahlgren, N., Sullivan, C. M., Kasschau, 
K. D., Chapman, E. J., Cumbie, J. S., 
& Montgomery, T. A., et al. (2009). 
Computational and analytical framework 
for small RNA profiling by high-throughput 
sequencing. RNA, 15, 992–1002.

Fiehn, O. (2001). Combining genomics, 

metabolome analysis, and biochemical 
modelling to understand metabolic 
networks. Comparative and Functional 
Genomics, 2, 155–168.

Fiehn, O. (2002). Metabolomics – the link 

between genotypes and phenotypes. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 48, 155–171.

Fiehn, O., Kristal, B., van Ommen, B., Sumner, 

L. W., Sansone, S. A., & Taylor, C., et al. 
(2006). Establishing reporting standards for 
metabolomic and metabonomic studies: A 
call for participation. Omics, 10, 158–163.

Flusberg, B. A., Webster, D. R., Lee, J. H., 
Travers, K. J., Olivares, E. C., & Clark, 
T. A., et al. (2010). Direct detection of 
DNA methylation during single-molecule, 
real-time sequencing. Nature Methods, 7, 
461–465.

Foley, J. A., Defries, R., Asner, G. P., Barford, 

C., Bonan, G., & Carpenter, S. R., et al. 
(2005). Global consequences of land use. 
Science, 309, 570–574.

Freeling, M., & Thomas, B. C. (2006). Gene-

balanced duplications, like tetraploidy, 
provide predictable drive to increase 
morphological complexity. Genome 
Research, 16, 805–814.

Fujino, K., Sekiguchi, H., Matsuda, Y., 
Sugimoto, K., Ono, K., & Yano, M.  
(2008). Molecular identification of a 
major quantitative trait locus, qLTG3-1, 
controlling low-temperature germinability in 
rice. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States  
of America, 105, 12623–12628.

Fukushima, A., Kusano, M., Redestig, H., Arita, 

M., & Saito, K. (2009). Integrated omics 
approaches in plant systems biology. Current 
Opinion in Chemical Biology, 13, 532–538.

Galvan, A., Ioannidis, J. P., & Dragani, T. A. 
(2010). Beyond genome-wide association 
studies: Genetic heterogeneity and 
individual predisposition to cancer. Trends in 
Genetics: TIG, 26, 132–141.

Gevaert, K., & Vandekerckhove, J. (2000). 

Protein identification methods in 
proteomics. Electrophoresis, 21, 1145–1154.
Godfray, H. C., Beddington, J. R., Crute, I. R., 

Haddad, L., Lawrence, D., & Muir, J. F., 
et al. (2010). Food security: The challenge 
of feeding 9 billion people. Science, 327, 
812–818.

Gong, Q., Li, P., Ma, S., Indu Rupassara, S., 
& Bohnert, H. J. (2005). Salinity stress 
adaptation competence in the extremophile 
Thellungiella halophila in comparison with 
its relative Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant 
Journal, 44, 826–839.

Ha, M., Lu, J., Tian, L., Ramachandran, V., 

Kasschau, K. D., & Chapman, E. J., et al. 
(2009). Small RNAs serve as a genetic 
buffer against genomic shock in Arabidopsis 
interspecific hybrids and allopolyploids. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
106, 17835–17840.

Harismendy, O., Ng, P. C., Strausberg, R. L., 

Wang, X., Stockwell, T. B., & Beeson, K. Y., 
et al. (2009). Evaluation of next generation 
sequencing platforms for population targeted 
sequencing studies. Genome Biology, 10, 
R32.

Hegeman, A. D. (2010). Plant metabolomics – 

meeting the analytical challenges of 
comprehensive metabolite analysis. Briefing 
in Functional Genomics, 9, 139–148.

Hiller, N. L., Janto, B., Hogg, J. S., Boissy, 

R., Yu, S., & Powell, E., et al. (2007). 
Comparative genomic analyses of seventeen 
Streptococcus pneumoniae strains: Insights 
into the pneumococcal supragenome. 
Journal of Bacteriology, 189, 8186–8195.

Hirai, M. Y., Sugiyama, K., Sawada, Y., Tohge, 
T., Obayashi, T., & Suzuki, A., et al. (2007). 
Omics-based identification of Arabidopsis 
Myb transcription factors regulating aliphatic 
glucosinolate biosynthesis. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 104, 6478–6483.

Hirschhorn, J. N., & Daly, M. J. (2005). 
Genome-wide association studies for 
common diseases and complex traits. Nature 
Reviews Genetics, 6, 95–108.

Huang, X., Qian, Q., Liu, Z., Sun, H., He, S., 

& Luo, D., et al. (2009). Natural variation at 
the DEP1 locus enhances grain yield in rice. 
Nature Genetics, 41, 494–497.

Hunkapiller, T., Kaiser, R. J., Koop, B. F., & 

Hood, L. (1991). Large-scale and automated 
DNA sequence determination. Science, 254, 
59–67.

Inaba, T., & Schnell, D. J. (2008). Protein 

trafficking to plastids: One theme, many 
variations. The Biochemical Journal, 413, 
15–28.

Inada, D. C., Bashir, A., Lee, C., Thomas, B. 

C., Ko, C., & Goff, S. A., et al. (2003). 
Conserved noncoding sequences in the 
grasses. Genome Research, 13, 2030–2041.

Iorio, M. V., Piovan, C., & Croce, C. M. 

(2010). Interplay between microRNAs 
and the epigenetic machinery: An intricate 

31

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

network. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 
1799(10–12), 694–701.

Jablonka, E., & Lamb, M. J. (2006). The 
evolution of information in the major 
transitions. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 
239, 236–246.

Jenkins, H., Hardy, N., Beckmann, M., Draper, 

J., Smith, A. R., & Taylor, J., et al. (2004). 
A proposed framework for the description 
of plant metabolomics experiments and 
their results. Nature Biotechnology, 22, 
1601–1606.

Jorrin, J. V., Maldonado, A. M., & Castillejo, M. 
A. (2007). Plant proteome analysis: A 2006 
update. Proteomics, 7, 2947–2962.

Junqueira, M., Spirin, V., Balbuena, T. S., 

Thomas, H., Adzhubei, I., & Sunyaev, S., et 
al. (2008). Protein identification pipeline for 
the homology-driven proteomics. Journal of 
Proteomics, 71, 346–356.

Katsnelson, A. (2010). Genomics goes beyond 

DNA sequence. Nature, 465, 145.
Kircher, M., & Kelso, J. (2010). High-

throughput DNA sequencing – concepts and 
limitations. Bioessays, 32, 524–536.

Kopka, J., Fernie, A., Weckwerth, W., Gibon, 
Y., & Stitt, M. (2004). Metabolite profiling 
in plant biology: Platforms and destinations. 
Genome Biology, 5, 109.

Kose, F., Weckwerth, W., Linke, T., & Fiehn, 
O. (2001). Visualizing plant metabolomic 
correlation networks using clique-metabolite 
matrices. Bioinformatics, 17, 1198–1208.
Kovalchuk, N., Li, M., Wittek, F., Reid, N., 

Singh, R., & Shirley, N., et al. (2010). 
Defensin promoters as potential tools for 
engineering disease resistance in cereal 
grains. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 8, 
47–64.

Le Novere, N., Hucka, M., Mi, H., Moodie, S., 

Schreiber, F., & Sorokin, A., et al. (2009). 
The systems biology graphical notation. 
Nature Biotechnology, 27, 735–741.

Lee, I., Ambaru, B., Thakkar, P., Marcotte, 

E. M., & Rhee, S. Y. (2010). Rational 
association of genes with traits using a 
genome-scale gene network for Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Nature Biotechnology, 28(2), 
149–156.

Li, H. M., & Chiu, C. C. (2010). Protein 

transport into chloroplasts. Annual Review of 
Plant Biology, 61, 157–180.

Li, R., Zhu, H., Ruan, J., Qian, W., Fang, X., 
& Shi, Z., et al. (2010). De novo assembly 
of human genomes with massively parallel 
short read sequencing. Genome Research, 
20, 265–272.

Lois, L. M. (2010). Diversity of the 

SUMOylation machinery in plants. 
Biochemical Society Transactions, 38, 60–64.

Lu, T., Lu, G., Fan, D., Zhu, C., Li, W., & 

Zhao, Q., et al. (2010). Function annotation 
of rice transcriptome at single nucleotide 
resolution by RNA-seq. Genome Research, 
20, 1238–1249.

Lv, X., Song, X., Rao, G., Pan, X., Guan, L., 

& Jiang, X., et al. (2009). Construction 
vascular-specific expression bi-directional 
promoters in plants. Journal of 
Biotechnology, 141, 104–108.

Ma, S., & Bohnert, H. J. (2007). Integration of 
Arabidopsis thaliana stress-related transcript 

32

profiles, promoter structures, and cell-
specific expression. Genome Biology, 
8, R49.

Ma, S., Gong, Q., & Bohnert, H. J. (2007). 

An Arabidopsis gene network based on the 
graphical Gaussian model. Genome Research, 
17, 1614–1625.

MacLean, D., Elina, N., Havecker, E. R., 

Heimstaedt, S. B., Studholme, D. J., & 
Baulcombe, D. C. (2010). Evidence for large 
complex networks of plant short silencing 
RNAs. PLoS ONE, 5, e9901.

Maher, C. A., Kumar-Sinha, C., Cao, X., 

Kalyana-Sundaram, S., Han, B., & Jing, X., 
et al. (2009). Transcriptome sequencing to 
detect gene fusions in cancer. Nature, 458, 
97–101.

Mao, L., Van Hemert, J. L., Dash, S., & 

Dickerson, J. A. (2009). Arabidopsis gene 
co-expression network and its functional 
modules. BMC Bioinformatics, 10, 346.

Matzke, M., Weiger, T. M., Papp, I., & Matzke, 

A. J. (2009). Nuclear membrane ion 
channels mediate root nodule development. 
Trends in Plant Science, 14, 295–298.

Mazzucotelli, E., Belloni, S., Marone, D., De 

Leonardis, A., Guerra, D., & Di Fonzo, N., 
et al. (2006). The e3 ubiquitin ligase gene 
family in plants: Regulation by degradation. 
Current Genomics, 7, 509–522.

Meldrum, D. (2000). Automation for genomics, 

part two: Sequencers, microarrays, and 
future trends. Genome Research, 10, 
1288–1303.

Merchant, S. S., Prochnik, S. E., Vallon, O., 

Harris, E. H., Karpowicz, S. J., & Witman, 
G. B., et al. (2007). The Chlamydomonas 
genome reveals the evolution of key animal 
and plant functions. Science, 318, 245–250.

Miyazaki, S., Fredricksen, M., Hollis, K. C., 

Poroyko, V., Shepley, D., & Galbraith, 
D. W., et al. (2004). Expression profiles 
for Arabidopsis thaliana grown at UIUC 
SoyFACE. Field Crop Research, 90, 47–59.
Moreno-Risueno, M. A., Busch, W., & Benfey, 
P. N. (2010). Omics meet networks – using 
systems approaches to infer regulatory 
networks in plants. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 13, 126–131.

Morioka, R., Kanaya, S., Hirai, M. Y., 

Yano, M., Ogasawara, N., & Saito, K. 
(2007). Predicting state transitions in 
the transcriptome and metabolome using 
a linear dynamical system model. BMC 
Bioinformatics, 8, 343.

Mullan, D. J., Colmer, T. D., & Francki, M. 
G. (2007). Arabidopsis-rice-wheat gene 
orthologues for Na transport and transcript 
analysis in wheat-L. elongatum aneuploids 
under salt stress. Molecular Genetics and 
Genomics: MGG, 277, 199–212.

Murphy, J. E., Padilla, B. E., Hasdemir, B., 

Cottrell, G. S., & Bunnett, N. W. (2009). 
Endosomes: A legitimate platform for the 
signaling train. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 106, 17615–17622.

Myles, S., Peiffer, J., Brown, P. J., Ersoz, E. S., 

Zhang, Z., & Costich,  
D. E., et al. (2009). Association mapping: 
Critical considerations shift from genotyping 
to experimental design. Plant Cell, 21, 
2194–2202.

Nelson, D. E., Repetti, P. P., Adams, T. R., 

Creelman, R. A., Wu, J., & Warner, D. C., et 
al. (2007). Plant nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) B 
subunits confer drought tolerance and lead 
to improved corn yields on water-limited 
acres. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
104, 16450–16455.

Nemri, A., Atwell, S., Tarone, A. M., Huang, 
Y. S., Zhao, K., & Studholme, D. J., et al. 
(2010). Genome-wide survey of Arabidopsis 
natural variation in downy mildew resistance 
using combined association and linkage 
mapping. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 107, 10302–10307.

Nord, E. A., & Lynch, J. P. (2009). Plant 
phenology: A critical controller of soil 
resource acquisition. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 60, 1927–1937.

Obayashi, T., Hayashi, S., Saeki, M., Ohta, H., 
& Kinoshita, K. (2009). ATTED-II provides 
coexpressed gene networks for Arabidopsis. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 37, D987–991.

Oh, D. H., Dassanayake, M., Haas, J. S., 

Kropornika, A., Wright, C., &  
d’Urzo, M. P., et al. (2010). Genome 
structures and halophyte-specific gene 
expression of the extremophile Thellungiella 
parvula in comparison to Thellungiella 
salsuginea (T. halophila) and Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Plant Physiology, 154, 1040–1052.
Oksman-Caldentey, K. M., & Inze, D. (2004). 
Plant cell factories in the post-genomic era: 
New ways to produce designer secondary 
metabolites. Trends in Plant Science, 9, 
433–440.

Orsini, F., D’Urzo, M. P., Inan, G., Serra, 
S., Oh, D. H., & Mickelbart, M. V., et 
al. (2010). A comparative study of salt 
tolerance parameters in 11 wild relatives 
of Arabidopsis thaliana. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 61, 3787–3798.

Parchman, T. L., Geist, K. S., Grahnen, J. A., 
Benkman, C. W., & Buerkle, C. A. (2010). 
Transcriptome sequencing in an ecologically 
important tree species: Assembly, 
annotation, and marker discovery. BMC 
Genomics, 11, 180.

Park, P. J. (2009). ChIP-seq: Advantages and 

challenges of a maturing technology. Nature 
Reviews Genetics, 10, 669–680.

Paterson, A. H., Freeling, M., Tang, H., & Wang, 

X. (2010). Insights from the comparison of 
plant genome sequences. Annual Review of 
Plant Biology, 61, 349–372.

Pfluger, J., & Wagner, D. (2007). Histone 

modifications and dynamic regulation of 
genome accessibility in plants. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 10, 645–652.

Piao, S., Friedlingstein, P., Ciais, P., de Noblet-

Ducoudre, N., Labat, D., & Zaehle, S. 
(2007). Changes in climate and land use 
have a larger direct impact than rising CO2 
on global river runoff trends. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America, 104, 
15242–15247.

Popescu, S. C., Popescu, G. V., Bachan, S., 

Zhang, Z., Gerstein, M., &  
Snyder, M., et al. (2009). MAPK target 
networks in Arabidopsis thaliana revealed 
using functional protein microarrays. Genes 
& Development, 23, 80–92.

The scope of things to come: New paradigms in biotechnology 

C H A P T E R   2

Postan, M. M. (1973). Essays on medieval 
agriculture and general problems of the 
medieval economy. Cambridge University 
Press.

Prober, J. M., Trainor, G. L., Dam, R. J., Hobbs, F. 
W., Robertson, C. W., & Zagursky, R. J., et al. 
(1987). A system for rapid DNA sequencing 
with fluorescent chain-terminating 
dideoxynucleotides. Science, 238, 336–341.

Rensing, S. A., Lang, D., Zimmer, A. D., 

Terry, A., Salamov, A., & Shapiro, H., et al. 
(2008). The physcomitrella genome reveals 
evolutionary insights into the conquest of 
land by plants. Science, 319, 64–69.

Rhee, M., & Burns, M. A. (2006). Nanopore 

sequencing technology: Research trends and 
applications. Trends in Biotechnology, 24, 
580–586.

Rhee, S. Y., Beavis, W., Berardini, T. Z., Chen, 

G., Dixon, D., &  
Doyle, A., et al. (2003). The Arabidopsis 
Information Resource (TAIR): A model 
organism database providing a centralized, 
curated gateway to Arabidopsis biology, 
research materials and community. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 31, 224–228.

Riano-Pachon, D. M., Nagel, A., Neigenfind, 
J., Wagner, R., Basekow, R., & Weber, E., 
et al. (2009). GabiPD: The GABI primary 
database – a plant integrative ‘omics’ database. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 37, D954–959.
Rivero, R. M., Kojima, M., Gepstein, A., 

Sakakibara, H., Mittler, R., & Gepstein, 
S., et al. (2007). Delayed leaf senescence 
induces extreme drought tolerance in a 
flowering plant. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 104, 19631–19636.

Rose, J. K., Bashir, S., Giovannoni, J. J., Jahn, 
M. M., & Saravanan, R. S. (2004). Tackling 
the plant proteome: Practical approaches, 
hurdles and experimental tools. Plant 
Journal, 39, 715–733.

Sanger, F., Nicklen, S., & Coulson, A. R. 
(1977). DNA sequencing with chain-
terminating inhibitors. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 74, 5463–5467.

Schnable, P. S., Hochholdinger, F., & Nakazono, 

M. (2004). Global expression profiling 
applied to plant development. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 7, 50–56.

Sekiyama, Y., Chikayama, E., & Kikuchi, 

J. (2010). Profiling polar and semipolar 
plant metabolites throughout extraction 
processes using a combined solution-state 
and high-resolution magic angle spinning 
NMR approach. Analytical Chemistry, 82, 
1643–1652.

Shendure, J., & Ji, H. (2008). Next-generation 
DNA sequencing. Nature Biotechnology, 26, 
1135–1145.

Shi, Y., Tyson, G. W., & DeLong, E. F. (2009). 

Metatranscriptomics reveals unique 
microbial small RNAs in the ocean’s water 
column. Nature, 459, 266–269.

Shulaev, V., Cortes, D., Miller, G., & Mittler, 
R. (2008). Metabolomics for plant stress 
response. Physiologia Plantarum, 132, 
199–208.

Spoel, S. H., Mou, Z., Tada, Y., Spivey, N. 

W., Genschik, P., & Dong, X. (2009). 
Proteasome-mediated turnover of the 

transcription coactivator NPR1 plays dual 
roles in regulating plant immunity. Cell, 137, 
860–872.

Stein, L. D. (2008). Towards a 

cyberinfrastructure for the biological 
sciences: Progress, visions and challenges. 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 9, 678–688.

Stein, L. D., Mungall, C., Shu, S., Caudy, M., 
Mangone, M., & Day, A., et al. (2002). The 
generic genome browser: A building block 
for a model organism system database. 
Genome Research, 12, 1599–1610.

Steinhauser, M. C., Steinhauser, D., Koehl, K., 
Carrari, F., Gibon, Y., & Fernie, A. R., et al. 
(2010). Enzyme activity profiles during 
fruit development in tomato cultivars and 
Solanum pennellii. Plant Physiology, 153, 
80–98.

Sterck, L., Rombauts, S., Vandepoele, K., 

Rouze, P., & Van de Peer, Y. (2007). How 
many genes are there in plants (... and why 
are they there)? Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 10, 199–203.

Stone, D. (2005). Decision-making in medieval 
agriculture. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.

Sullivan, M. L., & Green, P. J. (1993). Post-

transcriptional regulation of nuclear-encoded 
genes in higher plants: The roles of mRNA 
stability and translation. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 23, 1091–1104.

Sunkar, R., & Jagadeeswaran, G. (2008). In 

silico identification of conserved microRNAs 
in large number of diverse plant species. 
BMC Plant Biology, 8, 37.

Swiezewski, S., Liu, F., Magusin, A., & Dean, 
C. (2009). Cold-induced silencing by long 
antisense transcripts of an Arabidopsis 
Polycomb target. Nature, 462, 799–802.

Tang, H., Wang, X., Bowers, J. E., Ming, 

R., Alam, M., & Paterson, A. H. (2008). 
Unraveling ancient hexaploidy through 
multiply-aligned angiosperm gene maps. 
Genome Research, 18, 1944–1954.

Tarczynski, M. C., Jensen, R. G., & Bohnert, 

H. J. (1993). Stress protection of transgenic 
tobacco by production of the osmolyte 
mannitol. Science, 259, 508–510.

Tauch, A., Schneider, J., Szczepanowski, R., 

Tilker, A., Viehoever, P., & Gartemann, K. 
H., et al. (2008). Ultrafast pyrosequencing 
of Corynebacterium kroppenstedtii 
DSM44385 revealed insights into the 
physiology of a lipophilic corynebacterium 
that lacks mycolic acids. Journal of 
Biotechnology, 136, 22–30.

Tetlow, I. J., Beisel, K. G., Cameron, S., 

Makhmoudova, A., Liu, F., & Bresolin, 
N. S., et al. (2008). Analysis of protein 
complexes in wheat amyloplasts reveals 
functional interactions among starch 
biosynthetic enzymes. Plant Physiology, 146, 
1878–1891.

The International Brachypodium Initiative. 

(2010). Genome sequencing and analysis of 
the model grass Brachypodium distachyon. 
Nature, 463, 763–768.

Thomas, J. C., Smigocki, A. C., & Bohnert, H. 
J. (1995). Light-induced expression of ipt 
from Agrobacterium tumefaciens results in 
cytokinin accumulation and osmotic stress 
symptoms in transgenic tobacco. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 27, 225–235.

Turner, T. L., Bourne, E. C., Von Wettberg, 
E. J., Hu, T. T., & Nuzhdin, S. V. (2010). 
Population resequencing reveals local 
adaptation of Arabidopsis lyrata to 
serpentine soils. Nature Genetics, 42, 
260–263.

Urbanczyk-Wochniak, E., Usadel, B., Thimm, 

O., Nunes-Nesi, A., Carrari, F., & Davy, 
M., et al. (2006). Conversion of MapMan 
to allow the analysis of transcript data from 
Solanaceous species: Effects of genetic 
and environmental alterations in energy 
metabolism in the leaf. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 60, 773–792.

Varshney, R. K., Nayak, S. N., May, G. D., & 

Jackson, S. A. (2009). Next-generation 
sequencing technologies and their 
implications for crop genetics and breeding. 
Trends in Biotechnology, 27, 522–530.

Vaughn, M. W., Tanurd, Ic, M., Lippman, Z., 

Jiang, H., Carrasquillo, R.,  
& Rabinowicz, P. D., et al. (2007). 
Epigenetic natural variation in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. PLoS Biology, 5, e174.

Venter, M. (2007). Synthetic promoters: 

Genetic control through cis engineering. 
Trends in Plant Science, 12, 118–124.

Vera, J. C., Wheat, C. W., Fescemyer, H. W., 

Frilander, M. J., Crawford, D. L., & Hanski, 
I., et al. (2008). Rapid transcriptome 
characterization for a nonmodel organism 
using 454 pyrosequencing. Molecular 
Ecology, 17, 1636–1647.

Vorosmarty, C. J., Green, P., Salisbury, J., 

& Lammers, R. B. (2000). Global water 
resources: Vulnerability from climate 
change and population growth. Science, 289, 
284–288.

Wada, A., Kidokoro, S., & Endo, S. (1989). 

Expanding roles of computers and robotics 
in biological macromolecular research. 
Annual Review of Biophysics and Biophysical 
Chemistry, 18, 1–24.

Wall, P. K., Leebens-Mack, J., Chanderbali, A. 
S., Barakat, A., Wolcott, E., & Liang, H., et 
al. (2009). Comparison of next generation 
sequencing technologies for transcriptome 
characterization. BMC Genomics, 10, 347.

Wang, E., Wang, J., Zhu, X., Hao, W., Wang, L., 
& Li, Q., et al. (2008). Control of rice grain-
filling and yield by a gene with a potential 
signature of domestication. Nature Genetics, 
40, 1370–1374.

Watson, A. M. (1983). Agricultural innovation 

in the early Islamic world. Cambridge 
University Press.

Waugh, R., Jannink, J. L., Muehlbauer, G. J., & 
Ramsay, L. (2009). The emergence of whole 
genome association scans in barley. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 12, 218–222.
Wei, C., Peng, J., Xiong, Z., Yang, J., Wang, 
J., & Jin, Q. (2008). Subproteomic tools 
to increase genome annotation complexity. 
Proteomics, 8, 4209–4213.

Wheeler, D. A., Srinivasan, M., Egholm, 

M., Shen, Y., Chen, L., & McGuire, A., 
et al. (2008). The complete genome of 
an individual by massively parallel DNA 
sequencing. Nature, 452, 872–876.

Wicker, T., & Keller, B. (2007). Genome-

wide comparative analysis of copia 
retrotransposons in Triticeae, rice, and 
Arabidopsis reveals conserved ancient 

33

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

networks by integrating knockout and 
perturbation data. PLoS ONE, 5, e8121.

Zeller, S. L., Kalinina, O., Brunner, S., Keller, 

B., & Schmid, B. (2010). Transgene x 
environment interactions in genetically 
modified wheat. PLoS ONE, 5, e11405.

Zeng, H., Luo, L., Zhang, W., Zhou, J., Li, Z., 

& Liu, H., et al. (2007). PlantQTL-GE: 
A database system for identifying candidate 
genes in rice and Arabidopsis by gene 
expression and QTL information. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 35, D879–882.

Zhai, J., Liu, J., Liu, B., Li, P., Meyers, B. C., 

& Chen, X., et al. (2008). Small RNA-
directed epigenetic natural variation in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS Genetics, 4, 
e1000056.

Zhan, S., & Lukens, L. (2010). Identification 
of novel miRNAs and miRNA dependent 
developmental shifts of gene expression 
in Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS ONE, 5, 
e10157.

Zhang, X., Yazaki, J., Sundaresan, A., Cokus, 
S., Chan, S. W., & Chen, H., et al. (2006). 
Genome-wide high-resolution mapping and 
functional analysis of DNA methylation in 
Arabidopsis. Cell, 126, 1189–1201.

Zhou, X., Sunkar, R., Jin, H., Zhu, J. K., & 

Zhang, W. (2009).  
Genome-wide identification and analysis 
of small RNAs originated from natural 
antisense transcripts in Oryza sativa. 
Genome Research, 19, 70–78.

Zilberman, D., Gehring, M., Tran, R. K., 

Ballinger, T., & Henikoff, S.  
(2007). Genome-wide analysis of 
Arabidopsis thaliana DNA methylation 
uncovers an interdependence between 
methylation and transcription. Nature 
Genetics, 39, 61–69.

Zivy, M., & de Vienne, D. (2000). Proteomics: 

A link between genomics, genetics and 
physiology. Plant Molecular Biology, 44, 
575–580.

evolutionary lineages and distinct dynamics 
of individual copia families. Genome 
Research, 17, 1072–1081.

Wicker, T., Schlagenhauf, E., Graner, A., Close, 

T. J., Keller, B., & Stein, N. (2006). 454 
sequencing put to the test using the complex 
genome of barley. BMC Genomics, 7, 275.
Wilhelm, B. T., & Landry, J. R. (2009). RNA-

Seq-quantitative measurement of expression 
through massively parallel RNA-sequencing. 
Methods, 48, 249–257.

Wood, W. W. (2003). A fresh water odyssey: 
Some observations on the global resource. 
Ground Water, 41, 300–305.

Yamada, T., & Bork, P. (2009). Evolution of 

biomolecular networks: Lessons from 
metabolic and protein interactions. Nature 
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 10, 
791–803.

Yip, K. Y., Alexander, R. P., Yan, K. K., 
& Gerstein, M. (2010). Improved 
reconstruction of in silico gene regulatory 

34

Proteomics and its application in plant 
biotechnology

4

Sylvain Bischof  Jonas Grossmann  Wilhelm Gruissem
Department of Biology, Plant Biotechnology, and Functional Genomics Center, Zurich, Switzerland

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  55
Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  56
Sample preparation prior to mass spectrometry . . . .   56
Mass spectrometry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
Spectra assignment for peptide and protein  
identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58
Quantitative proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58
Post-translational modifications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   58
Proteomics in Plant Biotechnology  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  59
What has been achieved so far in crop proteomics?    59
Arabidopsis thaliana as plant model organism  . . . . .   59
Crops and other economically relevant plant species   60
Future applications and perspectives  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  61

Introduction

Modern  day  crop  plants  are  essential  as  a  food  source  for 
humans  and  animals,  as  biofuel,  and  as  feedstock  for  indus-
trial  use.  At  the  same  time,  the  world  population  is  growing 
rapidly and with it the need for plant-based foods. Forty years 
from now there will be 9.2 billion people living on Earth, 50% 
more than today. Not only has the daily food demand per cap-
ita  increased  from  an  average  of  2360 kcal  in  the  mid-1960s 
to  currently  2800 kcal,  but  demands  for  high-quality  food 
like fruit, vegetables, and meat is also rising. Meat production 
over the last 15 years has doubled as well. Today, nearly half 
of the food produced worldwide is fed to farm animals to sat-
isfy the growing demand for meat. More recently, crop plants 
that have traditionally been used to feed humans and animals 
are  now  also  used  increasingly  as  feedstock  for  chemical  and 
biofuel  production,  placing  previously  unknown  demands  on 
agricultural  production.  The  available  arable  land  is  limited, 
however,  which  necessitates  cultivation  strategies  to  increase 
crop  yield  per  acre.  Therefore  it  is  important  to  understand 

the regulation of plant functions and growth, and how a plant 
allocates biomass to its edible and usable parts to secure sus-
tainable  crop  yields  in  a  changing  environment  for  feeding  a 
growing  world  population  and  meeting  demands  for  chemi-
cal  feedstocks.  The  central  goal  of  plant  biotechnology  is  the 
targeted  introduction  of  desired  traits  into  a  crop  plant  via 
genetic engineering to produce plants that are better adapted 
to biotic and abiotic stress, and with higher yield per acre of 
cultivated land.

Plants can also be used as biochemical factories that cata-
lyze many different complex biochemical reactions. Plant bio-
technology exploits this potential to use plants as bioreactors 
for the production of food and feed additives, antibodies, vac-
cines,  pharmaceuticals,  enzymes,  or  biodegradable  polymers 
like polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA). Plants are a cost-effective 
production  system  because  they  are  easy  and  inexpensive  to 
cultivate in large quantities. Scale-up and processing of plant 
material is efficient because the existing agronomic infrastruc-
ture  can  be  used  for  this  purpose.  In  some  instances,  plant-
based  products  such  as  vaccines  and  pharmaceuticals  can  be 
synthesized in leaves, seeds, and fruits, and delivered with the 
normal diet, therefore making further processing or isolation 
of active ingredients unnecessary (De Wilde et al., 2000).

The  increased  pressure  on  plant  productivity  for  food, 
diverse  derivatives,  or  as  raw  material  has  greatly  accelerated 
plant  research  during  the  last  decade.  Especially  in  the  field 
of  plant  biotechnology,  substantial  progress  was  made  that 
notably  lead  to  the  possible  genetic  transformation  of  a  large 
number of different plant species. In this context, the estab-
lishment  of  novel  analysis  techniques  and  genome-wide  pro-
filing  technologies  plays  an  important  role  that  allows  plant 
metabolism  not  only  to  be  better  understood,  but  also  to  be 
improved.  An  essential  milestone  for  plant  sciences  was  the 
completion  of  the  first  sequenced  plant  genome,  Arabidopsis 
thaliana, in 2000 (Arabidopsis Genome Initiative, 2000). This 
resource  laid  the  foundation  for  the  development  and  appli-
cation  of  high-throughput  technologies  such  as  transcriptom-
ics  and  proteomics.  These  large-scale  approaches  offer  the 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00004-3

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

opportunity to monitor a considerable number of components 
of a system in a single experiment and to investigate how these 
components  vary  upon  different  stresses  or  genetic  perturba-
tions.  Integrative  analysis  of  such  large-scale  datasets  allows 
understanding complex metabolic networks and the interplay 
of multiple components of a biological system.

In  this  chapter,  we  review  mass  spectrometry-based  pro-
teomics  as  a  powerful  tool  to  identify  and  quantify  proteins 
in complex biological samples. We discuss the current state of 
the art of the technology, the techniques in use, and address 
the  challenges  that  should  guide  the  future  applications  of 
proteomics in the rapidly evolving field of plant biotechnology.

Mass Spectrometry-Based 
Proteomics

The term “proteomics” was coined in the late 1990s (James, 
1997). The goal of proteomics is a comprehensive, quantitative 
description  of  protein  expression  and  its  changes  under  the 
influence of biological perturbations (Anderson and Anderson, 
1998).  Various  approaches  such  as  large-scale  proteome  pro-
filing,  enrichment,  and  identification  of  post-translational  
modifications (PTMs), subcellular localization, protein–protein  
interaction,  or  activity-based  protein  profiling  can  be  under-
taken to understand protein dynamics (Pandey and Mann, 2000; 
Aebersold and Mann, 2003; Phizicky et al., 2003; Barglow and 
Cravatt,  2007;  Gstaiger  and  Aebersold,  2009).  Identification 
and quantification of all proteins in an organism or a specific tis-
sue  at  a  certain  time  point  are  very  ambitious  goals.  The  high 
degree of complexity of cellular proteomes and the low abun-
dance  of  several  proteins  necessitate  highly  sensitive  analytical 
techniques.  Mass  spectrometry  (MS)  has  increasingly  become 
the method of choice for analysis of complex protein samples. 
MS-based proteomics was made possible by the availability of 
genome  sequence  databases  and  various  technical  advances, 
most  notably  the  discovery  and  development  of  protein  and 
peptide ionization methods (Fenn et al., 1989).

Proteomics  is  becoming  increasingly  important  as  a  tool 
to  integrate  genome  information  and  transcription  activity 
with  translation  efficiency  and  enzyme  activity  (Gstaiger  and 
Aebersold, 2009; Baginsky et al., 2010). Quantitative protein 
data  are  a  new  source  of  information  about  the  complexity 
and function of biological systems, especially when combined 
with  information  from  large  RNA  profiling  databases  such 
as  Genevestigator  (Zimmermann  et  al.,  2004;  Hruz  et  al., 
2008).  Although  RNA  accumulation  is  often  used  as  a  proxy 
for  protein  abundance  and  complexity,  it  is  often  difficult  to 
predict  protein  concentrations  from  mRNA  levels  because 
post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms adjust protein con-
centrations to prevailing conditions. Recent large-scale analyses 
confirmed  that  in  many  cases  no  apparent  correlation  exists 
between  transcript,  protein,  and  metabolite  levels,  suggesting 
that regulation of gene activity occurs at different nodes in bio-
logical networks (Gibon et al., 2004; Kleffmann et al., 2004; 
Baerenfaller  et  al.,  2008).  Tools  for  high-throughput  quan-
titative  determination  of  proteins  are  now  available  and  have 
been  reviewed  extensively  in  the  current  literature  (Yan  and 
Chen,  2005;  Wienkoop  et  al.,  2010;  Domon  and  Aebersold, 

2010; Schulze and Usadel, 2010). Quantitative protein infor-
mation  complements  data  from  transcriptional  profiling  and 
metabolomics. It represents a key link between different levels 
of  gene  expression  regulation  and  provides  insights  into  their 
causal  relationships.  Unlike  transcriptional  profiling,  however, 
comprehensive  proteome  analysis  remains  challenging,  and 
information  about  proteome  complexity  and  dynamics  is  far 
from complete (Cox and Mann, 2007).

In  contrast  to  transcriptomics,  different  approaches  are 
needed  to  achieve  a  high  coverage  of  the  proteome  (Yates 
et  al.,  2009).  A  typical  MS-based  proteomics  workflow  is 
composed of several steps. Sample preparation, including sub-
cellular fractionation and protein extraction methods, diverse 
enzymatic  digestions,  chromatographic  separation,  or  enrich-
ment of peptides have to be adapted depending on the sample 
complexity  and  the  objective  of  each  analysis.  The  composi-
tion of the extraction buffer and especially the type of deter-
gents used play key roles for the solubilization of proteins of 
interest  and  also  for  downstream  analysis.  Samples,  in  most 
cases  trypsin-digested  peptides,  are  then  analyzed  by  MS. 
Peptide,  respectively,  protein  identification  is  achieved  by 
comparing  measured  with  theoretical  spectra  from  available 
proteomic  databases  that  are  based  on  genomic  sequences. 
The  output  of  MS-based  proteomics  experiments  therefore 
relies on the availability of high-quality full genome sequences 
or  at  least  a  collection  of  expressed  sequence  tags  (ESTs). 
Fast improvements of DNA sequencing techniques (Metzker, 
2009) led to the release of many sequence databases of plant 
genomes, including important crop and economically relevant 
species  such  as  barley,  cassava,  cucumber,  grapevine,  maize, 
papaya,  poplar,  potato,  rice,  soybean,  tomato,  or  wheat.  In 
the  following  section,  we  highlight  important  aspects  of  a 
typical  proteomics  workflow  (Figure  4.1)  and  discuss  poten-
tial  problems  in  proteome  analysis.  Also,  an  essential  aspect 
of  MS-based  proteomics  deals  with  accurate  protein  quanti-
fication  strategies,  such  that  changes  in  protein  abundance 
across  different  samples  and  conditions  can  be  monitored 
with precision. Several methods involving labeling techniques 
but also label-free approaches were developed and will be dis-
cussed here.

Sample preparation prior to mass 
spectrometry

Bottom-up proteomics is usually applied to identify and char-
acterize  many  peptides  in  a  complex  mixture  and  then  infer 
protein identity. Very often, protein extraction and the reduc-
tion  of  sample  complexity  by  fractionation  techniques  are 
key steps for achieving an increased sensitivity. Furthermore, 
detection  of  low  abundant  proteins  can  be  hindered  by 
one  or  several  very  abundant  proteins  such  as  ribulose-1,5-
bisphosphate  carboxylase  (RuBisCO),  which  makes  up  more 
than  50%  of  the  total  amount  of  protein  in  green,  photo-
synthetically  active  plant  tissues.  To  handle  this  problem, 
depletion  strategies  such  as  selective  removal  by  immuno  -
affinity have been developed (Cellar et al., 2007). But caution 
has  to  be  taken  for  quantitative  analyses  because  immuno-
depletion  changes  the  overall  proteome  composition  and 

56

Proteomics and its application in plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   4

Figure 4.1 l Typical proteomics workflow for protein identification and quantification in complex sample mixtures. l Two parallel 
procedures constitute a typical proteomics workflow. Protein identification from measured spectra in the wet lab (in blue) directly relay on 
genomic sequences processed in silico (in green). In silico, protein sequence databases are generated from available genomic sequences. In 
this process, a gene prediction algorithm is used to predict open reading frames from which protein sequences are subsequently extracted. 
Protein sequences are then digested in silico into small polypeptides (peptides) following the same enzymatic rules as used in the wet lab. 
From these in silico peptides, fragment ion masses are calculated according to established fragmentation rules (e.g., b- and y-ions for 
collision-induced dissociation activation) resulting in the theoretical MS/MS spectrum. In the wet lab, protein extracts are enzymatically 
digested (in most cases with trypsin) and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry. MS spectra of eluting peptides and MS/MS spectra 
obtained after fragmentation of selected peptides are recorded. For protein identification, measured MS and MS/MS spectra are compared 
with in silico spectra by using specific algorithms such as Mascot or Sequest. Spectra matching results in peptide and subsequent protein 
identification if the peptide is not ambiguous to several different proteins. Quantitative information is usually extracted at peptide level and 
then propagated to the identified proteins. PMF: Peptide mass fingerprint. 

complexity  and  also,  additional  proteins  might  be  removed 
unintentionally.

Protein extraction and digestion
Protein  extraction  is  a  crucial  step  for  MS-based  proteomics 
experiments.  The  chosen  extraction  procedure  determines 
the  population  of  proteins  that  will  be  analyzed  and  there-
fore sample complexity. Stringency of extraction ranging from 
soluble  proteins  to  hydrophobic  membrane  proteins  highly 
depends  on  the  type  of  detergents  used.  Several  excellent 
studies  dedicated  to  protein  extraction  procedures  are  avail-
able  and  will  not  be  discussed  further  in  this  chapter  (e.g., 
Saravanan  and  Rose,  2004;  Isaacson  et  al.,  2006;  Maldonado 
et al., 2008; Weiss and Görg, 2009). Nevertheless, detergents 
used for protein extraction have to be chosen carefully, espe-
cially for their compatibility with downstream fractionation or 
enzymatic digestion.

Enzymatic digestion usually precedes MS analysis. Trypsin 
is  the  most  widely  used  enzyme  and  cleaves  amino  acid 
sequences  after  lysine  and  arginine  to  generate  smaller  pep-
tides  (Shevchenko  et  al.,  1996).  The  size  of  such  peptides 
is  appropriate  for  ionization  and  further  detection  by  MS. 
Enzymatic  digestion  using  multiple  proteases  such  as  LysC, 
ArgC, AspN, and GluC in addition to trypsin have also been 
explored  in  order  to  improve  protein  identification  (Swaney 
et al., 2010). Enzymatic digestion can either be done prior to 
or after fractionation steps.

Protein and peptide fractionation
Sample  fractionation  leads  to  the  reduction  of  sample  com-
plexity.  Higher  sensitivity  can  therefore  be  achieved  for  the 
identification of low abundant proteins. Various fractionation 
techniques  have  been  developed  that  are  based  on  different 
properties  of  proteins  or  peptides  such  as  size,  isoelectric 
point,  hydrophobicity,  or  charge.  Protein  fractionation  meth-
ods include, notably, one-dimensional sodium-dodecyl sulfate 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), two-dimen-
sional  (2D)  PAGE,  native  PAGE,  gel  filtration,  or  isoelectric 
focusing.  In  contrast,  fewer  peptide  fractionation  techniques 
are available and of these, strong cation exchange is the most 
widely  used  (Bodenmiller  et  al.,  2007).  In  addition,  peptide 
populations  obtained  after  enzymatic  digestion  are  usually 
separated online by high-pressure liquid chromatography (LC) 
prior to the MS/MS analysis (Yates et al., 2009).

Mass spectrometry

During  the  last  three  decades,  MS  was  established  as  the 
method of choice to identify peptides and proteins. MS of pep-
tides is more sensitive than MS of whole proteins and the mass 
of an intact protein by itself is not sufficient for identification. 
The  high  sensitivity  and  mass  accuracy  of  modern  mass  spec-
trometers  today  allows  the  confident  identification  and  quan-
tification  of  a  high  number  of  proteins  in  a  complex  sample. 
Also, MS analyses are highly reproducible and compatible with 

57

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

high-throughput approaches. These robust characteristics made 
MS-based proteomics, together with transcriptomics, a leading 
domain of the rapidly emerging field of system biology.

A typical mass spectrometer consists of three elements: an 
ion source, a mass analyzer, and a detector. Before entering the 
mass spectrometer, peptides are ionized, either by an electro-
spray  ion  source  (ESI)  or  by  matrix-assisted  laser  disruption 
ionization  (MALDI;  Aebersold  and  Mann,  2003).  ESI  ioniza-
tion is often coupled to a high-pressure liquid chromatography 
(LC) in very fine capillaries, in which at the end of the capil-
lary peptides are nebulized into small, highly charged droplets. 
In MALDI, peptides are embedded in a solid matrix and ion-
ized by a laser pulse.

After  ionisation,  multiple  protonated  peptides  enter  the 
mass spectrometer and a mass spectrum of the peptides elut-
ing  at  this  time  point  is  taken  (MS1  spectrum).  A  computer 
generates a prioritized list of these peptides for fragmentation 
and subsequent tandem mass spectrometric or MS/MS meas-
urements  (MS2  spectra;  Figure  4.1).  In  these  measurements 
a  selected  peptide  ion  is  isolated,  fragmented  by  energetic 
collision with gas (usually helium), and the fragment ions are 
recorded as the tandem mass spectrum. Coupling of two mass 
spectrometers  allows  measurement  of  MS2  spectra  at  the 
same time as MS1 spectra are recorded. Usually, a high mass 
accuracy instrument records precursor ions in the MS1. Three 
to seven of the most intensive precursor ions are then selected 
for fragmentation and detection (MS2) in the second ion trap 
mass  spectrometer.  During  MS2  acquisition,  the  first  mass 
spectrometer  already  records  the  successive  MS1.  Acquired 
MS2 and the associated mass from the MS1 spectra are then 
used for matching against protein sequence databases.

Spectra assignment for peptide and protein 
identification

For  peptide  identification,  measured  tandem  mass  spectra  are 
compared  with  an  in  silico  digested  protein  database,  which 
is  generated  (if  available)  from  the  genome  sequence  of  the 
organism  under  investigation  (Figure  4.1).  Several  computa-
tional programs such as Sequest or Mascot (and many others, 
e.g.,  Phenyx,  Omssa,  X!Tandem,  Pepsplice)  allow  compari-
sons and scoring of spectra that result in peptide identification 
that is diagnostic for specific proteins (Pappin et al., 1993; Eng 
et al., 1994). At present, however, full genome sequences are 
not available for all economically relevant crops, which makes 
their  proteome  analysis  more  challenging.  A  number  of  strat-
egies  have  been  developed  to  facilitate  proteomics  studies  in 
non-sequenced  organisms.  First,  EST  collections  are  available 
for most of the major crops. These databases can be searched 
with  MS/MS  data  for  peptide  identification.  Other  strate-
gies include modified MS/MS data analysis workflows such as 
peptide  or  protein  de  novo  sequencing,  which  extracts  amino 
acid sequence information directly from an MS/MS spectrum 
without relying on existing protein databases. A number of de 
novo sequencing tools are available and some of them achieve 
a good quality de novo sequencing result when applied to high-
quality  spectra  (Chen  et  al.,  2001;  Johnson  and  Taylor,  2002; 
Ma  et  al.,  2003;  Searle  et  al.,  2004;  Zhang,  2004;  Fischer 

et al., 2005; Frank and Pevzner, 2005; Grossmann et al., 2005). 
These software tools, however, do not perform well with MS/
MS  spectra  that  result  from  inaccurate  measurements,  miss-
ing peaks (gaps), and chemical or instrument noise. Therefore, 
de novo sequencing is most often not compatible with a high-
throughput  workflow  because  all  sequences  must  be  carefully 
examined for correctness, which requires time and expertise.

Quantitative proteomics

One  of  the  most  significant  advances  in  proteomics  was  the 
development  of  methods  to  perform  quantitative  compari-
sons  between  samples  (Baginsky  et  al.,  2010;  Schulze  and 
Usadel,  2010).  For  many  years,  comparative  proteome  stud-
ies  were  done  using  2D  gels,  in  which  the  staining  intensity 
of  protein  spots  is  usually  correlated  with  the  abundance  of 
proteins. However, this method suffers limitations in sensitiv-
ity and dynamic range (Gygi et al., 2000; Wu and Han, 2006). 
Improvement  in  sensitivity,  speed,  and  accuracy  of  modern 
mass spectrometers, and progress in statistical data evaluation, 
however, have now provided a good foundation for quantifica-
tion in shotgun-type experiments (Lu et al., 2007).

LC-MS data of high mass resolution can be directly used for 
label-free quantification using appropriate computational meth-
ods. Using software such as SuperHirn or Progenesis, peptide 
signals from LC-MS data can be accurately extracted and these 
features can be tracked across measurements of different sam-
ples  (Mueller  et  al.,  2007;  www.nonlinear.com/products/pro-
genesis/lc-ms/overview). Other relative quantification methods 
make use of stable isotope labeling such as isotope-coded affin-
ity tag (ICAT) technology, or metabolically 15N-labeled cell cul-
tures (Gygi et al., 1999; Kierszniowska et al., 2009).

A  more  recent  method,  multiple  reaction  monitoring 
(MRM), uses the special feature of quadrupole mass spectrom-
eters to specifically select and quantify known peptides (Lange 
et  al.,  2008).  Three  inline  quadrupoles  allow:  (1)  the  selec-
tion for a defined precursor as MS1, (2) its fragmentation, and 
(3)  a  second  selection  of  a  specific  fragment.  This  approach 
enhances  sensitivity  and  therefore  the  dynamic  range  for  pro-
tein  detection  in  a  complex  protein  mixture  (Picotti  et  al., 
2009). In combination with the introduction of internal isotopi-
cally labeled signature peptides often referred to as proteotypic 
peptides  (PTPs),  this  method  can  be  used  for  absolute  quan-
tification  of  peptides.  Quantitative  measurements  can  also  be 
achieved  by  the  addition  of  PTPs  into  analytical  protein  sam-
ples,  where  native  peptides  can  then  be  quantified  relative  to 
the added PTPs (Kuster et al., 2005).

Post-translational modifications

Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins often have 
critical roles in regulating the activity of proteins and therefore 
the biology of the cell. PTMs are enzymatic, covalent chemical 
modifications of proteins that typically occur after the transla-
tion of mRNAs. These modifications are relevant because they 
can potentially change the physical or chemical properties, the 
activity,  the  localization,  or  the  stability  of  a  protein  (Farley 
and  Link,  2009).  Modification-specific  enrichment  techniques 

58

Proteomics and its application in plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   4

combined with advanced MS/MS methods and computational 
data analysis have revealed a surprisingly large extent of PTMs 
in  proteins,  including  multi-site,  cooperative  modifications  in 
individual proteins (Zhao and Jensen, 2009).

Phosphorylation  is  a  prominent  modification  that  regulates 
a  large  number  of  cellular  processes.  It  is  a  reversible  modifi-
cation  catalyzed  by  protein  kinases  and  can  occur  on  serine, 
threonine,  or  tyrosine.  Despite  the  often  low  abundance  of 
phosphorylated  peptides  within  a  complex  peptide  mixture, 
precise  assignment  of  the  phosphorylation  sites  can  now  be 
achieved using a combination of enrichment methods, such as 
immobilized  metal-affinity  chromatography  (IMAC)  or  tita-
nium  dioxide  (TiO2),  and  the  sensitivity  and  high  mass  accu-
racy of modern mass spectrometers (Li and Dass, 1999; Larsen 
et al., 2005; Bodenmiller et al., 2007). In plants, several large-
scale  studies  successfully  started  to  map  the  phosphopro-
teome of Arabidopsis (Sugiyama et al., 2008; Jones et al., 2009; 
Reiland et al., 2009), of rice (Whiteman et al., 2008; Nakagami 
et al., 2010), or of Medicago (Grimsrud et al., 2010). Such data 
are accessible in different databases such as PhosPhAt (Baginsky 
and Gruissem, 2009; Kersten et al., 2009; Durek et al., 2010).

So far, other PTMs have been studied on a large scale using 
different enrichment methods. For example, N-linked glyco-
capture enabled the study of protein N-glycosylation (Zhang 
et al., 2003). Lysine and N-terminal acetylation were mapped 
by applying immunoaffinity strategies or combined fractional 
diagonal  chromatography  (Gevaert  et  al.,  2003;  Choudhary 
et al., 2009a). But to date, most of these techniques have not 
been applied to plants on a larger scale.

Proteomics in Plant Biotechnology

Although  genetically  engineered  crops  are  now  widely  used  in 
agriculture — in particular insect- and herbicide-resistant maize, 
soybean, canola, and cotton — very few reports are available on 
the proteome of transgenic crops. This is not surprising, because 
crop genome sequence information is only now becoming avail-
able on a broader scale and the engineered traits used in crop 
plants today are not expected to influence the physiological and 
metabolic activities of the plant. Concerns about the safety of 
food from genetically engineered crops have been addressed in 
detail and novel proteins that are expressed in a crop plant are 
subject  to  a  rigorous  evaluation  to  exclude  potential  allergenic 
effects  (Metcalfe,  2005;  Goodman  et  al.,  2005)  or  effects  on 
the environment and non-target organisms (Bigler, 2006). Most 
studies  reported  that  analyzed  the  substantial  equivalence  of 
genetically  engineered  crops  typically  found  more  differences 
in  transcripts,  proteins,  and  metabolites  between  crop  varie-
ties  than  differences  between  transgenic  plants  and  their  non-
transgenic  siblings  (e.g.,  Catchpole  et  al.,  2005;  Lehesranta 
et  al.,  2005;  Baker  et  al.,  2006;  Baudo  et  al.,  2006;  Ioset  
et al., 2007). This will change, however, as crop plants are engi-
neered  to  improve  their  nutritional  properties  and  tolerance 
to abiotic and biotic stress to address the nutritional health of 
humans  and  animals,  and  to  achieve  yield  stability  or  increase 
yield under changing climatic conditions (e.g., Ye et al., 2000; 
Butelli  et  al.,  2008;  Wirth  et  al.,  2009).  Therefore  it  will  be 
increasingly important to understand the complexity of genetic 

and  protein  networks  in  crop  plants  and  how  their  function 
relates to physiology and performance.

What has been achieved so far in crop 
proteomics?

Proteomics  research  in  the  agricultural  field  —  so-called  crop 
proteomics  —  has  a  history  of  about  two  decades.  Although 
only very limited protein sequence information was first avail-
able for most crop plants, one common approach was to search 
the  measured  spectra  using  a  database  of  all  non-redundant 
protein sequence databases or to search a subset of this data-
base  containing  only  plant  sequences,  commonly  called  the 
viridiplantae  protein  sequence  database.  Clearly,  the  lack  of 
detailed  genomic  information  was  limiting  these  approaches 
with respect to the completeness of such studies. Furthermore, 
if  a  protein  of  a  related  organism  was  identified  based  on 
some peptides of the related protein, it could not be taken for 
granted that the protein also existed in exactly this form in the 
investigated  organism.  Nevertheless,  many  pioneer  plant  pro-
teomics studies of crop plants succeeded in identifying homolo-
gous protein sequences using such databases.

Non-redundant  protein  sequence  databases  are  still  often 
used in crop proteomics because only a small number of plant 
genomes have been sequenced to date, although this is chang-
ing quickly with next-generation sequencing technologies that 
are  now  available.  Protein  separation  by  2D  PAGE  followed 
by identification using MALDI-TOF is the most widely used 
method  to  investigate  the  proteome  composition  of  various 
intracellular  compartments  in  crop  plants,  but  also  to  inves-
tigate  quantitative  protein  changes  upon  application  of  vari-
ous stresses or genetic perturbations. MS-based studies were 
already reported for a large number of unsequenced plant spe-
cies  including:  apple,  chickpea,  cotton,  eucalyptus,  ginseng, 
olive  tree,  pumpkin,  strawberry,  sugar  beet,  or  sugarcane. 
Their discussion goes beyond the scope of this chapter.

Despite  the  reduced  throughput  and  identification  in  com-
parison  with  shotgun  proteomics,  2D  PAGE  approaches 
remain  powerful  because  they  allow  high-confidence  iden-
tification  of  differentially  regulated  proteins  between  two 
experimental  conditions  by  quantifying  intensities  of  specific 
protein spots (Weiss and Görg, 2009). Protein spots on highly 
resolved 2D gels are mainly composed of one unique protein, 
which  increases  the  chances  for  successful  protein  identifica-
tion  by  MALDI-TOF.  Mass  spectra  obtained  by  MALDI-TOF 
are highly accurate, therefore, de novo sequencing methods can 
be applied in addition to searches using non-redundant protein 
sequence databases to achieve an increased peptide and protein 
identification  for  unsequenced  organisms  (Grossmann  et  al., 
2007).  Such  an  approach  was  undertaken  to  analyze  the  pro-
teome of hairy root from ginseng (Kim et al., 2003).

Arabidopsis thaliana as plant model 
organism

Establishment  of  novel  methods  and  technologies  in  plant 
MS-based proteomics was mainly driven by studies using the 

59

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

)
e
u
l
a
v
-
p
/
1
(
 
0
1
g
o

l

Translation

tRNA aminoacylation...

Glycolysis

Protein folding

Intracellular protein transport

Embryonic development ending in seed dor...

Photosynthesis
Response to cold

RNA processing

Ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic pr...

Fatty acid biosynthetic process

Response to heat

ER to Golgi vesicle-mediated transport

Response to oxidative stress

Toxin catabolic process

Aminoacid biosynthetic process

Protein transport

Chloroplast organization and biogenesis

Chlorophyll biosynthetic process

Photosynthetic electron transport
Protein import into nucleus, docking

Amino acid catabolic process

Cell culture

Siliques

Seeds

Roots
Leaves

Flowers

Figure 4.2 l Protein landscape of identified proteins in Arabidopsis tissues. l Functional classification of proteins identified in a 
large-scale proteome study of various Arabidopsis tissues. Functional classification is based on TAIR GO categories from the aspect 
“biological process.” 

Figure and legend are adapted from Baerenfaller et al. (2008).

 

model  plant  A.  thaliana.  Recently,  label-free  spectral  count-
ing  (Lu  et  al.,  2007)  has  been  successfully  applied  to  quan-
tify more than 13,000 proteins of the Arabidopsis proteome 
(Baerenfaller et al., 2008). This study provided an important 
resource  for  the  plant  research  community  as  quantitative 
information  became  available  for  proteins  of  several  tissues 
including leaves, roots, cotyledons, flowers, seeds, or siliques 
(Figure 4.2). Furthermore, the quantitative protein inventory 
of  many  organelles  has  been  achieved,  thus  providing  valu-
able  information  on  intracellular  protein  localization  (Lunn, 
2007; Lilley and Dupree, 2007; Baginsky, 2009). Information 
of  such  large-scale  proteomics  studies  were  compiled  into 
publicly  available  databases  highlighted  in  Table  4.1.  Also, 
MS-based  proteomics  was  used  to  investigate  responses 
to  biotic  and  abiotic  stress  (Peck  et  al.,  2001).  In  addition, 
regulatory  networks  have  been  studied  by  analyzing  PTMs 
such as phosphorylation (Sugiyama et al., 2008; Jones et al., 
2009;  Reiland  et  al.,  2009;  Baginsky  and  Gruissem,  2009). 
Altogether, all of this acquired knowledge is greatly contribut-
ing to our understanding of crop and economical relevant spe-
cies (Rensink and Buell, 2004).

Crops and other economically relevant 
plant species

Following  completion  of  the  map-based  genome  sequenc-
ing  in  2005,  rice  has  emerged  as  another  plant  model  spe-
cies  (International  Rice  Genome  Sequencing  Project,  2005). 
Functional  genomics  approaches,  including  proteomics,  have 
therefore become more accessible and powerful for this spe-
cies (Yazaki et al., 2004). For example, quantitative label-free 
shotgun proteomic analysis was performed to analyze the pro-
teome of cultured cells exposed to high- and low-temperature 
stresses (Gammulla et al., 2010). Albeit most rice MS-based 
proteomics studies remain based on 2D PAGE, these cover a 
wide  range  of  specific  biological  questions  such  as  the  iden-
tification of gibberellic acid-responsive proteins in leaf sheath 
or  drought-induced  changes  in  the  anther  proteome  (Gu 
et al., 2010; Liu and Bennett, 2010). The proteome composi-
tion of various tissues and intracellular compartments such as 
the nucleus, the plasma membrane, the plastid, or the mito-
chondria  were  described  (Khan  and  Komatsu,  2004;  Tanaka 
et  al.,  2010;  von  Zychlinski  et  al.,  2005;  Komatsu,  2008; 

60

Proteomics and its application in plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   4

Table 4.1  Available proteome databases for Arabidopsis

Compartement

Abbreviation

Name

Web site

No. of proteins

Reference

All

All

Chloroplast

Chloroplast

Chloroplast

SUBA

SUB-Cellular Location Database 
for Arabidopsis Proteins 

suba.plantenergy.uwa.edu.au

5699

atProteome

The Arabidopsis Proteome Map

www.atproteome.ethz.ch

13,029

PlProt

PPDB

Plastid Proteome Database

www.plprot.ethz.ch

The Plant Proteome Database

ppdb.tc.cornell.edu

AT_CHLORO

Chloroplast Proteome Database

http://www.grenoble.prabi.fr/
at_chloro

2043

5000

1323

Mitochondria

AMPDB

The Arabidopsis Mitochondrial 
Protein DataBase

suba.planetary.uwa.edu.au

416

Nucleolus

AtNoPDB

The Arabidopsis Nucleolar Protein 
Database

bioinf.scri.sari.ac.uk/cgi-bin/
atnopdb/home

217

Heazlewood et al. 
(2007)

Baerenfaller et al. 
(2008)

Kleffmann et al. (2006)

Sun et al. (2009)

Ferro et al. (2010)

Heazlewood et al. 
(2004)

Brown et al. (2005)

Proteome databases for the plant model organism A. thaliana. Proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS either in total extracts or in purified compartments such as the chloroplast, 
the mitochondria, or the nucleolus.

Aki  and  Yanagisawa,  2009;  Choudhary  et  al.,  2009b;  Huang 
et  al.,  2009).  Also  the  consequences  of  various  stress  condi-
tions  were  investigated  by  comparative  proteomics.  These 
include  notable  responses  to  high  temperatures  (Lee  et  al., 
2007; Han et al., 2009), drought (Salekdeh et al., 2002; Liu 
and Bennett, 2010), or leaf wounding (Dafoe et al., 2010).

MS-based  proteomics  studies  were  not  only  restricted  to 
model  species.  For  example,  the  phloem  protein  composi-
tion  has  been  analyzed  in  rice,  pumpkin,  and  poplar  (Dafoe 
et  al.,  2009;  Lin  et  al.,  2009;  Aki  et  al.,  2008;  Cho  et  al., 
2010).  Because  of  its  role  as  a  “model  tree”  with  economic 
implications  for  the  wood  industry,  the  proteome  compo-
sition  of  poplar  and  its  modulation  upon  cadmium  or  heat 
stress were investigated (Ferreira et al., 2006; Plomion et al., 
2006;  Kieffer  et  al.,  2009).  Also  for  economic  reasons,  the 
proteome of grapevine has recently received much attention. 
Studies  include  responses  to  stresses  such  as  salt  (Jellouli 
et al., 2008), fungal infections (Marsh et al., 2010), hormone 
treatment  (Giribaldi  et  al.,  2010),  or  herbicide  treatment 
(Castro et al., 2005).

The proteomes of several crop species, in particular maize, 
wheat,  and  cassava,  were  also  subjected  to  many  proteome 
studies.  Seed  and  starch-bound  storage  proteins,  proteins  of 
storage roots, and seed development received particular atten-
tion  (Sheffield  et  al.,  2006;  Grimaud  et  al.,  2008;  Sergeant 
et  al.,  2009;  Shen  et  al.,  2009;  Li  et  al.,  2010;  Pechanova  
et al., 2010; Wall et al., 2010). Of interest is also the analysis 
of  potential  allergens  in  maize  kernels  using  proteomic  tools 
(Fasoli et al., 2009) or the investigation of C4 photosynthesis in 
isolated chloroplasts of bundle sheath cells (Friso et al., 2010).
MS-based  proteomics  was  also  recently  used  to  under-
stand the consequences of genetic perturbations or of genetic 
transformation (Kim et al., 2008; Barros et al., 2010). Taken 
together,  the  constantly  growing  numbers  of  studies  related 

to  crop  physiology  and  more  recently  also  to  plant  biotech-
nology  reinforce  the  view  that  proteomics  has  emerged  as  a 
technology of choice to understand the proteome composition 
of  various  crops,  tissues,  intracellular  compartments,  and  its 
changes  upon  application  of  many  different  biotic  or  abiotic 
stresses.

Future applications and perspectives

Considering  the  rapid  advances  in  next-generation  sequenc-
ing  technologies,  the  numbers  of  sequenced  plant  genomes 
will quickly grow in the future. For example, the genome of 
papaya  has  recently  been  released  (Yu  et  al.,  2009)  and  the 
establishment  of  adequate  protein  extraction  procedures 
for  2D  PAGE  has  already  started  (Rodrigues  et  al.,  2009). 
Together with the increased number of sequenced and anno-
tated  plant  genomes,  the  analytical  power  of  MS-based  pro-
teomics approaches will increase. It can therefore be expected 
that  shotgun  label-free  approaches  coupled  with  statistical 
downstream  analysis  using  bioinformatics  tools  will  be  used 
more  often.  In  addition,  the  standardization  of  quantitative 
proteomics workflows such as MRM or visual proteomics and 
various  enrichment  techniques  (e.g.,  for  phosphopeptides), 
should  allow  a  deeper  insight  into  specific  molecular  mecha-
nisms  (Bodenmiller  et  al.,  2007;  Lange  et  al.,  2008;  Picotti 
et al., 2009; Beck et al., 2009).

Despite their expected importance for biofuel or hydrogen 
production,  the  proteomes  of  algae  remain  poorly  analyzed. 
As  a  model  organism  with  its  genome  sequenced  at  the  end 
of  2007,  Chlamydomonas  is  excellently  suited  for  MS-based 
proteomics analyses and different studies have contributed thus 
far  to  describe  the  overall  proteome  composition  and  its 
response  to  sulfur-deprivation  or  metal-rich  water  (Rolland 
et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2010; Cid et al., 2010).

61

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

MS-based  proteomics  approaches  and  functional  genom-
ics  studies  such  as  transcriptomics  or  metabolomics  simulta-
neously  monitor  a  large  number  of  components  of  a  system 
at  one  time  point.  An  integrative  analysis  of  such  large-scale 
datasets  generates  a  broad  overview  of  the  complex  plant 
metabolic network. Subsequent modeling of these data is also 

expected  to  allow  predictive  functions  of  different  compo-
nents  of  a  metabolic  network.  Future  strategies  and  applica-
tions  in  plant  biotechnology  will  certainly  take  advantage  of 
a broader systems view for the selection and enhancement of 
specific metabolic functions by classical breading strategies or 
by direct engineering of genetically modified organisms.

References

Aebersold, R., & Mann, M. (2003). Mass 

spectrometry-based proteomics. Nature, 
422, 198–207.

Aki, T., Shigyo, M., Nakano, R., Yoneyama, 
T., & Yanagisawa, S. (2008). Nano scale 
proteomics revealed the presence of 
regulatory proteins including three 
FT-Like proteins in phloem and xylem saps 
from rice. Plant and Cell Physiology, 49, 
767–790.

Aki, T., & Yanagisawa, S. (2009). Application 

of rice nuclear proteome analysis to the 
identification of evolutionarily conserved 
and glucose-responsive nuclear proteins. 
Journal of Proteome Research,
 8, 3912–3924.

Anderson, N. L., & Anderson, N. G. 

(1998). Proteome and proteomics: New 
technologies, new concepts, and new words. 
Electrophoresis, 19, 1853–1861.

Arabidopsis Genome Initiative, (200). Analysis 

of the genome sequence of the flowering 
plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature, 408, 
796–815.

Baerenfaller, K., Grossmann, J., Grobei, M. A., 
Hull, R., Hirsch-Hoffmann, M., & Yalovsky, 
S., et al. (2008). Genome-scale proteomics 
reveals Arabidopsis thaliana gene models 
and proteome dynamics. Science, 320, 
938–941.

Baginsky, S., & Gruissem, W. (2009). The 

chloroplast kinase network: New insights 
from large-scale phosphoproteome profiling. 
Molecular Plant, 2, 1141–1153.

Baginsky, S., Hennig, L., Zimmermann, P., & 

Gruissem, W. (2010). Gene expression 
analysis, proteomics, and network discovery. 
Plant Physiology, 152, 402–410.

Baginsky, S. (2009). Plant proteomics: 

Concepts, applications, and novel strategies 
for data interpretation. Mass Spectrometry 
Reviews, 28, 93–120.

Baker, J. M., Hawkins, N. D., Ward, J. L., 
Lovegrove, A., Napier, J. A., & Shewry, 
P. R., et al. (2006). A metabolomic 
study of substantial equivalence of field-
grown genetically modified wheat. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 4, 381–392.

Barglow, K. T., & Cravatt, B. F. (2007). Activity-

based protein profiling for the functional 
annotation of enzymes. Nature Methods, 4, 
822–827.

Barros, E., Lezar, S., Anttonen, M. J., van 

Dijk, J. P., Röhlig, R. M., & Kok, E. J., et 
al. (2010). Comparison of two GM maize 
varieties with a near-isogenic non-GM 
variety using transcriptomics, proteomics 
and metabolomics. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 8, 436–451.

62

Baudo, M. M., Lyons, R., Powers, S., Pastori, 

G. M., Edwards, K. J., & Holdsworth, M. J., 
et al. (2006). Transgenesis has less impact 
on the transcriptome of wheat grain than 
conventional breeding. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 4, 369–380.

Beck, M., Malmström, J. A., Lange, V., 

Schmidt, A., Deutsch, E. W., &  
Aebersold, R. (2009). Visual proteomics of 
the human pathogen Leptospira interrogans. 
Nature Methods, 6, 817–823.

Bigler, F. (2006). Ninth international 

symposium on the biosafety of genetically 
modified organisms. Session II: Identifying 
and defining hazards and potential 
consequences I: Concepts for problem 
formulation and non-target risk assessment. 
Environmental Biosafety Research, 5, 
183–186.

Bodenmiller, B., Mueller, L. N., Mueller, 

M., Domon, B., & Aebersold, R. 
(2007). Reproducible isolation of 
distinct, overlapping segments of the 
phosphoproteome. Nature Methods, 4, 
231–237.

Brown, J. W., Shaw, P. J., Shaw, P., & Marshall, 
D. F. (2005). Arabidopsis nucleolar protein 
database (AtNoPDB). Nucleic Acids 
Research, 1, 633–636.

Castro, A. J., Carapito, C., Zorn, N., Magné, 
C., Leize, E., & Van Dorsselaer, A., et al. 
(2005). Proteomic analysis of grapevine 
(Vitis vinifera L.) tissues subjected to 
herbicide stress. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 56, 2783–2795.

Catchpole, G. S., Beckmann, M., Enot, D. 

P., Mondhe, M., Zywicki, B., & Taylor, J., 
et al. (2005). Hierarchical metabolomics 
demonstrates substantial compositional 
similarity between genetically modified and 
conventional potato crops. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 102, 14458–14462.

Cellar, N. A., Kuppannan, K., Langhorst, M. 
L., Ni, W., Xu, P., & Young, S. A. (2007). 
Cross species applicability of abundant 
protein depletion columns for ribulose-
1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase. 
Journal of Chromatography B, Analytical 
Technologies in the Biomedical and Life 
Sciences, 1(861), 29–30..

Chen, M., Zhao, L., Sun, Y. L., Cui, S. 

X., Zhang, L. F., & Yang, B., et al. 
(2010). Proteomic analysis of hydrogen 
photoproduction in sulfur-deprived 
Chlamydomonas cells. Journal of Proteome 
Research, 9, 3854–3866.

Chen, T., Kao, M. Y., Tepel, M., Rush, J., 
& Church, G. M. (2001). A dynamic 

programming approach to de novo peptide 
sequencing via tandem mass spectrometry. 
Journal of Computational Biology, 8, 
325–337.

Cho, W. K., Chen, X. Y., Rim, Y., Chu, H., Kim, 

S., & Kim, S. W., et al. (2010). Proteome 
study of the phloem sap of pumpkin using 
multidimensional protein identification 
technology. Journal of Plant Physiology, 167, 
771–778.

Choudhary, C., Kumar, C., Gnad, F., Nielsen, 
M. L., & Rehman, M., et al. (2009). Lysine 
acetylation targets protein complexes 
and co-regulates major cellular functions. 
Science, 325, 834–840.

Choudhary, M. K., Basu, D., Datta, A., 

Chakraborty, N., & Chakraborty, S. (2009). 
Dehydration-responsive nuclear proteome 
of rice (Oryza sativa L.) illustrates protein 
network, novel regulators of cellular 
adaptation, and evolutionary perspective. 
Molecular & Cellular Proteomics: MCP, 8, 
1579–1598.

Cid, C., Garcia-Descalzo, L., Casado-Lafuente, 

V., Amils, R., & Aguilera, A. (2010). 
Proteomic analysis of the response of an 
acidophilic strain of Chlamydomonas sp. 
(Chlorophyta) to natural metal-rich water. 
Proteomics, 10, 2026–2036.

Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2007). Is proteomics the 

new genomics? Cell, 130, 395–398.

Dafoe, N. J., Gowen, B. E., & Constabel, C. 

P. (2010). Thaumatin-like proteins are 
differentially expressed and localized in 
phloem tissues of hybrid poplar. BMC Plant 
Biology, 10, 191.

Dafoe, N. J., Zamani, A., Ekramoddoullah, A. 

K., Lippert, D.,  
Bohlmann, J., & Constabel, C. P. (2009). 
Analysis of the poplar phloem proteome 
and its response to leaf wounding. Journal of 
Proteome Research, 5, 2341–2350.

De Wilde, C., Van Houdt, H., De Buck, S., 
Angenon, G., De Jaeger, G., & Depicker, 
A. (2000). Plants as bioreactors for protein 
production: Avoiding the problem of 
transgene silencing. Plant Molecular Biology, 
43, 347–359.

Domon, B., & Aebersold, R. (2010). Options 

and considerations when selecting a 
quantitative proteomics strategy. Nature 
Biotechnology, 28, 710–721.

Durek, P., Schmidt, R., Heazlewood, J. L., 

Jones, A., & MacLean, D.,  
et al. (2010). PhosPhAt: The Arabidopsis 
thaliana phosphorylation site database. An 
update. Nucleic Acids Research, 38, 
D828–834.

Proteomics and its application in plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   4

Eng, J. K., McCormack, A. L., & III., Yates, 

J. R. (1994). An approach to correlate 
tandem mass spectral data of peptides with 
amino acid sequences in a protein database. 
Journal of the American Society for Mass 
Spectrometry, 11, 976–989.

Farley, A. R., & Link, A. J. (2009). 

Identification and quantification of protein 
posttranslational modifications. Methods in 
Enzymology, 463, 725–763.

Fasoli, E., Pastorello, E. A., Farioli, L., Scibilia, 

J., Aldini, G., & Carini, M., et al. (2009). 
Searching for allergens in maize kernels via 
proteomic tools. Journal of Proteomics, 13, 
501–510.

Fenn, J. B., Mann, M., Meng, C. K., Wong, S. F., 

& Whitehouse, C. M. (1989). Electrospray 
ionization for mass spectrometry of large 
biomolecules. Science, 246, 64–71.

Ferreira, S., Hjernø, K., Larsen, M., Wingsle, 

G., Larsen, P., & Fey, S.,  
et al. (2006). Proteome profiling of Populus 
euphratica Oliv. upon heat stress. Annals of 
Botany, 98, 361–377.

Ferro, M., Brugiere, S., Salvi, D., Seigneurin-
Berny, D., Court, M., & Moyet, L., et al. 
(2010). AT_CHLORO: A comprehensive 
chloroplast proteome database with 
subplastidial localization and curated 
information on envelope proteins. Molecular 
Cell Proteomics, 9, 1063–1084.

Fischer, B., Roth, V., Roos, F., Grossmann, J., 
Baginsky, S., & Widmayer, P., et al. (2005). 
NovoHMM: A hidden Markov model for 
de novo peptide sequencing. Analytical 
Chemistry, 77, 7265–7273.

Frank, A., & Pevzner, P. (2005). PepNovo: De 
novo peptide sequencing via probabilistic 
network modeling. Analytical Chemistry, 77, 
964–973.

Friso, G., Majeran, W., Huang, M., Sun, Q., 
& van Wijk, K. J. (2010). Reconstruction 
of metabolic pathways, protein expression, 
and homeostasis machineries across maize 
bundle sheath and mesophyll chloroplasts: 
Large-scale quantitative proteomics using 
the first maize genome assembly. Plant 
Physiology, 152, 1219–1250.

Gammulla, C. G., Pascovici, D., Atwell, B. J., & 
Haynes, P. A. (2010). Differential metabolic 
response of cultured rice (Oryza sativa) 
cells exposed to high- and low-temperature 
stress. Proteomics, 10, 3001–3019.

Gevaert, K., Goethals, M., Martens, L., Van 

Damme, J., & Staes, A., et al. (2003). 
Exploring proteomes and analyzing 
protein processing by mass spectrometric 
identification of sorted N-terminal peptides. 
Nature Biotechnology, 21, 566–569.

Gibon, Y., Blaesing, O. E., Hannemann, J., 

Carillo, P., Höhne, M., & Hendriks, J. H., 
et al. (2004). A Robot-based platform 
to measure multiple enzyme activities in 
Arabidopsis using a set of cycling assays: 
Comparison of changes of enzyme activities 
and transcript levels during diurnal cycles 
and in prolonged darkness. Plant Cell, 16, 
3304–3325.

Giribaldi, M., Gény, L., Delrot, S., & Schubert, 
A. (2010). Proteomic analysis of the effects 
of ABA treatments on ripening Vitis vinifera 
berries. Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 
2447–2458.

Goodman, R. E., Hefle, S. L., Taylor, S. 
L., & van Ree, R. (2005). Assessing 
genetically modified crops to minimize the 
risk of increased food allergy: A review. 
International Archives of Allergy and 
Immunology, 137, 153–156.

Grimaud, F., Rogniaux, H., James, M. G., 

Myers, A. M., & Planchot, V. (2008). 
Proteome and phosphoproteome analysis 
of starch granule-associated proteins from 
normal maize and mutants affected in 
starch biosynthesis. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 59, 3395–3406.

Grimsrud, P. A., den Os, D., Wenger, C. D., 

Swaney, D. L., Schwartz, D., & Sussman, M. 
R., et al. (2010). Large-scale phosphoprotein 
analysis in Medicago truncatula roots 
provides insight into in vivo kinase activity in 
legumes. Plant Physiology, 152, 19–28.

Grossmann, J., Fischer, B., Baerenfaller, K., 

Owiti, J., Buhmann, J. M., & Gruissem, W., 
et al. (2007). A workflow to increase the 
detection rate of proteins from unsequenced 
organisms in high-throughput proteomics 
experiments. Proteomics, 7, 4245–4254.

Grossmann, J., Roos, F. F., Cieliebak, M., 

Lipták, Z., Mathis, L. K., & Müller, M., et 
al. (2005). AUDENS: A tool for automated 
peptide de novo sequencing. Journal of 
Proteome Research, 4, 1768–1774.

Gstaiger, M., & Aebersold, R. (2009). Applying 

mass spectrometry-based proteomics to 
genetics, genomics and network biology. 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 10, 617–627.

Gu, J. Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, X., Zhang, S. H., 

Gao, Y., & An, C. C. (2010). Identification 
of gibberellin acid-responsive proteins in rice 
leaf sheath using proteomics. Frontiers in 
Bioscience, 15, 826–839.

Gygi, S. P., Corthals, G. L., Zhang, Y., Rochon, 

Y., & Aebersold, R. (2000). Evaluation of 
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis-based 
proteome analysis technology. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 97, 9390–9395.

Gygi, S. P., Rist, B., Gerber, S. A., Turecek, F., 
& Gelb, M. H., et al. (1999). Quantitative 
analysis of complex protein mixtures 
using isotope-coded affinity tags. Nature 
Biotechnology, 17, 994–999.

Han, F., Chen, H., Li, X. J., Yang, M. F., Liu, 

G. S., & Shen, S. H. (2009). A comparative 
proteomic analysis of rice seedlings 
under various high-temperature stresses. 
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1794, 
1625–1634.

Heazlewood, J. L., Tonti-Filippini, J. S., Gout, 

A., Day, D. A., Whelan, J.,  
& Millar, A. H. (2004). Experimental 
analysis of the Arabidopsis mitochondrial 
proteome highlights signalling and regulatory 
components, provides assessment of 
targeting prediction programs and points to 
plant specific mitochondrial proteins. Plant 
Cell, 16, 241–256.

Heazlewood, J. L., Verboom, R. E., Tonti-
Filippini, J., Small, I., & Millar, A. H. 
(2007). SUBA: The Arabidopsis Subcellular 
Database. Nucleic Acids Research, 35, 
D213–218.

Hruz, T., Laule, O., Szabo, G., Wessendrop, 
F., Bleuler, S., & Oertle, L., et al. (2008). 
Genevestigator V3: A reference expression 

database for the meta-analysis of 
transcriptomes. Advances in Bioinformatics, 
1 (5),  851–857.

Huang, S., Taylor, N. L., Narsai, R., Eubel, 
H., Whelan, J., & Millar, A. H. (2009). 
Experimental analysis of the rice 
mitochondrial proteome, its biogenesis, 
and heterogeneity. Plant Physiology, 149, 
719–734.

International Rice Genome Sequencing Project. 

(2005).  The map-based sequence of the 
rice genome. Nature, 436, 793–800.

Ioset, J. R., Urbaniak, B., Ndjoko-Ioset, K., 
Wirth, J., Martin, F., & Gruissem, W., et 
al. (2007). Flavonoid profiling among wild 
type and related GM wheat varieties. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 65, 645–654.

Isaacson, T., Damasceno, C. M., Saravanan, R. 
S., He, Y., Catalá, C., & Saladié, M., et al. 
(2006). Sample extraction techniques for 
enhanced proteomic analysis of plant tissues. 
Nature Protocols, 1, 769–774.

James, P. (1997). Protein identification in 
the post-genome era: The rapid rise of 
proteomics. Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics, 
30, 279–331.

Jellouli, N., Ben Jouira, H., Skouri, H., 

Ghorbel, A., Gourgouri, A., & Mliki, A. 
(2008). Proteomic analysis of Tunisian 
grapevine cultivar Razegui under salt stress. 
Journal of Plant Physiology, 165, 471–481.

Johnson, R. S., & Taylor, J. A. (2002). Searching 

sequence databases via de novo peptide 
sequencing by tandem mass spectrometry. 
Molecular Biotechnology, 22, 301–315.

Jones, A. M., MacLean, D., Studholme, D. J., 
Serna-Sanz, A., Andreasson, E., & Rathjen, 
J. P., et al. (2009). Phosphoproteomic 
analysis of nuclei-enriched fractions from 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Journal of Proteomics, 
72, 439–451.

Kersten, B., Agrawal, G. K., Durek, P., 

Neigenfind, J., Schulze, W., & Walther, D., 
et al. (2009). Plant phosphoproteomics: An 
update. Proteomics, 9, 964–988.

Khan, M. M., & Komatsu, S. (2004). Rice 
proteomics: Recent developments and 
analysis of nuclear proteins. Phytochemistry, 
65, 1671–1681.

Kieffer, P., Schröder, P., Dommes, J., 

Hoffmann, L., Renaut, J., & Hausman, J. F. 
(2009). Proteomic and enzymatic response 
of poplar to cadmium stress. Journal of 
Proteomics, 72, 379–396.

Kierszniowska, S., Seiwert, B., & Schulze, W. 
X. (2009). Definition of Arabidopsis sterol-
rich membrane microdomains by differential 
treatment with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin 
and quantitative proteomics. Molecular 
Cellular Proteomics: MCP, 8, 612–623.

Kim, S. I., Kim, J. Y., Kim, E. A., Kwon, K. H., 

Kim, K. W., & Cho, K.,  
et al. (2003). Proteome analysis of hairy 
root from Panax ginseng C.A. Meyer using 
peptide fingerprinting, internal sequencing 
and expressed sequence tag data. Proteomics, 
3, 2379–2392.

Kim, S. T., Kim, S. G., Kang, Y. H., Wang, Y., 

Kim, J. Y., & Yi, N.,  
et al. (2008). Proteomics analysis of rice 
lesion mimic mutant (spl1) reveals tightly 
localized probenazole-induced protein 
(PBZ1) in cells undergoing programmed 

63

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

cell death. Journal of Proteome Research, 7, 
1750–1760.

regulation. Nature Biotechnology, 25, 
117–124.

Kleffmann, T., Hirsch-Hoffmann, M., 

Gruissem, W., & Baginsky, S. (2006). Plprot: 
A comprehensive proteome database for 
different plastid types. Plant and Cell 
Physiology, 47, 432–436.

Kleffmann, T., Russenberger, D., von 

Zychlinski, A., Christopher, W., Sjolander, 
K., & Gruissem, W., et al. (2004). The 
Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplast proteome 
reveals pathway abundance and novel 
protein functions. Current Biology : CB, 14, 
354–362.

Komatsu, S. (2008). Plasma membrane 

proteome in Arabidopsis and rice. 
Proteomics, 8, 4137–4145.

Kuster, B., Schirle, M., Mallick, P., & Aebersold, 

R. (2005). Scoring proteomes with 
proteotypic peptide probes. Nature Reviews 
Molecular Cell Biology, 6, 577–583.

Lange, V., Picotti, P., Domon, B., & Aebersold, 

R. (2008). Selected reaction monitoring 
for quantitative proteomics: A tutorial. 
Molecular Systems Biology, 4, 222.

Larsen, M. R., Thingholm, T. E., Jensen, 
O. N., Roepstorff, P., & Jorgensen, T. 
J. (2005). Highly selective enrichment 
of phosphorylated peptides from 
peptide mixtures using titanium dioxide 
microcolumns. Molecular Cellular 
Proteomics, 4, 873–886.

Lee, D. G., Ahsan, N., Lee, S. H., Kang, K. 
Y., Bahk, J. D., & Lee, I. J., et al. (2007). 
A proteomic approach in analyzing 
heat-responsive proteins in rice leaves. 
Proteomics, 7, 3369–3383.

Lehesranta, S. J., Davies, H. V., Shepherd, L. 
V., Nunan, N., McNicol, J. W., & Auriola, 
S., et al. (2005). Comparison of tuber 
proteomes of potato varieties, landraces, and 
genetically modified lines. Plant Physiology, 
138, 1690–1699.

Li, K., Zhu, W., Zeng, K., Zhang, Z., Ye, 
J., & Ou, W., et al. (2010). Proteome 
characterization of cassava (Manihot 
esculenta Crantz) somatic embryos, 
plantlets and tuberous roots. Proteome 
Science, 8, 10.

Li, S., & Dass, C. (1999). Iron(III)-immobilized 

metal ion affinity chromatography and 
mass spectrometry for the purification 
and characterization of synthetic 
phosphopeptides. Analytical Biochemistry, 
270, 9–14.

Lilley, K. S., & Dupree, P. (2007). Plant 

organelle proteomics. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology, 10, 594–599.

Lin, M. K., Lee, Y. J., Lough, T. J., Phinney, 
B. S., & Lucas, W. J. (2009). Analysis of 
the pumpkin phloem proteome provides 
insights into angiosperm sieve tube function. 
Molecular & Cellular Proteomics : MCP, 8, 
343–356.

Liu, J. X., & Bennett, J. (2010). Reversible 

and irreversible drought-induced changes in 
the Anther Proteome of rice (Oryza sativa 
L.) Genotypes IR64 and Moroberekan. 
Molecular Plant 4 (1), 59–69.

Lu, P., Vogel, C., Wang, R., Yao, X., & Marcotte, 

E. M. (2007). Absolute protein expression 
profiling estimates the relative contributions 
of transcriptional and translational 

64

Lunn, J. E. (2007). Compartmentation in plant 
metabolism. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
58, 35–47.

Ma, B., Zhang, K., Hendrie, C., Liang, C., Li, 

M., & Doherty-Kirby, A., et al. (2003). 
PEAKS: Powerful software for peptide 
de novo sequencing by tandem mass 
spectrometry. Rapid Communications in 
Mass Spectrometry, 17, 2337–2342.

Maldonado, A. M., Echevarría-Zomeño, S., 

Jean-Baptiste, S., Hernández, M., & Jorrín-
Novo, J. V. (2008). Evaluation of three 
different protocols of protein extraction for 
Arabidopsis thaliana leaf proteome analysis 
by two-dimensional electrophoresis. Journal 
of Proteomics, 71, 461–472.

Marsh, E., Alvarez, S., Hicks, L. M., Barbazuk, 
W. B., Qiu, W., & Kovacs, L., et al. (2010). 
Changes in protein abundance during 
powdery mildew infection of leaf tissues of 
Cabernet Sauvignon grapevine (Vitis vinifera 
L.). Proteomics, 10, 2057–2064.

Metcalfe, D. D. (2005). Genetically modified 
crops and allergenicity. Nature Immunology, 
6, 857–860.

Mueller, L. N., Rinner, O., Schmidt, A., 

Letarte, S., & Bodenmiller, B.,  
et al. (2007). SuperHirn – A novel tool 
for high resolution LC-MS-based peptide/
protein profiling. Proteomics, 7, 3470–3480.

Nakagami, H., Sugiyama, N., Mochida, K., 

Daudi, A., Yoshida, Y., & Toyoda, T., 
et al. (2010). Large-scale comparative 
phosphoproteomics identifies conserved 
phosphorylation sites in plants. Plant 
Physiology, 153, 1161–1174.

Pandey, A., & Mann, M. (2000). Proteomics 

to study genes and genomes. Nature, 405, 
837–846.

Pappin, D. J., Hojrup, P., & Bleasby, A. J. 

(1993). Rapid identification  
of proteins by peptide-mass fingerprinting. 
Current Biology, 3, 
327–332.

Pechanova, O., Pechan, T., Ozkan, S., 

McCarthy, F. M., Williams, W. P., & Luthe, 
D. S. (2010). Proteome profile of the 
developing maize (Zea mays L.) rachis. 
Proteomics, 10, 3051.

Peck, S., Nühse, T. S., Hess, D., Iglesias, A., 
Meins, S., & Boller, T. (2001). Directed 
proteomics identifies a plant-specific protein 
rapidly phosphorylated in response to 
bacterial and fungal elicitors. The Plant Cell, 
13, 1467–1475.

Phizicky, E., Bastiaens, P. I., Zhu, H., Snyder, 

M., & Fields, S. (2003). Protein analysis on a 
proteomic scale. Nature, 422, 208–215.
Picotti, P., Bodenmiller, B., Mueller, L. N., 

Domon, B., & Aebersold, R. (2009). Full 
dynamic range proteome analysis of S. 
cerevisiae by targeted proteomics. Cell, 138, 
795–806.

Plomion, C., Lalanne, C., Claverol, S., 
Meddour, H., Kohler, A., & Bogeat-
Triboulot, M. B., et al. (2006). Mapping 
the proteome of poplar and application to 
the discovery of drought-stress responsive 
proteins. Proteomics, 6, 6509–6527.

Reiland, S., Messerli, G., Baerenfaller, K., 
Gerrits, B., & Endler, A., et al. (2009). 

Large-scale Arabidopsis phosphoproteome 
profiling reveals novel chloroplast kinase 
substrates and phosphorylation networks. 
Plant Physiology, 150, 889–903.

Rensink, W. A., & Buell, C. R. (2004). 

Arabidopsis to rice. Applying knowledge 
from a weed to enhance our understanding 
of a crop species. Plant Physiology, 135, 
622–629.

Rodrigues, S. P., Ventura, J. A., Zingali, 

R. B., & Fernandes, P. M. (2009). 
Evaluation of sample preparation methods 
for the analysis of papaya leaf proteins 
through two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. 
Phytochemical Analysis, 20, 456–464.
Rolland, N., Atteia, A., Decottignies, P., 

Garin, J., Hippler, M., & Kreimer, G., 
et al. (2009). Chlamydomonas proteomics. 
Current Opinion in Microbiology, 12, 
285–291.

Salekdeh, G. H., Siopongco, J., Wade, L. 

J., Ghareyazie, B., & Bennett, J. (2002). 
Proteomic analysis of rice leaves during 
drought stress and recovery. Proteomics, 2, 
1131–1145.

Saravanan, R. S., & Rose, J. K. (2004). A 
critical evaluation of sample extraction 
techniques for enhanced proteomic analysis 
of recalcitrant plant tissues. Proteomics, 4, 
2522–2532.

Schulze, W. X., & Usadel, B. (2010). 

Quantitation in mass-spectrometry-based 
proteomics. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 
61, 491–516.

Searle, B. C., Dasari, S., Turner, M., Reddy, A. 

P., Choi, D., & Wilmarth, P. A., et al. (2004). 
High-throughput identification of proteins 
and unanticipated sequence modifications 
using a mass-based alignment algorithm 
for MS/MS de novo sequencing results. 
Analytical Chemistry, 76, 2220–2230.
Sergeant, K., Pinheiro, C., Hausman, J. F., 

Ricardo, C. P., & Renaut, J. (2009). Taking 
advantage of nonspecific trypsin cleavages 
for the identification of seed storage proteins 
in cereals. Journal of Proteome Research, 8, 
3182–3190.

Sheffield, J., Taylor, N., Fauquet, C., & 

Chen, S. (2006). The cassava (Manihot 
esculenta Crantz) root proteome: Protein 
identification and differential expression. 
Proteomics, 6, 1588–1598.

Shen, Z., Li, P., Ni, R. J., Ritchie, M., Yang, C. 

P., & Liu, G. F., et al. (2009). Label-free 
quantitative proteomics analysis of etiolated 
maize seedling leaves during greening. 
Molecular & Cellular Proteomics: MCP, 8, 
2443–2460.

Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., & Mann, 
M. (1996). Mass spectrometric sequencing 
of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide 
gels. Analytical Chemistry, 68, 850–858.
Sugiyama, N., Nakagami, H., Mochida, K., 

Daudi, A., & Tomita, M.,  
et al. (2008). Large-scale phosphorylation 
mapping reveals the extent of tyrosine 
phosphorylation in Arabidopsis. Molecular 
Systems Biology, 4, 193.

Sun, Q., Zybailov, B., Majeran, W., Friso, G., 
Olinares, P. D., & van Wijk, K. J. (2009). 
PPDB, the plant proteomics database 
at Cornell. Nucleic Acids Research, 37, 
D969–974.

Proteomics and its application in plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   4

Swaney, D. L., Wenger, C. D., & Coon, J. J. 
(2010). Value of using multiple proteases 
for large-scale mass spectrometry-based 
proteomics. Journal of Proteome Research, 9, 
1323–1329.

Tanaka, N., Konishi, H., Khan, M. M., & 

Komatsu, S. (2010). Proteome analysis 
of rice tissues by two-dimensional 
electrophoresis: An approach to the 
investigation of gibberellin regulated 
proteins. Molecular Genetics and Genomics, 
270, 485–496.

von Zychlinski, A., Kleffmann, T., 

Krishnamurthy, N., Sjolander, K., Baginsky, 
S., & Gruissem, W. (2005). Proteome 
analysis of the rice etioplast: Metabolic 
and regulatory networks and novel protein 
functions. Molecular Cellular Proteomics, 4, 
1072–1084.

Wall, M. L., Wheeler, H. L., Smith, J., 

Figeys, D., & Altosaar, I. (2010). Mass 
spectrometric analysis reveals remnants of 
host-pathogen molecular interactions at the 
starch granule surface in wheat endosperm. 
Phytopathology, 100, 848–854.

Weiss, W., & Görg, A. (2009). High-resolution 

two-dimensional electrophoresis. Methods in 
Molecular Biology, 564, 13–32.

Whiteman, S. A., Nühse, T. S., Ashford, D. 
A., Sanders, D., & Frans Maathuis, J. M. 

(2008). A proteomic and phosphoproteomic 
analysis of Oryza sativa plasma membrane 
and vacuolar membrane. The Plant Journal, 
56, 146–156.

Wienkoop, S., Baginsky, S., & Weckwerth, W. 

(2010). Arabidopsis thaliana as a model 
organism for plant proteome research. 
Journal of Proteomics, 73, 2239–2248.

Wirth, J., Poletti, S., Aeschlimann, B., 

Yakandawala, N., Drosse, B., & Osorio, 
S., et al. (2009). Rice endosperm iron 
biofontification by targeted and synergistic 
action of nicotianamine synthase and 
ferritin. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 7, 
631–644.

Wu, L., & Han, D. K. (2006). Overcoming 

the dynamic range problem in mass 
spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. 
Expert Review of Proteomics, 3, 611–619.

Yan, W., & Chen, S. S. (2005). Mass 

spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic 
profiling. Briefings in Functional Genomics & 
Proteomics, 4, 27–38.

Yates, J. R., Ruse, C. I., & Nakorchevsky, A. 

(2009). Proteomics by mass spectrometry: 
Approaches, advances, and applications. 
Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering, 
11, 49–79.

Yazaki, J., Kojima, K., Suzuki, K., Kishimoto, 

N., & Kikuchi, S. (2004). The Rice 

PIPELINE: A unification tool for plant 
functional genomics. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 1, D383–387.

Ye, X., Al-Babili, S., Klöti, A., Zhang, J., Lucca, 
P., & Beyer, P., et al. (2000). Engineering the 
provitamine A (beta-carotene) biosynthetic 
pathway into (carotenoid-free) rice 
endosperm. Science, 287, 303–305.

Yu, Q., Tong, E., Skelton, R. L., Bowers, J. E., 
Jones, M. R., & Murray, J. E., et al. (2009). 
A physical map of the papaya genome 
with integrated genetic map and genome 
sequence. BMC Genomics, 10, 371.

Zhang, H., Li, X. J., Martin, D. B., & Aebersold, 

R. (2003). Identification and quantification 
of N-linked glycoproteins using hydrazide 
chemistry, stable isotope labeling and mass 
spectrometry. Nature Biotechnology, 21, 
660–666.

Zhao, Y., & Jensen, O. N. (2009). Modification-

specific proteomics: Strategies for 
characterization of post-translational 
modifications using enrichment techniques. 
Proteomics, 9, 4632–4641.

Zimmermann, P., Hirsch-Hoffmann, M., 
Hennig, L., & Gruissem, W. (2004). 
GENEVESTIGATOR. Arabidopsis 
microarray database and analysis toolbox. 
Plant Physiology, 136, 2621–2632

65

Plant metabolomics: Applications 
and opportunities for agricultural 
biotechnology

5

Diane M. Beckles1  Ute Roessner2
1Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis California, 2Australian Centre for 
Plant Functional Genomics and Metabolomics Australia, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  67
Metabolite Networks: The Basics  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  68
Metabolomics: Technologies for Analyses  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  69
Analytical platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   70
Data analysis and interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   71

Metabolomics: Applications in Agricultural  
Biotechnology  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  73
Metabolite profiling to test substantial equivalence . .   73
Phytochemical diversity, phenotyping, and  
classification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
Postharvest quality of horticultural crops  . . . . . . . . .   74
Stress responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   74
Functional genomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   75
Breeding and metabolite quantitative trait loci  . . . . .   75
Metabolomics: Challenges and Future Perspectives  .  .  .  .  76
From model organisms to crop plants . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
Compartmentation of plant metabolism  . . . . . . . . . .   76
High-resolution sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
Primary and secondary metabolism pose different 
challenges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   76
Identifying the metabolome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   77
Measurements of metabolic flux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   77
Outlook  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  78
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  78

Introduction

Plants  produce  a  spectacular  array  of  chemical  compounds 
and are some of the most efficient and elegant chemical syn-
thesizing  machines  known.  A  single  plant  has  the  capacity  to 
produce  5–25,000  compounds  at  any  given  time  (Verpoorte, 
1998;  Weckwerth  and  Fiehn,  2002;  Oksman-Caldentey 
and  Inzé,  2004),  and  there  are  estimates  that  as  many  as 

200,000–1,000,000  different  metabolites  may  be  produced 
in the plant kingdom (Saito and Matsuda, 2010). The chemi-
cal  structures  synthesized  by  plants  are  our  source  of  food 
(directly  and  indirectly),  fuel  (both  fossilized,  ethanolic,  and 
oil), polymers, fiber, adhesives, waxes, dyes, fragrances, medic-
inal compounds, and feedstocks for animals. It is not an over-
exaggeration to suggest that our existence on Earth depends on 
plant metabolic capacity.

Advances  in  analytical  technology  now  make  it  possible 
to  take  a  comprehensive  and  unbiased  look  at  the  chemi-
cal  inventory  of  a  plant  cell.  Each  cell  unit  is  an  individual 
processing  facility  responsible  for  the  production  of  the  met-
abolic  intermediates  or  end  products  valuable  to  man.  These 
compounds  share  some  basic  functional  groups  —  hydroxyls, 
alcohols,  steroids,  alkyls,  benzyl  rings,  and  so  forth  —  but  it 
is the chemical diversity that arises from the infinite combina-
tion of these structures that leads to unique compounds with 
different  solubilities,  melting  points,  and  reactivities  typical 
of plant metabolism (Trethewey, 2004; Roessner and Beckles, 
2009).  Current  profiling  technologies  permit  the  simultane-
ous detection of hundreds of compounds within a single plant 
extract. This has led to the emergence of the field of “metab-
olomics,”  that  is,  the  description  of  the  metabolic  state  of 
a  biological  system  in  response  to  environmental  and  genetic 
perturbations  (Oliver  et  al.,  1998;  Fiehn,  2001;  Villas-Boas 
et al., 2005).

Although the metabolome in many plants represents a cata-
log  of  thousands  of  different  chemical  species,  for  simplicity 
they  are  classified  as  belonging  to  one  of  two  groups  —  pri-
mary or secondary — depending on their roles in plant survival. 
Secondary  metabolites  are  not  directly  needed  for  normal 
growth  and  development,  but  their  production  can  enhance 
the  organism's  survival  under  certain  conditions  of  biotic  or 
abiotic stress. Based on DNA sequence analysis of many plant 
genomes, we know that there are thousands of genes that poten-
tially encode enzymes that catalyze exotic reactions (Saito and 
Matsuda,  2010),  but  we  have  not  been  able  to  experimen-
tally  resolve  the  functions  of  these  putative  enzymes.  Primary 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00005-5

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

metabolites  are  immediately  necessary  for  plants  to  complete 
their life cycles under normal growth conditions. Quantitatively, 
they  comprise  the  highest  proportion  of  the  metabolome  and 
they tend to be simpler compounds (e.g., sugars and amino and 
fatty acids), which often act as immediate substrates for com-
pounds related to agronomic yield (e.g., starch, protein, lipids, 
and cell walls). The human intervention 10,000 years ago that 
led to the domestication of naturally growing plant species also 
led  to  massive  changes  in  plant  composition.  Many  secondary 
metabolites  that  enabled  plants  to  tolerate  unfavorable  condi-
tions  in  the  wild  have  been  diminished  in  various  crop  plants, 
whereas the primary storage compounds have been coaxed for 
maximal  production  through  breeding  and  by  providing  opti-
mal conditions of culture. Although it is pragmatic to make this 
arbitrary  distinction,  secondary  metabolites  may  regulate  sign-
aling networks that are integral to the successful completion of 
the plant growth cycle acting as pseudohormones (Pourcel and 
Grotewold,  2009),  and  we  anticipate  that  further  studies  will 
elucidate these interrelationships.

At its outset biotechnology held great promise for rational 
and  targeted  metabolic  engineering,  but  its  potential  has  not 
yet been fully realized. Although there have been some prom-
ising  breakthroughs  (Itkin  and  Aharoni,  2009),  metabolite 
engineering, by and large, has been unsuccessful due in large 
part  to  the  complexity  and  robustness  of  plant  metabolism 
and  the  extent  to  which  the  environment  influences  plant 
phenotype.  So,  can  metabolomics  be  applied  to  enhance  the 
chances  of  successful  biotechnological  manipulation?  We 
argue that the answer is yes, and that this can be achieved in 
three main ways. Metabolomics can:
1. Identify metabolite markers that underscore valuable 

phenotypes.

2. Assess the outcomes of engineering steps.
3. Guide future metabolic engineering strategies.

Metabolomics will not be a magic bullet for solving biotech-
nological problems, but may prove to be a valuable technology 
by providing a more complete picture of the biological system 
under  study.  In  this  chapter  we  will  outline  what  is  known 
about the general organization of metabolite networks and use 
it  to  illustrate  broad  concepts  of  metabolic  control  and  regu-
lation,  information  necessary  for  metabolite  engineering.  We 
will then survey the analytical and data-mining tools available 
as  this  will  allow  us  to  ascertain  what  can  be  measured  and 
how biological information can be extracted from these meas-
urements.  We  will  then  outline  how  metabolomics  is  being 
used  to  support  biotechnology.  There  has  literally  been  an 
explosion  in  the  number,  scope,  and  depth  of  applications  of 
metabolomics in recent years and we will not be able to com-
prehensively address them all. Finally, we will look at the chal-
lenges ahead and the key issues that must be addressed if the 
full potential of this discipline is to be realized for improving 
agriculture.

Metabolite Networks: The Basics

explore  this  subject  superficially,  so  the  reader  is  referred  to 
the  recent  literature  (Ma  and  Zeng,  2003a,b;  Sweetlove  and 
Fernie, 2005; Zhao et al., 2006; Rios-Estepa and Lange, 2007;  
Kose et al., 2007; Rodriguez and Infante, 2009; Grafahrend-
Belau  et  al.,  2009;)  for  more  details.  Some  commonly  con-
structed  plant  metabolite  networks  display  stoichiometric 
relationships  between  metabolites  that  imply  functional-
ity.  The  relationship  between  metabolite  x1  and  all  others  is 
determined in several samples and metabolites that correlate 
strongly, that is, maintain the same relationship under differ-
ent  perturbations,  are  inferred  to  be  connected  by  common 
regulatory  mechanisms  or  in  an  enzymatic  step  (Weckwerth 
et al., 2004; Camacho et al., 2005; Stamova et al., 2009). In 
such  networks  each  metabolite  may  be  considered  to  be  a 
node.  When  two  or  more  metabolites  (nodes)  are  connected 
(presumably  by  an  enzymatic  step  that  links  them),  this  is 
described  as  an  edge.  Metabolites  that  are  the  substrates  of 
many reactions, for example, glucose-6-phosphate, may have 
many  edges  highly  interlinked  to  other  nodes  (metabolites). 
Where  there  is  a  high  frequency  of  such  metabolites,  these 
regions  of  the  network  are  described  as  hubs.  Several  hubs 
may  form  individual  modules,  which  can  connect  to  others 
leading to a supra-hierarchical structure.

Metabolic  networks  have  been  extensively  characterized 
in unicellular prokaryotes, which are much less complex than 
plants. However, some basic patterns have emerged that may 
be broadly applicable. A “bow-tie” structure is often evident 
when the nodes of a metabolite network are viewed (Ma and 
Zeng,  2003a,b;  Zhao  et  al.,  2006;  Grafahrend-Belau  et  al., 
2009;  Figure  5.1).  A  giant  strong  component  (GSC)  that 
constitutes many reactions of central metabolism can be dis-
cerned. Inputs to the GSC are those needed for assimilation 
so in plants these would be carbon dioxide fixation and N-, S-, 
and  P-assimilation  reactions  that  have  high  energy  consump-
tion  but  are  needed  for  the  synthesis  of  more  complicated 
compounds such as amino acids, nucleic acids, sugars, and so 
forth. Outputs from the GSC in plants, which would include 
reactions that constitute a secondary metabolism, are typically 
specialized and are less interconnected.

DECREASING CONSTRAINTS

GIANT
STRONG

COMPONENT

INPUT

OUTPUT

Network  analysis  is  rather  complex  and  there  are  many 
evolving  theorems.  For  the  purposes  of  this  chapter,  we  will 

Figure 5.1 l Bow-tie structure illustrating the global properties of 
metabolic networks. Adapted from Grafahrend-Belau et al. (2009) and Ma and 
Zeng (2003).

68

Plant metabolomics: Applications and opportunities for agricultural biotechnology

C H A P T E R   5

As carbon and energy flow through this system there may 
be decreasing constraints, such as less regulation of the reac-
tions.  Considering  plant  metabolism  in  this  way  can  provide 
a  framework  relevant  to  metabolic  engineering.  Reactions 
that  are  part  of  the  GSC  may  be  more  difficult  to  change, 
or  changes  may  impact  normal  growth  and  development, 
whereas  reactions  described  as  outputs  may  be  easier  to 
manipulate since they are less intertwined with core processes 
needed  for  survival.  Reactions  at  the  juncture  of  the  GSC 
and the output modules may play a key role controlling fluxes 
between  reactions  needed  for  basal  functioning  (GSC),  and 
those that can readily react to swift changes in external condi-
tions and boost survival (output) (Modolo et al., 2009). The 
model we have presented here is based on data for low-com-
plexity  organisms;  however,  with  data  amassed  from  metab-
olomics  of  plant  organs,  networks  that  accurately  reflect  the 
metabolomes of higher plants may be built.

Metabolomics: Technologies for 
Analyses

The  metabolome  consists  of  a  vast  number  of  different 
chemical  structures  hugely  diverse  in  chemical  and  physical 
properties  such  as  molecular  weight  and  size,  polarity,  vola-
tility,  solubility,  stability,  and  pka  (Villas-Bôas  et  al.,  2007). 
Therefore,  a  number  of  analytical  technologies  have  to  be 
employed  to  enable  the  separation,  detection,  and  quantifi-
cation  of  these  chemicals.  The  most  common  platforms  are 
liquid and gas chromatography both coupled with mass spec-
trometry  (LC-MS  and  GC-MS)  and  nuclear  magnetic  reso-
nance spectroscopy (NMR). How these instruments function 
and  why  they  are  used  in  the  metabolomics  field  is  exten-
sively  described  in  a  number  of  reviews  and  books  (Villas-
Bôas et al., 2007; Roessner and Beckles, 2009, and references 
therein).  There  are  two  major  approaches  in  metabolomics, 
targeted and untargeted (Figure 5.2). The attempt to measure 
as many metabolites as possible is defined as untargeted analy-
sis and the selection and accurate quantification of a subset of 
metabolites of interest is called the targeted approach. There 

are advantages and disadvantages for both approaches, as out-
lined in Figure 5.2. Thousands of metabolites can now be ana-
lyzed simultaneously by using LC-MS (Callahan et al., 2009). 
The  resulting  data  matrices  are  highly  multidimensional  and 
require sophisticated statistical and multivariate analysis tech-
niques to make comparisons between stages and identify the 
differences and similarities between those stages (see the sec-
tion  Data  Analysis  and  Interpretation).  One  difficulty  in  the 
interpretation  of  data  resulting  from  untargeted  analysis  is 
the sheer number of peaks determined that cannot be related 
to  a  particular  chemical  structure,  and  therefore  cannot  be 
related to a particular biochemical pathway. The major advan-
tage  of  targeted  analysis,  on  the  other  hand,  is  that  the  user 
knows  what  is  being  measured  which  gives  better  interpret-
able results in a biological context. The actual concentrations 
of the metabolites targeted are determined, which may indi-
cate  importance  and  function  of  the  metabolites  in  a  rather 
biochemical  context.  Targeted  analysis  is  generally  charac-
terized  by  a  much  higher  accuracy,  greater  selectivity  and, 
most important, a greater sensitivity compared to untargeted 
analysis  (e.g.,  Kitteringham  et  al.,  2009;  Wei  and  Seymour, 
2010)  since  the  metabolites  of  interest  are  separated  from 
the  crude  extract  using  specialized  extraction  procedures  or 
via  specific  targeting  in  the  mass  spectrometer.  A  common 
methodology  for  specific  targeting  of  the  ions  of  a  particular 
compound  utilizes  the  so-called  multiple  reaction  monitor-
ing  (MRM),  a  method  well  known  from  proteomics  studies 
designed  to  quantify  peptides  (Kitteringham  et  al.,  2009; 
Yocum  and  Chinnaiyan,  2009).  In  metabolomics,  the  tech-
nique is very comparable, the molecular ion of a compound is 
first selected and further fragmented. One specific fragment is 
then selected and monitored (a process called transition) and 
the number of both the mother and fragment ion is counted. 
When compared to a standard calibration curve it is then pos-
sible  to  estimate  the  concentration  of  the  compound  in  the 
extract.  Using  this  physical  instrumentation  developments 
thus far have allowed the quantification of up to 250 metabo-
lites  simultaneously  (Wei  and  Seymour,  2010);  the  greatest 
limitation,  however,  is  the  availability  of  authentic  standards 
required for the establishment of calibration curves.

Figure 5.2 l Schematics of the advantages and 
disadvantages of targeted versus untargeted metabolite 
analysis. 

69

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Analytical platforms

A  number  of  analytical  platforms  have  to  be  used  in  a  com-
plementary  manner  to  measure  the  huge  chemical  diversity. 
The  most  common  metabolite  detection  technologies,  often 
referred to as “work-horses,” are mass spectrometry (MS) and 
NMR. Complex metabolite mixtures extracted from biologi-
cal fluids and  tissues often require a  separation step  prior  to 
detection, especially when using MS as the detection system. 
Gas chromatography (GC), liquid chromatography (LC), and 
capillary  electrophoresis  (CE)  are  the  most  common  sepa-
ration  techniques  coupled  with  MS.  These  separation  and 
detection methods have been extensively described in the lit-
erature (Villas-Bôas et al., 2007; Roessner and Beckles, 2009). 
Here  we  only  present  a  short  summary  of  the  technologies 
and refer the reader to the extensive literature.

GC-MS
Gas  chromatography  coupled  with  mass  spectrometry  (GC-
MS) is characterized by its great separation power and repro-
ducibility. GC-MS allows the analysis of compounds that are 
either volatile or can be made volatile through derivatization. 
After  injection,  the  compounds  are  separated  based  on  their 
volatility  temperature  and  interaction  with  the  column  sta-
tionary  phase  (e.g.,  polarity).  Eluted  compounds  enter  the 
ion  source,  usually  an  electron  impact  ionization  (EI)  source, 
where  they  are  ionized  prior  to  entering  the  MS.  Since  the 
conditions  of  electron  impact  ionization  are  highly  standard-
ized  and  reproducible,  comprehensive  GC-MS  mass  spectral 
libraries  for  compound  identifications  have  been  established 
that  are  both  commercially  (e.g.,  NIST,  http://www.nist.
gov/srd/nist1a.cfm;  Agilent’s  FiehnLib;  Kind  et  al.,  2009) 
and  publicly  available  (GMD;  Kopka  et  al.,  2005).  Ideally, 
for  increased  confidence  and  reproducibility  of  the  data,  the 
libraries do not only offer searching based on mass spectra, but 
also  provide  retention  times  or  retention  time  indices  under 
standardized  conditions  for  each  compound  (Kopka  et  al., 
2005). Due to the comprehensiveness and validity of the exist-
ing GC-MS libraries, a typical GC-MS analysis of a biological 
sample  today  can  separate  up  to  400  compounds,  including 
amino and organic acids, sugars, amines, fatty acids, and ster-
ols, of which about 100 to 150 can be unambiguously identi-
fied  with  respect  to  their  chemical  nature.  Much  work  must 
still be done to identify remaining unknown peaks. The bottle-
neck comes from the lack of availability of authentic standards 
required  to  confirm  a  peak’s  identity  before  it  can  be  stored 
in  a  mass  spectral  library.  Although  GC-MS  is  currently  lim-
ited  to  identification  of  compounds  smaller  than  1000 Da, 
it  remains  a  major  analytical  platform  for  metabolomics 
approaches  since  it  is  robust,  easy  to  establish,  and  requires 
relatively low capital investments for setup.

LC-MS
The  targeted  and  quantitative  approach  and  untargeted  but 
semi-quantitative  analysis  using  LC-MS  have  been  widely 
used  in  the  proteomics  field  and  have  garnered  substantially 
greater  interest  in  the  metabolomics  community  during 

70

Table 5.1  List of mass analyzers, their principle of mass 
separation, and indication of mass resolution

Type of 
analyzer

Quadrupole

Ion trap

Symbol

Principle of mass 
separation

Resolution

Q

IT

m/z (trajectory stability)

m/z (resonance frequency)

Low

Low

High

Time of flight

TOF

Velocity (flight time)

FTICR

m/z (resonance frequency)

Very high

FT-OT

m/z (resonance frequency)

Very high

Fourier 
transform 
ion cyclotron 
resonance

Fourier 
transform 
orbitrap

Source: Modified from Hoffmann and Stroobant (2007).

the  past  few  years  (Griffiths  and  Wang,  2009).  There  are  a 
number  of  advantages  to  using  LC-MS  for  metabolite  analy-
ses.  First,  compounds  do  not  require  derivatization  prior  to 
analysis so the chemical structures of the compounds analyzed 
are  therefore  not  altered.  Secondly,  higher  molecular  weight 
compounds  and  metabolites  with  lower  thermostability  are 
amendable for analysis.

Eluting  compounds  must  be  converted  into  the  gas  phase 
via  simultaneous  ionization  to  be  analyzed  using  MS.  The 
most common ionization techniques include electrospray ioni-
zation (ESI) and atmospheric pressure ionization (API). Once 
ionized compounds are separated they are then counted based 
on  their  mass  to  charge  ratio.  This  process  takes  place  in  a 
mass analyzer. The most common analyzers and their modes 
of  ion  separation  are  listed  in  Table  5.1.  A  more  detailed 
description of how the different analyzers function is given in 
Roessner and Beckles (2009).

Modern  MS  often  involves  the  use  of  two  or  more  mass 
analyzers  in  tandem  (e.g.,  QqTOF,  QqQ,  QqLT;  for  graphic 
description see Roessner and Beckles, 2009). For tandem MS 
a number of triggered mass selections are carried out, followed 
by subsequent fragmentation of the selected ions. Potentially, 
two (MS/MS) or more rounds (MSn) of this process are con-
ducted,  an  important  feature  for  structural  elucidation  of 
unknown peaks to determine specific fragmentation patterns. 
Once a target’s fragmentation pattern is known, it can also be 
utilized to assign a name to the same peak observed in several 
experimental biological samples through the establishment of 
mass spectral libraries.

There  are  a  great  number  of  different  column  matrices 
available  for  the  separation  of  complex  metabolite  extracts 
and  it  is  therefore  important  to  choose  the  appropriate  sta-
tionary as well as mobile phase for the compounds of interest. 
These column matrices include ion exchange, reversed phase, 
and  hydrophobic  interaction  chromatography.  Unfortunately, 
no single separation methodology is capable of separating the 
vast  number  of  different  chemistries  of  metabolites.  This  is 

Plant metabolomics: Applications and opportunities for agricultural biotechnology

C H A P T E R   5

Sample

Polor extract (e.g., MeOH)

Lipid extract (e.g., chloroform)

Apolar

compounds

Polar

compounds

Lipid
profile

Lipid species
quantification

C18RP

+/– ESI QTOF

HILIC (ANP)
+/– ESI QTOF

DIMS

MRM using QQQ

Figure 5.3 l Schematic of the potential methodologies required for 
untargeted and highly comprehensive metabolite analyses. 
 

especially problematic if the aim is to analyze as many meta-
bolites  as  possible  in  an  untargeted  manner.  Figure  5.3  illus-
trates the complexity of methodologies required to determine 
as  many  compounds  as  possible,  ranging  from  highly  hydro-
phobic  (such  as  lipids)  to  highly  hydrophilic  (such  as  amino 
acids or sugar phosphates) metabolites, from a single sample.

To  analyze  both  hydrophilic  and  hydrophobic  compounds, 
these classes are ideally separated through an extraction proc-
ess  using  a  bi-phasic  solvent  mixture  (e.g.,  methanol,  water, 
chloroform).  The  chloroform  phase,  which  contains  the 
lipophilic components such as lipids and sterols, can then be 
analyzed  using  lipidomics  methodologies  either  to  screen  for 
as many lipid classes present as possible (Ivanova et al., 2009) 
or to quantify individual lipid species using MRM (Ståhlman 
et al., 2009).

The  methanol/water  phase  must  then  be  analyzed  with 
two  different  stationary  phases.  C18  reversed  phase  is  used 
for  the  more  polar  components  in  the  extract  (e.g.,  flavo-
noids,  alkaloids,  non-polar  amino  acids  such  as  tryptophan 
or  phenylalanine,  and  certain  plant  hormones)  and  aqueous 
normal phase (ANP) or hydrophilic interaction chromatogra-
phy (HILIC) is used for polar components (e.g., sugars, sugar 
phosphates,  polar  amino  acids  such  as  alanine  and  glycine; 
Callahan  et  al.,  2009).  Two  types  of  ionization  modes  (posi-
tive and negative) have to be used to cover a greater comple-
ment of metabolites in the extract.

A  number  of  mass  spectral  libraries  are  commercially  or 
publicly  available  (see  Table  5.2);  however,  none  of  them 
record  retention  times  of  the  compounds.  Unfortunately, 
retention  times  in  LC  application  are  often  inconsistent,  as 
major  changes  in  the  constitution  of  the  mobile  phase  and 
temperature or pH of the solvents (and extracts) can have dra-
matic effects on the retention times of the eluting compounds 
or even, in part, on the order of elution. Another difficulty for 
unambiguous  peak  identification  is  that  a  number  of  metabo-
lites have the exact same accurate mass and therefore the same 
sum formular, which can be generated from the accurate mass. 
New  initiatives  around  the  world  are  supporting  attempts  to 
establish highly standardized and controlled conditions for LC 
(e.g., stationary and mobile phase, temperature, gradient, flow, 
pH)  as  well  as  MS  (e.g.,  ionization  mode,  collision  energies, 

Table 5.2  Examples of mass spectral databases

Name

Metlin

Web site

Reference

http://metlin.scripps.edu/

Smith et al. (2005)

Chemspider

www.chemspider.com/

Williams (2008)

MassBank

www.massbank.jp/

Horai et al. (2010)

HMD

www.hmdb.ca/

Forsythe and Wishart 
(2009)

MS  scan  modes  and  speeds)  with  the  longer  term  goal  of 
developing LC-MS libraries that record accurate masses, reten-
tion times, and MS2 and MS3 fragmentation patterns.

In  summary,  there  are  two 

important  developments 
required to improve the utility of LC-MS-based metabolomics. 
First,  high-throughput  methodologies  to  help  identify  more 
and  more  of  the  unknown  mass  features  in  chromatograms 
need to be established, both by building comprehensive librar-
ies  and  by  selective  purification  and  enrichment  technique  of 
those  unknown  peaks  for  subsequent  NMR-based  structural 
elucidations. The second important development is to extend 
our current targeted quantitative MRM-based methods toward 
more comprehensive methods that would allow accurate quan-
tification of hundreds of metabolites simultaneously.

NMR
NMR-based  metabolite  profiling  has  been  used  extensively 
for  the  analysis  of  biological  fluids  such  as  blood,  serum,  or 
urine  and  has  become  a  great  success  in  a  number  of  medi-
cal  applications  and  biomarker  discovery  studies  (Bollard 
et al., 2005). There are a number of advantages to using NMR 
in  metabolomics;  for  instance,  it  is  a  non-destructive  meas-
urement  allowing  the  sample  to  be  used  for  other  analyses. 
Also,  NMR-based  metabolite  detection  can  quantitatively 
capture a number of different classes of metabolites with dif-
ferent  chemical  and  physical  properties  in  one  single  analy-
sis,  substantially  reducing  the  measurement  time  per  sample 
(Ward et al., 2007). Compared to other analytical platforms, 
NMR represents a fast and relatively cheap (per sample base) 
method; however, NMR requires a substantial capital invest-
ment and, therefore, careful consideration. NMR is also char-
acterized  by  its  relatively  low  sensitivity,  meaning  that  larger 
sample volumes are required to detect sufficient numbers of 
metabolites.

Data analysis and interpretation

A  single  metabolomics  experiment  can  generate  hundreds  of 
data  points  that  require  cautious  treatment  and  analysis  to 
remove  noise  from  a  “real”  signal  and  allow  biological  inter-
pretation of these data. There are a number of steps involved 
in this process, from data extraction from the instrument to 
the ability to visualize them with respect to the biological/bio-
chemical question. Most often there are three stages of data 

71

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Figure 5.4 l Example of deconvolution. l Upper 
panel shows the total ion chromatogram (in black) 
and the deconvoluted extracted ion chromatograms 
of each compound detected (in color). The lower 
panel shows the respective accurate mass peaks 
for the deconvoluted extracted ion chromatograms 
for the leftmost peak in the upper panel only. 

processing  applied.  The  first,  called  pre-processing,  includes 
steps  to  reduce  raw  data  by  removing  noise.  These  include 
deconvolution,  filtering,  peak  detection  or  feature  finding, 
and  alignment  of  the  peaks  found  from  different  samples. 
The main purpose of these steps is to extract the characteris-
tics of each observed ion (e.g., m/z ratio, retention time, and 
ion intensity) from the raw data file into an easy-to-interpret 
form.  The  second  step  involves  normalization  and  transfor-
mation procedures followed by the third step, the actual sta-
tistical  analysis  using  either  univariate  (e.g.,  Student’s  t-test) 
or  multivariate  (e.g.,  principal  component  analysis;  PCA) 
methodologies.

Data pre-processing
The  first  step  for  the  data  pre-processing  procedure  is  to 
deconvolute  the  signals  and  detect  the  peaks  under  each 
deconvoluted  signal.  Figure  5.4  shows  an  example  of  a 
deconvoluted  total  ion  chromatogram  (TIC).  Each  colored 
peak  underneath  the  TIC  peak  represents  an  individual  ion 
detected at a similar time that can now be related to its accu-
rate mass in the mass spectrum shown in Figure 5.4. A simi-
lar  approach  is  taken  when  GC-MS  data  are  deconvoluted; 
however, in that situation it is important to consider that each 
compound  is  represented  by  more  than  one  ion  due  to  the 
electron impact ionization process used in GC-MS.

The  next  step  is  to  distinguish  between  noise  and  the 
“real”  signal  from  the  sample.  It  is  important  to  always  run 
blank  samples  with  each  experiment  (e.g.,  an  empty  tube 
treated  the  same  as  all  other  samples),  because  they  will 
provide  estimates  of  background  noise  that  will  be  sub-
tracted  from  experimental  samples.  The  next  process  is  to 
align all detected signals across all samples within an experi-
ment to account for retention time shifts between runs. Most 
instrument  vendors  offer  this  capability  in  their  instrument- 
specific  software;  however,  this  operation  can  also  be  per-
formed  using  open-source  software  packages  (e.g.,  XCMS, 
Smith  et  al.,  2006;  or  MZmine,  Katajamaa  et  al.,  2006;  for 
review see Katajamaa and Oresic, 2007).

Normalization and data transformation
Deconvolution, peak identification, and alignment result in a 
data  matrix  in  table  format,  which  then  undergoes  adequate 
normalization and subsequent transformation prior to statisti-
cal  analysis.  Depending  on  the  properties  of  the  data  matrix 
different  normalization  procedures  are  applied  for  metabo-
lomics  data.  Most  biological  data  are  characterized  by  het-
eroscedasticity  (i.e.,  where  the  standard  deviation  of  each 
metabolite determined in replicate samples changes with the 
mean  of  the  signal;  e.g.,  Arneberg  et  al.,  2007;  Herberich 
et al., 2010), which can substantially affect results (Kvalheim 
et  al.,  1994).  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  normalize  data. 
This  is  done  by  choosing  the  appropriate  normalization  pro-
cedure,  because  it  is  important  to  consider  that  every  data-
set  is  different.  Common  normalization  procedures  include 
Z-scores, media, sum of selected or all metabolites, and inter-
nal  and  external  standard  normalizations.  These  procedures 
and their advantages and disadvantages are described in detail 
in Roessner et al. (2011).

Depending  on  the  type  of  statistical  analysis  required, 
different  transformation  procedures  are  also  applied.  For 
instance,  most  biological  data  are  either  right  or  left  skewed 
but the Student’s t-test can only be applied to normally dis-
tributed  data;  therefore,  transformation  is  required  prior  to 
performing t-tests. Transformation also changes heteroscedas-
ticity into homoscedasticity, so the method used depends on 
the  properties  of  the  heteroscedasticity.  For  example,  if  the 
standard deviation is directly proportional to the mean of each 
signal,  log-transformation  is  optimal  to  change  heteroscedas-
ticity.  However,  if  the  standard  deviation  is  proportional  to 
the  root  of  the  mean,  then  square-root  transformation  can 
provide a homoscedastic noise pattern (Roessner et al., 2011).

Statistical analysis
Once the data are appropriately normalized and transformed 
they can be statistically analyzed. A number of different uni-
variate  (e.g.,  Student’s  t-test)  and  multivariate  statistical 

72

Plant metabolomics: Applications and opportunities for agricultural biotechnology

C H A P T E R   5

analysis  tools  (e.g.,  Principal  Component  Analysis  (PCA) 
linear discriminant analysis, LDA; hierarchical cluster analysis, 
HCA; partial least squares discriminant analysis, PLS-DA; and 
independent component analysis, ICA) are available to deter-
mine statistical differences between samples and metabolites. 
Again, the method of choice depends on the biological ques-
tion  as  well  as  on  the  experimental  design  and  data  acquisi-
tion.  There  is  extensive  literature  available  describing  the 
functionality  of  different  statistical  methodologies  and  their 
applicability  and  usefulness  to  the  analysis  of  metabolomics 
data (see Roessner and Beckles, 2009; Roessner et al., 2011, 
and references therein).

Data visualization
The previously mentioned data analysis tools are great for rep-
resenting  the  changes,  similarities,  and  dissimilarities  between 
groups.  However,  in  a  biological  context  metabolomics  data 
need to be mapped onto biochemical pathways to allow inter-
pretation  of  the  influence  of  the  treatment  (genetic  or  envi-
ronmental) on the levels of metabolites. The low percentage of 
signals detected that are known with respect to chemical struc-
ture and therefore in relation to a metabolite presents a bottle-
neck in this approach. That is why targeted metabolite analysis 
has  gained  more  interest  in  the  past  few  years;  the  metabo-
lites detected and quantified as a result of targeted analysis are 
known and can be mapped onto a biochemical pathway. In any 
untargeted approach the only metabolites that are further inves-
tigated  are  those  with  statistically  significant  changes,  which 
may  be  useful  if  one’s  aim  is  to  identify  a  particular  marker 
characteristic of a sample group; other metabolites are not fur-
ther investigated (e.g., identified). We want to stress that from a 
biochemical and biological point of view it is important to know 
which metabolites do and do not change in their pool sizes.

A  number  of  software  tools  are  available  that  allow  map-
ping of metabolite changes onto biochemical pathways (for a 
detailed review see Roessner and Beckles, 2009). Again, each 
has its advantages and disadvantages. There are tools such as 
the  Omics  Viewer  (Pathway  Tools  Omics  Viewer  –  PTOV), 
which  allows  mapping  of  metabolite  level  changes  onto  a 
given,  static  pathway,  and  maps  gene  and  protein  expression 
and metabolic flux analysis data (Paley and Karp, 2006). Only 
a small portion of metabolites are identified in routine metab-
olomics experiments and mapping those onto the whole bio-
chemical  pathway  “dilutes”  the  visualization  of  the  changes. 
Using tools such as VANTED (Junker et al., 2006), the path-
ways  with  which  the  measured  metabolites  are  involved  can 
be  drawn  in a  customized  fashion.  Another  advantage  of  the 
VANTED tool is that it allows mapping of the results of more 
than two experiments on the same metabolic pathway rather 
than limiting only one comparison per visualized map.

Metabolomics: Applications in 
Agricultural Biotechnology

The  primary  aim  of  agricultural  biotechnology  is  to  maxi-
mize the synthesis of a product deemed desirable, to reduce 
the  level  of  undesirable  products  or  to  introduce  a  novel 

non-native  product  to  the  plant  in  the  hopes  of  delivering 
value-added,  reasonably  priced  commodities  to  market.  So 
how can metabolomics enable this?

Metabolomics can be used to tell: (1) if there is a pathway 
step  that  is  regulated  differently  due  to  a  perturbation,  (2) 
the  extent  to  which  genetic  or  environmental  changes  alter 
metabolism, and (3) which gene(s) underlie the accumulation 
of  a  metabolite.  In  addition,  metabolomics  is  used  to  assist 
with  cultivar  classification  and  phenotyping.  The  attention 
we give to each of the next sections is not necessarily indica-
tive of its importance; rather we highlight areas that are more 
often than not overlooked and those studies that best exem-
plify an application.

Metabolite profiling to test substantial 
equivalence

Metabolomics  plays  a  major  role  in  the  determination  of 
substantial  equivalence  of  GMO  crops  (Beale  et  al.,  2009). 
Genetic alteration affects the visible phenotype as well as the 
biochemical  composition  of  the  cells  leading  to  unexpected 
effects  on  the  basis  of  current  genetic  or  biochemical  knowl-
edge (Cellini et al., 2004; Kuiper et al., 2003). To determine 
substantial  equivalence,  a  concept  initially  introduced  by  the 
Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD, 1991; Kuiper et al., 2002) as a framework for safety 
evaluations where existing crops and foods serve as a baseline 
for safety and the properties of any new foods and crops are 
compared  to  their  counterparts  is  used.  The  metabolomes  of 
genetically engineered plants are monitored and compared to 
the natural variation of metabolomes of their wild-type coun-
terparts. This framework is not a safety assessment per se, but 
presents a starting point for a comprehensive comparison on all 
biochemical  and  chemical  levels  of  the  new  product  (Kuiper 
et  al.,  2001).  Metabolomics  is  only  one  of  the  tools  utilized 
in  support  of  this  concept  (Rischer  and  Oksman-Caldentey, 
2006). There have been examples presented where the intro-
duction  (or  deletion)  of  a  gene  has  resulted  in  unexpected 
changes in metabolism and metabolite levels, even if the gene 
of interest is not actively involved in metabolic processes. For 
instance, the introduction of a gene encoding a plasma mem-
brane  Na-pumping  ATPase,  originally  from  Physcomitrella 
patens,  into  rice  and  barley  under  the  control  of  a  constitu-
tive promoter resulted in dramatic effects on metabolite levels 
compared  to  the  control  plants  even  under  controlled  condi-
tions  (Jacobs  et  al.,  2007).  Interestingly,  some  metabolites 
were differently changed in either rice or barley, indicating the 
importance  of  applying  the  substantial  equivalence  concept, 
not  only  to  every  gene  used  for  transformation,  but  also  in 
every species and most probably also every variety into which 
it  was  transferred.  Large  metabolomics  studies  have  been 
undertaken on transgenic crops grown in the field (Catchpole 
et al., 2005; Baker et al., 2006; Zywicki et al., 2005; Venneria 
et  al.,  2008),  and  the  consensus  from  those  studies  is  that, 
while  results  have  to  be  treated  with  caution,  strong  indica-
tions are that traditional breeding or growth in different envi-
ronments  may  produce  inherently  more  genetic  variation  in 
plants than that from some transgenic manipulations.

73

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Phytochemical diversity, phenotyping,  
and classification

A metabolite profile provides, to some extent, a biochemical 
readout of the genetic blueprint of an organism. It can there-
fore be used to classify and phenotype individuals and to look 
at  evolutionary  and  phylogenetic  relationships.  Hundreds  of 
data  points  can  be  generated  from  a  single  GC  run;  even  if 
these compounds are unknown, their occurrence and relative 
content are a signature of the genetic background and environ-
mental conditions under which that individual was cultured.

Metabolomics has already been exploited to survey phyto-
chemical  diversity  among  herbs  used  in  traditional  medicine 
(Jiang  et  al.,  2006),  to  phenotype  varieties  based  on  chemi-
cal  composition,  allowing  growers  to  implement  standards 
for  quality  control  (Zeng  et  al.,  2008;  Vekiari  et  al.,  2010). 
Metabolite  profiles  also  act  as  a  signature  to  identify  culti-
vars  and  varieties  by  the  region  in  which  they  are  cultivated 
(Anastasiadi et al., 2009). The profiles of secondary metabo-
lites  in  eucalyptus  portrayed  important  taxonomic  and  evo-
lutionary  relationships  leading  to  the  suggestion  that  it  can 
be a powerful tool for phylogenetic studies (Merchant et al., 
2006).  DNA  sequence  analysis  is  still  the  standard  used  for 
fingerprinting individuals, but metabolomics is set to be part 
of the growing arsenal for performing these types of studies.

Postharvest quality of horticultural crops

The  postharvest  quality  of  fruit  and  vegetables  is  a  prime 
determinant  of  consumer  acceptability  and  producer  profita-
bility. Good flavor, appearance, and low costs are important to 
the public whereas reducing losses along the production chain 
from harvest to table are of concern to the producer (Beckles, 
2011).  The  quality  of  fruit  and  vegetables  after  harvest  are 
maintained  by  manipulating  their  storage  conditions  —  tem-
perature, humidity, and atmospheric composition — to delay 
senescence and retain nutrient content. Sometimes, regardless 
of  environmental  manipulation,  there  is  still  loss  of  product. 
Metabolomics  is  being  increasingly  used  to  understand  the 
biochemical basis of these traits and to identify relevant steps 
in  the  pathways  for  manipulation.  Treatments  for  preserving 
shelf life (e.g., exposure to UV treatment; Rudell et al., 2008) 
and  modifying  CO2  and  O2  levels  (Franck  et  al.,  2004)  also 
affect  the  metabolome.  Singling  out  the  altered  metabolites 
that  change  in  a  manner  coincident  with  the  treatment  may 
present  targeted  genetic  strategies  to  augment  environmen-
tal  manipulation.  In  addition,  analyses  of  volatiles  have  been 
used  to  detect  postharvest  disease  during  storage  of  onions 
(Prithiviraj et al., 2004), mangoes (Moalemiyan et al., 2006), 
and apples (Li et al., 2007). This information could help ship-
pers remove bad batches and preserve the core of the crop.

Chemicals  also  underscore  fruit  and  vegetable  flavor  and 
their complex interaction may make one fruit more desirable 
than  another.  Metabolomics  will  feature  prominently  when 
identifying  these  compounds,  allowing  biologists  to  establish 
a baseline for understanding flavor. It may then be possible to 
develop tools to definitively tag fruit and vegetables in terms 
of quality and, with functional genomics approaches, identify 

genes  that  underscore  the  latter  (Hall,  2007).  For  exam-
ple,  broad  surveys  of  aromas  and  secondary  metabolites  of  a 
tomato mapping population have been undertaken (Bermudez 
et  al.,  2008).  Correlations  with  the  levels  of  specific  com-
pounds  and  fruits  classified  as  desirable  by  sensory  panels 
were found (Zanor et al., 2009). This kind of study may make 
it possible to rely less heavily on sensory panels in evaluating 
horticultural  crops.  In  addition,  cheap,  user-friendly,  “elec-
tronic noses,” such as gas sensor devices that can detect vol-
atiles  (Kende  et  al.,  2010),  are  being  used  to  indicate  peak 
ripeness (Zhang et al., 2008).

Stress responses

Plants have evolved very elaborate basal and acquired mecha-
nisms  to  deal  with  biotic  (insect,  bacteria,  fungi,  and  viral 
attack)  and  abiotic  stress  (cold,  frost,  heat,  drought,  salin-
ity).  Abiotic  stress  alone  costs  millions  of  dollars  in  agricul-
tural  losses  each  year  (Mittler,  2006),  and  problems  with 
heat  and  drought  stress  are  forecast  to  be  amplified  due  to 
global warming in a report from a workshop held by the U.S. 
Department  of  Energy  Office  of  Science  (http://genomic-
science.energy.gov/carboncycle/response.pdf).  This  topic  has 
been  extensively  reviewed  and  is  the  subject  of  Chapter  18, 
so it will be treated only superficially here.

Exposure  to  stress  causes,  among  other  things,  metabolic 
dysfunction  in  plants.  Several  soluble,  neutral  organic  com-
pounds,  such  as  polyols,  amino  acids,  quaternary  ammonium 
compounds,  and/or  tertiary  sulfonium  compounds  (compat-
ible solutes), are altered when plants are placed in unfavorable 
conditions  (Bohnert  et  al.,  1995).  Changes  in  these  com-
pounds can be quantified through metabolite profiling (Bowne 
et al., 2010).

Plant responses to stress may be divided into primary and 
secondary events (Orr and Raison, 1990). Primary events are 
those  that  are  the  direct  result  of  the  initial  signals  propa-
gated  from  the  stress  condition,  and  may  be  protective  or 
adaptive. Secondary events are time-dependent, downstream 
symptoms  of  the  dysfunction.  The  knowledge  derived  from 
studying both periods can be informative. In our lab we stud-
ied  the  primary  metabolic  events  during  postharvest  chill-
ing  stress  in  fruit  from Solanum  lycopersicum  cv.  Micro-Tom. 
Tomato fruits stored below 10°C can be damaged and unsal-
able  (Luengwilai  and  Beckles,  2010).  We  measured  changes 
in membrane permeability (a sensitive way to detect response 
to chilling) before, during, and after the introduction of cold 
stress and, at the time points when membrane ion leakage was 
initiated,  GC-MS  sampling  was  used  to  correlate  metabolite 
changes with the trait of interest. Approximately 15% of the 
metabolome was altered, even though morphological effect of 
the stress was not manifested in the fruit until 14 days later 
(Luengwilai et al., 2011).

In the real world plants may face an onslaught of unfavo-
rable conditions with each stress occurring with variable tim-
ing  and  intensity.  For  example,  high  solar  irradiation  often 
accompanies high temperatures, which together reduce water 
availability and increase soil electrical conductivity. However, 
metabolomics  has  been  very  useful  in  understanding  the 

74

Plant metabolomics: Applications and opportunities for agricultural biotechnology

C H A P T E R   5

physiology  of  the  plant  stress  response.  Using  this  approach 
we have learned that in Arabidopsis heat and cold stress cause 
some  similar,  overlapping  responses  (Kaplan  et  al.,  2004), 
but the effects of two or more stresses on the levels of path-
way components cannot be predicted by studying each stress 
individually  (Mittler,  2006;  Mittler  and  Blumwald,  2010). 
We  have  further  learned  that  landraces  may  tolerate  abiotic 
stress better than commercial cultivars by accumulating a dif-
ferent spectrum of compatible solutes (Widodo et al., 2009), 
although  how  widespread  this  mechanism  is  will  need  to  be 
examined further. Plant scientists have even been able to iso-
late marker metabolites associated with freezing tolerance in 
Arabidopsis (Korn et al., 2010).

Less  is  known  about  the  metabolic  responses  of  plants  to 
biotic stress. The general approach is to separately analyze the 
metabolomes of the tissue to be infected (host) and the path-
ogen of interest and then analyze the metabolomes of both in 
a  time-course  series  after  infection.  In  this  way  metabolites 
deployed  for  plant  defense  and  pathogen  virulence  may  be 
identified.  As  proof  of  concept  ESI-MS  profiling  of  a  resist-
ant  and  a  sensitive  cultivar  of  Brachypodium  before  and 
after  Magnaporthe  grisea  infection  was  performed  to  iden-
tify  metabolites  that  underscore  the  differential  response. 
Phospholipid  levels  correlated  to  the  differences  in  symp-
tomology  and  were  implicated  in  defense  (in  resistant  culti-
var) or progression (in the susceptible cultivar) of the disease 
(Allwood  et  al.,  2010).  There  is  also  evidence  that  different 
pathogenic  agents,  such  as  fungus,  bacteria,  and  viroids,  will 
each induce a specific catalog of metabolites upon host infec-
tion (Lopez-Gresa et al., 2009).

Functional genomics

Functional genomics is the study of the physiological and bio-
chemical  consequences  of  gene  function  and  interactions.  It 
is  well  accepted  that  metabolomics  can  inform  on  changes  in 
gene expression in more direct ways than methods that gauge 
levels  of  mRNA  or  polypeptides  (Fiehn,  2004).  Transcripts 
and proteins are modified in response to a myriad of regulatory 
mechanisms  so  that  their  accumulated  levels  may  not  reflect 
their  relative  importance  at  that  time  and  place.  Metabolite 
levels  are  determined  by  a  culmination  of  high-order  regula-
tory signals and are closer to the phenotype than DNA, RNA, 
or protein. To identify genes that encode enzymes or regulatory 
molecules that determine metabolite levels, gene-to-metabolite 
networks  can  be  drawn  (Moreno-Risueno  et  al.,  2010).  From 
such a dataset, transcript changes that correlate with metabo-
lite  changes  implicate  a  causal  relationship.  Several  important 
papers  in  which  genes  that  control  commercially  important 
compounds have been identified have been published recently 
(Rischer  and  Oksman-Caldentey,  2006;  Rischer  et  al.,  2007; 
Saito et al., 2008). More detailed studies have been reviewed 
by Saito and Matsuda (2010).

The  genome  of  Arabidopsis  was  the  first  of  any  flowering 
plant  to  be  fully  sequenced  (Arabidopsis  Genome  Initiative, 
2000). However, 40–60% of genes have not been functionally 
annotated.  To  tackle  this,  a  global  program  has  been  estab-
lished  to  undertake  a  systematic  genome-wide  functional 

screen to identify and validate the function of all of the genes 
in  the  plant.  The  Arabidopsis  Metabolomics  Consortium 
(http://tht.vrac.iastate.edu:81/index.php),  supported  by  the 
National  Science  Foundation  (NSF),  is  part  of  this  global 
program  and  has  brought  together  a  number  of  expert  labo-
ratories  in  plant  metabolomics,  utilizing  as  many  analytical 
platforms  as  possible,  with  the  goal  of  elucidating  the  entire 
metabolic complement of Arabidopsis. The aim is to analyze 
in great detail as many Arabidopsis lines as possible that carry 
mutations in genes of which the functions are not fully under-
stood.  The  resulting  metabolomics  data  will  then  be  inte-
grated with the results of transcript, protein, and phenotypic 
analyses,  enhancing  the  generation  of  hypotheses  about  gene 
functions.  All  of  the  data  generated  are  stored  in  a  publicly 
available database freely accessible by researchers for utility in 
their research areas (Bais et al., 2010).

Breeding and metabolite quantitative  
trait loci

Variations  in  an  agronomic  trait  between  related  species  are 
often  due  to  differences  in  the  cumulative  actions  of  multi-
ple  gene  products.  The  genes  encoding  these  quantitative 
traits or quantitative trait loci (QTLs), may reside on differ-
ent  chromosomes,  but  their  products  work  together  as  part 
of  a  regulatory,  perception,  metabolic,  or  transduction  path-
way to determine a phenotype. Metabolomics, however, may 
provide  a  useful  strategy  for  linking  phenotypes  to  QTLs 
(Kliebenstein,  2007;  Fernie  and  Schauer,  2009;  Keurentjes, 
2009).  Specific  regions  of  the  genome  that  co-localize  with 
changes  in  metabolite  levels  can  be  classified  as  metabolite 
QTLs  (mQTLs).  Traditionally  differences  in  easily  scored 
phenotypes  such  as  seed  mass,  plant  height,  and  fruit  lyco-
pene were used as markers and now, DNA sequence is more 
commonly  used.  Using  metabolites  as  phenotypes  presents 
many  advantages.  Metabolomics  approaches  are  not  con-
strained  by  the  need  for  the  sequence  of  an  entire  genome 
and,  at  the  present,  are  a  cheaper  platform  than  DNA 
sequencing technologies (Fernie and Schauer, 2009). Perhaps 
the best example comes from work by Schauer et al. (2006). 
A  mapping  population  consisting  of  76  individuals  was  pro-
duced  by  a  cross  between  the  wild  Solanum  pennellii  and  S. 
lycopersicum  cv.  “M82.”  Segments  of  the  M82  genome  were 
introgressed  into  homologous  regions  of  the  wild  species, 
which  made  it  possible  to  assign  loci  underlying  contrasting 
agronomic,  physiological,  and  molecular  traits  (Lippman  and 
Zamir,  2007).  Fruit  and  leaves  from  each  individual  and  the 
parental  lines  were  profiled  using  GC-MS  and  data  on  dif-
ferent agronomic traits were collected. Schauer et al. (2006) 
detected 889 mQTLs, with approximately half of them influ-
encing  yield-related  traits  and  several  of  them  influencing 
entire  metabolic  networks.  Single  mQTLs  that  may  regulate 
or control malate levels, which influence tomato fruit quality, 
were  also  found  (Schauer  et  al.,  2006).  This  intersection  of 
quantitative  genetics  and  metabolomics  is  very  powerful  and 
presents  such  unique  possibilities  for  plant  breeding  that  we 
anticipate rapid growth in the coming years.

75

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Metabolomics: Challenges and  
Future Perspectives

Our understanding of metabolism has benefited tremendously 
from progress made via the field of metabolomics. However, 
there  are  several  issues  that  will  have  to  be  adequately 
resolved  to  definitively  characterize  plant  metabolomes  and 
apply  that  knowledge  for  precise  genetic  manipulation  of 
plants.  These  limitations  are  not  insurmountable  and  can  be 
overcome  provided  that  adequate  resources  are  available. 
Indeed, recent publications indicate that steps are being taken 
to redress these issues.

From model organisms to crop plants

Our  food  comes  from  approximately  3000  different  spe-
cies  with  8  —  namely  rice,  wheat,  barley,  maize,  potato, 
tomato,  soybean,  and  pea  —  providing  90%  of  our  calories 
and  nutrients  (Bowne  et  al.,  2010),  yet  it  is  the  weedy  lab 
model Arabidopsis that has been most extensively character-
ized  with  respect  to  the  metabolome  (Okuda  et  al.,  2008; 
Matsuda  et  al.,  2010).  Even  among  related  organisms,  such 
as  cereal  grains,  GC-MS  profiles  of  polar  metabolites  (pri-
mary  compounds)  can  be  easily  differentiated  to  the  point 
where  it  has  been  suggested  that  metabolomics  can  be  used 
to fingerprint individual crops or even cultivars (Arbona et al., 
2009; Roessner and Bowne, 2009). The comparative genom-
ics  approach  that  leverages  information  directly  from  model 
species  to  others  of  economic  value  may  be  of  limited  value 
in  understanding  varied  metabolomes.  Metabolic  atlases  for 
plant species of economic importance may need to be devel-
oped. Knowledge on how to efficiently optimize extractions, 
profiling technologies, data-mining techniques, and metabolic 
databases such as AraCyc (Mueller et al., 2003) gained from 
studies in Arabidopsis, and other model species will undoubt-
edly  be  applied  to  less  studied  but  agriculturally  important 
species.

Compartmentation of plant metabolism

in  the  tuber  vacuoles,  but  that  their  concentrations  are  high-
est in the cytosol (Farre et al., 2008). This information can be 
used to determine the potential activation state of enzymes in 
each compartment and help to develop transgenic approaches 
for modifying enzyme activity.

High-resolution sampling

Most metabolite profiling is done on crude extracts of a single 
type  of  tissue,  but  often  these  tissues  consist  of  a  heteroge-
neous  collection  of  different  cell  types  with  varying  func-
tions  and  presumably,  with  different  catalogs  of  metabolites. 
Homogenization  therefore  damps  metabolite  signals  associ-
ated with specialized cell types within the tissue. Two broad 
approaches  are  being  taken  to  map  the  distribution  of  cel-
lular  metabolites  (Moco  et  al.,  2009).  One  uses  laser  micro-
dissection for precision harvesting of a population of specific 
cell types the unique chemical composition of which is then 
determined  using  conventional  approaches  (Schad  et  al., 
2005).  This  “micro”  view  of  metabolites  was  used  to  study 
secretory  cavities  in  Dilatris  and  led  to  the  identification  of 
a  “novel”  class  of  compounds  called  methoxyphenylphenal-
enones (Schneider and Holscher, 2007). The other approach 
uses MS to image metabolites in situ in different sections of 
the tissue (Svatos, 2010); for example, waxes in Arabidopsis 
leaf epidermis have been profiled (Jun et al., 2010) as well as 
the epicuticular layer of Arabidopsis leaf cuticle and the sec-
ondary compounds in herbal species (Ng et al., 2007).

Individual  cells  within  a  tissue  may  also  have  diverse 
metabolomes. In addition to having different functions, they 
may  be  at  different  stages  of  the  cell  cycle  and  can  even  be 
exposed  to  distinct  microenvironments,  each  producing 
unique metabolic consequences, as compared to adjacent cells 
(Kehr,  2003).  Single-cell  metabolite  profiling  would  offer 
even  richer  information,  but  is  hindered  by  the  relatively 
small size of plant cells and the rigidity of the cell wall. Still, 
such  high-resolution  measurements  are  now  possible.  Vertes 
and  colleagues  recently  obtained  metabolite  profiles  of  indi-
vidual  cells  from  onion  and  lily  bulb  epidermis  and  maize 
roots  showing  that  each  had  distinct  profiles  (Shrestha  and 
Vertes, 2009; Day et al., 2010).

Plant  metabolism  is  highly  compartmented.  The  presence  of 
several  organelles,  each  performing  specific  physiological  and 
metabolic roles, shows developmental plasticity, which means 
that  their  in  situ  metabolic  pool  sizes  will  vary  within  a  cell 
and  be  dependent  on  the  developmental  stage.  Knowing  the 
amount  of  metabolites  in  the  compartment  helps  to  deter-
mine if its content is sufficient to participate in the metabolic 
process of that organelle or cell. This information is critical for 
accurate pathway engineering. It is not trivial to obtain quan-
tities of relatively pure fractions of subcellular organelles ade-
quate  for  analysis.  Non-aqueous  subcellular  fractionation  can 
be  used  to  separate  organelles  and  is  technically  easier  with 
non-bulky tissues such as leaves (Winter et al., 1993; Benkeblia 
et al., 2009), but great progress has also been made with hith-
erto difficult organs such as tubers (Farre et al., 2001, 2008). 
Use  of  this  technique  in  combination  with  GC-MS  revealed 
that most organic and amino acids and sugars are sequestered 

Primary and secondary metabolism pose 
different challenges

Primary  metabolism  may  be  subjected  to  complex  regulatory 
controls  to  ensure  adequate  growth  and  metabolism.  This  is 
consistent  with  the  idea  of  primary  metabolism  as  the  GSC 
consisting  of  major  hubs  (Figure  5.1).  Metabolites  in  this  hub 
include simple sugars and nitrogen compounds that are potent 
regulators of gene expression (Koch, 1996; Coruzzi and Zhou, 
2001;  Rolland  et  al.,  2006).  If  linkages  within  this  hub  are 
altered  by  genetic  or  environmental  perturbation  then  one  of 
two  outcomes  may  be  envisaged.  The  system  may  be  able  to 
buffer against the perturbation and maintain homeostasis or, if a 
“vulnerable” step has been targeted in the hub, then other con-
nections will be altered, many of which may directly affect nor-
mal growth, likely leading to reduced fitness. Therefore while 

76

Plant metabolomics: Applications and opportunities for agricultural biotechnology

C H A P T E R   5

compounds  of  primary  metabolism  are  more  abundant  and  as 
such easier to assay, it is not trivial to purposefully manipulate 
their  levels.  When  all  of  the  evidence  of  the  past  10  years  is 
taken  together,  there  are  more  examples  of  genetic  engineer-
ing  experiments  designed  to  increase  sugars,  starch,  proteins, 
and  amino  acids  without  negatively  changing  yield  that  have 
failed,  than  have  succeeded  (Smith,  2008;  Morandini,  2009; 
Stitt  et  al.,  2010).  Metabolomics,  however,  has  made  it  pos-
sible to refine our understanding of the control and regulation 
of metabolism. Organisms with “silent phenotypes,” those that 
have been genetically modified but show no visible symptoms, 
can be probed to discover how the perturbation was buffered 
(Weckwerth et al., 2004; Stamova et al., 2009). However, only 
when all of the regulatory mechanisms that act on chromatin, 
DNA, RNA, protein and enzyme activity, cooperative binding, 
and post-translational modifications are identified, will we have 
an accurate portrayal of the regulation of metabolism.

In contrast to primary metabolism, there has been consid-
erable  success  in  changing  the  levels  of  secondary  metabo-
lites. The nutraceutical profiles of foods have been improved, 
volatiles  and  pigmentation  in  fruit  and  flowers  have  been 
altered,  chemicals  have  been  introduced  that  provide  protec-
tion  against  pathogen  attack,  and  the  potency  of  medicinal 
agents  have  been  amplified  (Itkin  and  Aharoni,  2009).  The 
bow-tie structure predicts fewer constraints from the GSC on 
secondary  metabolites  (Figure  5.1).  This  does  not  mean  that 
engineering  the  levels  of  secondary  metabolites  is  easy.  The 
genes that encode many of the enzymatic steps are unknown; 
the  metabolites  are  structurally  complex  and  occur  at  low 
levels  and,  often,  only  transiently.  There  is  a  high  energetic 
cost  for  the  construction  of  intricate  chemical  compounds  in 
planta  and  production  must  provide  a  clear  cost-benefit  ratio 
for  the  plant  (Kliebenstein,  2009).  Tampering  with  these 
mechanisms  that  have  evolved  over  millions  of  years  does 
not always produce the anticipated response under field con-
ditions.  Metabolomics  can  be  a  useful  tool  for  improving  the 
success of these experiments. Many of the functional genomics 
approaches  combining  transcriptomics  and  targeted  metabo-
lomics have led to the identification of new gene targets (see 
the section Functional Genomics).

Identifying the metabolome

The sheer number of different metabolites analyzed with bet-
ter instrumentation that has greater sensitivity and detection 
speed  has  resulted  in  datasets  containing  numerous  metabo-
lites that are unknown with respect to their chemical nature. 
Still, about 60–80% of all signals detected in a profiling exper-
iment,  using  both  GC-MS  and  LC-MS  platforms,  cannot  be 
assigned  a  name.  Although  the  increased  mass  resolution  of 
newer mass spectrometers (e.g., QTOF, Orbitrap, or FT-ICR 
technologies; see Table 5.1) offers the opportunity to estimate 
sum formulars from a detected molecular ion, those sum for-
mulars can still be translated into a number of potential struc-
tures.  The  development  of  mass  spectral  libraries  is  crucial 
for the deciphering of unknown structures; a number of these 
libraries are now available either commercially or in the public 
domain (Table 5.2).

Additionally, to accurately record the compounds in a mass 
spectral library, researchers and vendors have started to record 
retention times under well-defined chromatographic and ioni-
zation  conditions  that  will  further  enhance  peak  identifica-
tions.  The  utilization  of  mass  spectral  fragmentation  patterns 
of  a  particular  chemical  structure  (tandem  MS)  is  also  criti-
cal  for  attaining  unambiguous  peak  identifications.  However, 
it  will  be  some  time  before  libraries  will  be  comprehensive 
enough for compound identifications based on accurate mass, 
retention  time,  and  mass  spectral  fragmentation  pattern. 
Currently  there  are  enormous  efforts  underway  to  estab-
lish  high-throughput  approaches  to  enhance  identifications  of 
unknown  peaks  in  various  biological  systems.  Also,  new  soft-
ware  tools,  designed  to  predict  the  chromatographic  behav-
ior  and  fragmentation  pattern  of  any  metabolite  predicted 
to  occur  in  a  biological  extract,  are  under  development  (e.g., 
see  Hummel  et  al.,  2010  for  GC-MS  and  Schulz-Trieglaff 
et  al.,  2008  for  LC-MS).  It  is  now  time  to  coordinate  these 
efforts and collate and structure the information for best uti-
lization by any metabolomics researcher. The first attempt at 
such a collaborative effort is MassBank (Horai et al., 2010), a 
Japanese initiative inviting other participants from around the 
world  to  contribute  to  a  publicly  available  metabolite  mass 
spectral library.

Measurements of metabolic flux

Metabolism  may  be  seen  as  consisting  of  two  separate 
entities  —  concentration  and  flux  (Wiechert  et  al.,  2007). 
However,  steady-state  levels  of  metabolites  generated  by 
metabolomics  tell  nothing  of  metabolic  flux.  This  is  perhaps 
the most serious hindrance to a biochemist’s ability to under-
stand  metabolism  in  plant  organs.  We  have  already  discussed 
how difficult it is to accurately measure intracellular concentra-
tions of metabolites (see sections Compartmentation of Plant 
Metabolism  and  High-Resolution  Sampling)  and  that  at  best 
we  are  surveying  the  average  contents  of  different  metabolite 
pools. Real-time momentary changes in fluxes are even harder 
to  gauge,  especially  in  plants,  because  of  compartmentation, 
enzyme  multiplicity,  and  high  cellular  water  content  (Morgan 
and  Rhodes,  2002;  Weitzel  et  al.,  2007;  Wiechert,  2007; 
Wiechert et al., 2007; Droste et al., 2008; Kruger and Ratcliffe, 
2008; Allen et al., 2009; Schryer et al., 2009). In spite of the 
challenges associated with making flux measurements, a recent 
advancement was made in looking at metabolic flux in cell wall 
biosynthesis, a process that is very poorly understood but is of 
great  interest  for  the  generation  of  cellulosic  biofuels.  MRM-
based  quantitative  LC-MS  was  used  to  separate  compounds 
that are intermediates of cell wall synthesis, and this was cou-
pled  with  dynamic  labeling  using  13C-sucrose  to  monitor  the 
flux of the label from sucrose to cell wall (Alonso et al., 2010).
A further complication is that flux may also be controlled 
by metabolic channeling. This occurs when the product of one 
enzymatic reaction is quickly transferred or channeled to the 
active site of the next enzyme in the pathway. Enzyme partici-
pants  are  organized  as  macromolecular  complexes  described 
as  metabolons  (Srere,  1985)  wherein  they  are  physically 
but  temporarily  associated  with  each  other.  These  enzyme 

77

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

aggregates result in quasi-compartmentalization in the cytosol 
(Jorgensen et al., 2005) and conceivably would facilitate the 
rapid  movement  of  metabolites  by  reducing  free  diffusion. 
The association/dissociation constants of these macromolecu-
lar  complexes  would  then  be  important  regulatory  factors  in 
determining  pathway  flux  (Srere,  1985).  There  are  several 
examples  of  this  phenomenon  in  plants,  such  as  the  Calvin 
cycle  (Winkel,  2004)  and  tryptophan,  phenylpropanoid,  cya-
nogenic  glucoside,  isoprenoid,  flavonoid,  and  alkaloid  biosyn-
thesis  (Jorgensen  et  al.,  2005;  Winkel,  2009).  Judging  from 
the number of recent publications on this subject, we may be 
underestimating the extent to which metabolism is regulated 
in this manner.

fluxes will undoubtedly lead to better information generated 
from metabolomics. The use of multiple analytical platforms, 
better  compound  identification,  and  new  enhanced  data-
mining strategies will permit the full exploitation of metabo-
lite  profiles.  We  have  outlined  current  uses  of  metabolomics 
in  support  of  the  development  of  agricultural  biotechnology 
and some of the new advancements in these areas. We argue 
that  collaborations  between  researchers  around  the  globe 
will be crucial to enable the seamless integration of informa-
tion obtained from metabolomics experiments in each of the 
research areas (e.g., same crop, same stress condition, similar 
gene  transformation),  and  to  coordinate  research  efforts  for 
the  most  successful  outcomes  in  developing  stronger  crops 
and better quality plant products.

Outlook

Acknowledgments

Metabolomics  is  being  established  as  an  indispensable  tool 
for  all  facets  of  biology.  It  is  driving  knowledge-creation  and 
the  invention  of  new  technologies  to  meet  the  multitude  of 
challenges  that  face  agricultural  production.  Progress  in  the 
use  of  metabolic  QTLs  and  functional  genomics  approaches 
undoubtedly will generate new targets that could drive future 
breeding strategies and create solutions for preventing loss of 
crops  postharvest.  The  widespread  adoption  of  efficient  and 
smart  technologies  for  high-resolution  sampling  and  imaging 
of metabolites coupled with the ability to monitor metabolic 

Ute Roessner is thankful for support from both the Australian 
Centre  for  Plant  Functional  Genomics  and  Metabolomics 
Australia.  Work  in  Diane  Beckles'  lab  is  supported  by  the 
National  Science  Foundation  Grant  MCB-06211,  University 
of  California  Hatch  projects  CA-D*-PLS-7198-H,  and 
CA-D*-PLS-7821-H  and  grants  from  the  Metabolomic 
Core  University  of  California  Davis  Genome  Center.  Both 
authors are indebted to Dr. Belinda Martineau for her helpful 
comments.

References

Allen, D. K., Libourel, I. G. L., & Shachar-Hill, 
Y. (2009). Metabolic flux analysis in plants: 
Coping with complexity. Plant Cell and 
Environment, 32, 1241–1257.

Allwood, J. W., Clarke, A., Goodacre, R., & 
Mur, L. A. J. (2010). Dual metabolomics: 
A novel approach to understanding plant-
pathogen interactions. Phytochemistry, 71, 
590–597.

Alonso, A. P., Piasecki, R. J., Wang, Y., LaClair, 

R. W., & Shachar-Hill, Y.  
(2010). Quantifying the labeling and the 
levels of plant cell wall precursors using  
ion chromatography tandem mass 
spectrometry. Plant Physiology, 153, 
915–924.

Anastasiadi, M., Zira, A., Magiatis, P., 

Haroutounian, S. A., Skaltsounis, A. L., 
& Mikros, E. (2009). H-1 NMR-based 
metabolomics for the classification of 
greek wines according to variety, region 
and vintage. Comparison with HPLC data. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
57, 11067–11074.

Arabidopsis Genome Initiative. (2000). Analysis 

of the genome sequence of the flowering 
plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature, 408, 
796–815.

Arbona, V., Iglesias, D. J., Talon, M., & Gomez-

Cadenas, A. (2009). Plant phenotype 
demarcation using nontargeted LC-MS 
and GC-MS metabolite profiling. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 57, 
7338–7347.

Arneberg, R., Rajalahti, T., Flikka, K., Berven, F. 

S., Kroksveen, A. C., &  
Berle, M., et al. (2007). Pretreatment 
of mass spectral profiles: Application to 
proteomic data. Analytical Chemistry, 79, 
7014–7026.

Bais, P., Moon, S. M., He, K., Leitao, R., 
Dreher, K., & Walk, T., et al. (2010). 
PlantMetabolomics.org: A webportal for 
plant metabolomics experiments. Plant 
Physiology, 152, 1807–1816.

Baker, J. M., Hawkins, N. D., Ward, J. L., 

Lovegrove, A., Napier, J. A., &  
Shewry, P. R., et al. (2006). A metabolomic 
study of substantial equivalence of field-
grown genetically modified wheat. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 4, 381–392.

Beale, M. H., Ward, J. L., & Baker, J. M. 

(2009). Establishing substantial equivalence: 
Metabolomics. Methods Molecular Biology, 
478, 289–303.

Beckles, D. M. (2011). Factors affecting 

the postharvest sugar content of tomato 
Solanum lycopersicum L. fruit. Postharvest 
Biology and Technology. In press. doi: 
10.1016/j.postharvbio.2011.05.016.

Beckles, D. M., Stamova, L., & Luengwilai, K. 
(2011). Factors controlling tomato Solanum 
lycopersicum L. fruit sugar accumulation. 
Postharvest Biology and Technology 
(Submitted)

Benkeblia, N., Shinano, T., & Osaki, M. (2009). 

Metabolite profiling and assessment of 
metabolome compartmentation of soybean 

leaves using non-aqueous fractionation and 
GC-MS analysis. Metabolomics, 3, 297–305.

Bermudez, L., Urias, U., Milstein, D., 

Kamenetzky, L., Asis, R., & Fernie, A. R., 
et al. (2008). A candidate gene survey of 
quantitative trait loci affecting chemical 
composition in tomato fruit. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 59, 2875–2890.

Bohnert, H. J., Nelson, D. E., & Jensen, R. 

G. (1995). Adaptations to environmental 
stresses. The Plant Cell, 7, 1099–1111.

Bollard, M. E., Stanley, E. G., Lindon, J. C., 

Nicholson, J. K., & Holmes, E. (2005). 
NMR-based metabolomic approaches 
for evaluating physiological influences on 
biofluid composition. NMR Biomedical, 18, 
143–162.

Bowne, J., Bacic, A., Tester, M., & Roessner, U. 

(2010). Abiotic Stress and Metabolomics. 
In R. D. Hall (Ed.), Annual plant reviews: 
The biology of plant metabolomics. Wiley-
Blackwell. (In Press)

Callahan, D. L., De Souza, D., Bacic, A., & 

Roessner, U. (2009). Profiling of polar 
metabolites in biological extracts using 
diamond hydride-based aqueous normal 
phase chromatography. Journal of Separation 
Science, 32, 2273–2280.

Camacho, D., de la Fuente, A., & Mendes, 
P. (2005). The origin of correlations in 
metabolomics data. Metabolomics, 1, 53–63.

Catchpole, G. S., Beckmann, M., Enot, D. 

P., Mondhe, M., Zywicki, B., & Taylor, J., 
et al. (2005). Hierarchical metabolomics 

78

Plant metabolomics: Applications and opportunities for agricultural biotechnology

C H A P T E R   5

demonstrates substantial compositional 
similarity between genetically modified and 
conventional potato crops. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States America, 102, 11458–14462.
Cellini, F., Chesson, A., Colquhoun, I., 

Constable, A., Davies, H. V., & Engel, 
K. H., et al. (2004). Unintended effects 
and their detection in genetically modified 
crops. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 42, 
1089–1125.

Coruzzi, G. M., & Zhou, L. (2001). Carbon 

and nitrogen sensing and signaling in plants: 
Emerging “matrix effects”. Current Opinion 
in Plant Biology, 4, 247–253.

Day, J.A., Shrestha, B., Nemes, P. and Vertes, 
A. (2010) Metabolic profiling of corn (Zea 
mays) roots by mid infrared laser ablation 
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. 
Proceedings of the 58th ASMS Conference 
on Mass Spectrometry and Allied Topics, 
Salt Lake City, Utah.

Droste, P., Weitzel, M., & Wiechert, W. (2008). 

Visual exploration of isotope labeling 
networks in 3D. Bioprocess and Biosystems 
Engineering, 31, 227–239.

Farre, E. M., Fernie, A. R., & Willmitzer, L. 

(2008). Analysis of subcellular metabolite 
levels of potato tubers (Solanum 
tuberosum) displaying alterations in cellular 
or extracellular sucrose metabolism. 
Metabolomics, 4, 161–170.

Farre, E. M., Tiessen, A., Roessner, U., 
Geigenberger, P., Trethewey, R. N., 
& Willmitzer, L. (2001). Analysis of 
the compartmentation of glycolytic 
intermediates, nucleotides, sugars, organic 
acids, amino acids, and sugar alcohols 
in potato tubers using a nonaqueous 
fractionation method. Plant Physiology, 127, 
685–700.

Fernie, A., & Schauer, N. (2009). 

Metabolomics-assisted breeding: A viable 
option for crop improvement? Trends in 
Genetics, 25, 39–48.

Fiehn, O. (2001). Combining genomics, 

metabolome analysis, and biochemical 
modelling to understand metabolic 
networks. Comparative and Functional 
Genomics, 2, 155–168.

Fiehn, O. (2004). High throughput metabolite 
profiling for functional genomics. Plant and 
Cell Physiology, 45 S7-S7

Forsythe, I. J., & Wishart, D. S. (2009). 

Exploring human metabolites using the 
human metabolome database. Current 
Protocols in Bioinformatics (Chapter 
14:Unit14.8)

Franck, C., Lammertyn, J., & Nicolai, B. 

(2004). Metabolic profiling using GC-MS to 
study biochemical changes during long-term 
storage of pears. Acta Horticulturae, 682, 
1991–1998.

Grafahrend-Belau, E., Junker, B. H., Klukas, 

C., Koschutzki, D., Schreiber, F., & 
Schwobbermeyer, H. (2009). Topology of 
Plant Metabolic Networks. In J. Schwender 
(Ed.), Plant metabolic networks (pp. 173–
210). Heidelberg: Springer.

Griffiths, W. J., & Wang, Y. (2009). Mass 

spectrometry: From proteomics to 
metabolomics and lipidomics. Chemical 
Society Reviews, 38, 1882–1896.

Hall, R. D. (2007). Food metabolomic:  

META-PHOR a new European research 
initiative. AgroFood Industry Hi-Tech, 18, 
14–16.

Herberich, E., Sikorski, J., & Hothorn, T. 

(2010). A robust procedure for comparing 
multiple means under heteroscedasticity 
in unbalanced designs. Public Library of 
Science One, 5, e9788.

Hoffmann, E., & Stroobant, V. (2007). Mass 
Spectrometry, principles and applications. 
Wiley.

Horai, H., Arita, M., Kanaya, S., Nihei, 

Y., Ikeda, T., & Suwa, K., et al. (2010). 
MassBank: A public repository for sharing 
mass spectral data for life sciences. Journal 
of Mass Spectrometry, 45, 703–714.

Hummel, J., Strehmel, N., Selbig, J., 

Walther, D., & Kopka, J. (2010). Decision 
tree supported substructure prediction 
of metabolites from GC-MS profiles. 
Metabolomics, 6, 322–333.

Itkin, M., & Aharoni, A. (2009). Bioengineering. 

In A. E. Osbourne & V. Lanzotti (Eds.), 
Plant-derived natural products 
(pp. 435–473). Heidelberg: Springer.

Ivanova, P. T., Milne, S. B., Myers, D. S., & 

Brown, H. A. (2009). Lipidomics: A mass 
spectrometry based systems level analysis of 
cellular lipids. Current Opinion of Chemical 
Biology, 13, 526–531.

Jacobs, A., Lunde, C., Bacic, A., Tester, M., 

& Roessner, U. (2007). The impact of 
constitutive expression of a moss Na 
transporter on the metabolomes of rice and 
barley. Metabolomics, 3, 307–317.

Jiang, H. L., Xie, Z. Z., Koo, H. J., McLaughlin, 

S. P., Timmermann, B. N., & Gang, D. R. 
(2006). Metabolic profiling and phylogenetic 
analysis of medicinal Zingiber species: 
Tools for authentication of ginger (Zingiber 
officinale Rosc.). Phytochemistry, 
67, 1673–1685.

Jorgensen, K., Rasmussen, A. V., Morant, M., 

Nielsen, A. H., Bjarnholt, N., & Zagrobelny, 
M., et al. (2005). Metabolon formation and 
metabolic channeling in the biosynthesis of 
plant natural products. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology, 8, 280–291.

Jun, J. H., Song, Z. H., Liu, Z. J., Nikolau, B. 

J., Yeung, E. S., & Lee,  
Y. J. (2010). High-spatial and high-mass 
resolution imaging of surface metabolites of 
Arabidopsis thaliana by laser desorption-
ionization mass spectrometry using colloidal 
silver. Analytical Chemistry, 82, 3255–3265.

Junker, B. H., Klukas, C., & Schreiber, F. 

(2006). VANTED: A system for advanced 
data analysis and visualization in the context 
of biological networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 
7, 109.

Kaplan, F., Kopka, J., Haskell, D. W., Zhao, 

W., Schiller, K. C., & Gatzke, N., et 
al. (2004). Exploring the temperature-
stress metabolome of Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiology, 136, 4159–4168.

Katajamaa, M., Miettinen, J., & Oresic, M. 
(2006). MZmine: Toolbox for processing 
and visualization of mass spectrometry based 
molecular profile data. Bioinformatics, 22, 
634–636.

Katajamaa, M., & Oresic, M. (2007). Data 
processing for mass spectrometry-based 

metabolomics. Journal of Chromatography 
A, 27, 318–328.

Kehr, J. (2003). Single cell technology. Current 

Opinion in Plant Biology, 6, 617–621.

Kende, A., Portwood, D., Senior, A., Earll, M., 

Bolygo, E., & Seymour, M. (2010). Target 
list building for volatile metabolite profiling 
of fruit. Journal of Chromatography A 
(Ahead of publication)

Keurentjes, J. J. B. (2009). Genetical 

metabolomics: Closing in on phenotypes. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 12, 
223–230.

Kind, T., Wohlgemuth, G., Lee do, Y., Lu, 
Y., Palazoglu, M., & Shahbaz, O., et al. 
(2009). FiehnLib: Mass spectral and 
retention index libraries for metabolomics 
based on quadrupole and time-of-flight 
gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. 
Analytical Chemistry, 15, 10038–10048.

Kitteringham, N. R., Jenkins, R. E., Lane, C. S., 
Elliott, V. L., & Park, B. K. (2009). Multiple 
reaction monitoring for quantitative 
biomarker analysis in proteomics and 
metabolomics. Journal of Chromatography B 
Analytic Technology Biomedical Life Science, 
877, 1229–1239.

Kliebenstein, D. J. (2007). Metabolomics and 
plant quantitative trait locus analysis – The 
optimal genetical genomics platform? In B. 
Nikolau & E. S. Wurtele (Eds.), Concepts 
in plant metabolomics (pp. 29–44). 
Netherlands: Springer.

Kliebenstein, D. J. (2009). Use of Secondary 

Metabolite Variation in Crop Improvement. 
In A. E. Osbourne & V. Lanzotti (Eds.), 
Plant-derived Natural Products (pp. 83–95). 
Heidelberg: Springer.

Koch, K. E. (1996). Carbohydrate-modulated 
gene expression in plants. Annual Review 
of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular 
Biology, 47, 509–540.

Kopka, J., Schauer, N., Krueger, S., Birkemeyer, 

C., Usadel, B., & Bergmüller, E., et al. 
(2005). GMD@CSB.DB: The Golm 
metabolome database. Bioinformatics, 21, 
1635–1638.

Korn, M., Gartner, T., Erban, A., Kopka, 
J., Selbig, J., & Hincha, D. K. (2010). 
Predicting Arabidopsis freezing tolerance 
and heterosis in freezing tolerance from 
metabolite composition. Molecular Plant, 3, 
224–235.

Kose, F., Budczies, J., Holschneider, M., 
& Fiehn, O. (2007). Robust detection 
and verification of linear relationships to 
generate metabolic networks using estimates 
of technical errors. BMC Bioinformatics, 
8, 162.

Kruger, N. J., & Ratcliffe, G. R. (2008). 

Metabolic organization in plants: A challenge 
for the metabolic engineer. Advances in 
Plant Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
1, 1–27.

Kuiper, H. A., Kleter, G. A., Noteborn, H. P., 

& Kok, E. J. (2001). Assessment of the food 
safety issues related to genetically modified 
foods. Plant Journal, 27, 503–528.

Kuiper, H. A., Kleter, G. A., Noteborn, H. P., 

& Kok, E. J. (2002). Substantial equivalence 
– An appropriate paradigm for the safety 
assessment of genetically modified foods? 
Toxicology, 181-182, 427–431.

79

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Kuiper, H. A., Kok, E. J., & Engel, K. H. 

(2003). Exploitation of molecular profiling 
techniques for GM food safety assessment. 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 14, 
238–243.

Kvalheim, O. M., Brakestad, F., & Liang, Y. 

(1994). Preprocessing of analytical profiles 
in the presence of homoscedastic or 
heteroscedastic noise. Analytical Chemistry, 
66, 43–51.

Li, C., Krewer, G., & Kays, S. J. (2007). 

Detection of apple deterioration using an 
electronic nose and zNosetm. Transactions of 
the ASABE, 50, 1417–1425.

Lippman, Z. B., & Zamir, D. (2007). Natural 
variation as a tool for gene identification in 
plants. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Lopez-Gresa, M. P., Maltese, F., Belles, J. M., 
Conejero, V., Kim, H. K., & Choi, Y. H., et 
al. (2009). Metabolic response of tomato 
leaves upon different plant-pathogen 
interactions. Phytochemical Analysis, 21, 
89–94.

Luengwilai, K., & Beckles, D. M. (2010). 

Climacteric ethylene is not essential for 
initiating chilling injury in tomato (Solanum 
lycopersicum) cv. Ailsa Craig. Journal of Stored 
Products and Postharvest Research, 1, 1.

Luengwilai, K., Salveit, M. E., & Beckles, D. 

M. (2011). Metabolite content of harvested 
Micro-Tom tomato (Solanum lycopersieum 
L.) fruit is altered by chilling and protective 
heat-shock treatments as shown by GC-
Ms metabolic profiling. Postharvest Biology 
and Technology. In press. doi: 10.1016/j.
postharvbio.2011.05.014.

Ma, H. W., & Zeng, A. P. (2003). 

Reconstruction of metabolic networks 
from genome data and analysis of their 
global structure for various organisms. 
Bioinformatics, 19, 270–277.

Ma, H. W., & Zeng, A. P. (2003). The 
connectivity structure, giant strong 
component and centrality of metabolic 
networks. Bioinformatics, 19, 1423–1430.
Matsuda, F., Hirai, M. Y., Sasaki, E., Akiyama, 

K., Yonekura-Sakakibara, K., & Provart, 
N. J., et al. (2010). AtMetExpress 
development: A phytochemical atlas of 
Arabidopsis development. Plant Physiology, 
152, 566–578.

Merchant, A., Richter, A., Popp, M., & Adams, 

M. (2006). Targeted metabolite profiling 
provides a functional link among eucalypt 
taxonomy, physiology and evolution. 
Phytochemistry, 67, 403–408.

Mittler, R. (2006). Abiotic stress, the field 

environment and stress combination. Trends 
in Plant Science, 11, 15–19.

Mittler, R., & Blumwald, E. (2010). Genetic 

engineering for modern agriculture: 
Challenges and perspectives. Annual Review 
of Plant Biology, 61, 13.1–13.20.

Moalemiyan, M., Vkram, A., Kushalappa, A. C., 

& Yaylayan, V. (2006). Volatile metabolite 
profiling to detect and discriminate stem-
end rot and anthracnose diseases of mango 
fruits. Plant Pathology, 55, 792–802.

Moco, S., schneider, B., & Vervoort, J. (2009). 

Plant micrometabolomics: The analysis of 
endogenous metabolites present in a plant 
cell or tissue. Journal of Proteome Research, 
8, 1694–1703.

80

Modolo, M. V., Reichert, A. I., & Dixon, R. A. 

(2009). Introduction to the different classes 
of biosynthetic enzymes. In A. E. Osbourne 
& V. Lanzotti (Eds.), Plant-derived natural 
products (pp. 143–163). Heidelberg: 
Springer.

Morandini, P. (2009). Rethinking metabolic 

control. Plant Science, 176, 441–451.

Moreno-Risueno, M. A., Busch, W., & Benfey, 
P. N. (2010). Omics meet networks – using 
systems approaches to infer regulatory 
networks in plants. Current Opinion of Plant 
Biology, 13, 126–131.

Morgan, J. A., & Rhodes, D. (2002). 

Mathematical modeling of plant metabolic 
pathways. Metabolic Engineering, 4, 80–89.
Mueller, L. A., Zhang, P., & Rhee, S. Y. (2003). 

AraCyc: A biochemical pathway database 
for Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 132, 
453–460.

Ng, K. M., Liang, Z. T., Lu, W., Tang, H. W., 
Zhao, Z. Z., & Che, C. M., et al. (2007). 
In vivo analysis and spatial profiling of 
phytochemicals in herbal tissue by matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization mass 
spectrometry. Analytical Chemistry, 79, 
2745–2755.

Oksman-Caldentey, K. -M., & Inzé, D. (2004). 
Plant cell factories in the post-genomic era: 
New ways to produce designer secondary 
metabolites. Trends in Plant Science, 9, 
433–440.

Okuda, S., Yamada, T., Hamajima, M., Itoh, 

M., Katayama, T., & Bork, P., et al. (2008). 
KEGG Atlas mapping for global analysis of 
metabolic pathways. Nucleic Acids Research, 
36, W423–W426.

Oliver, S. G., Winson, M. K., Kell, D. B., & 
Baganz, F. (1998). Systematic functional 
analysis of the yeast genome. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 16, 373–378.

Orr, G. R., & Raison, J. K. (1990). The 

effect of changing the composition of 
phosphatidylglycerol from thylakoid polar 
lipids of oleander and cucumber on the 
temperature of the transition related to 
chilling injury. Planta, 181, 137–143.

Paley, S. M., & Karp, P. D. (2006). The pathway 

tools cellular overview diagram and Omics 
viewer. Nucleic Acid Research, 
34, 3771–3778.

Pourcel, L., & Grotewold, E. (2009). 

Participation of phytochemicals in plant 
development and growth. In A. E. Osbourne 
& V. Lanzotti (Eds.), Plant-derived natural 
products: Synthesis, function and application 
(pp. 269–283). Dordrecht, Heidelberg: 
Springer.

Prithiviraj, B., Vikram, A., Kushalappa, A. C., 
& Yaylayan, V. (2004). Volatile metabolite 
profiling for the discrimination of onion  
bulbs infected by Erwinia carotovora 
ssp. carotovora, Fusarium oxysporum and 
Botrytis allii. European Journal of Plant 
Pathology, 110, 371–377.

Rios-Estepa, R., & Lange, B. M. (2007). 

Experimental and mathematical approaches 
to modeling plant metabolic networks. 
Phytochemistry, 68, 2351–2374.

Rischer, H., & Oksman-Caldentey, K. -M. 

(2006). Unintended effects in genetically 
modified crops: Revealed by metabolomics? 
Trends in Biotechnology, 24, 102–104.

Rischer, H., Oresic, M., Goossens, A., Inze, 
D., & Oksman-Caldentey, K. M. (2007). 
Integrating transcriptional and metabolic 
profiling to unravel secondary metabolite 
biosynthesis in plants. In Z. Xu, J. Li, Y. 
Xue & W. Yang (Eds.), Biotechnology and 
sustainable agriculture 2006 and beyond 
(pp. 135–138). Netherlands: Springer.

Rodriguez, A., & Infante, D. (2009). Network 

models in the study of metabolism. 
Electronic Journal of Biotechnology, 12, 2.

Roessner, U., & Beckles, D. M. (2009). 

Metabolite measurements. In J. 
Schwender (Ed.), Plant metabolic networks 
(pp. 39–69). New York, New York: Springer 
Verlag.

Roessner, U., & Bowne, J. (2009). What is 

metabolomics all about? Biotechniques, 46, 
363–365.

Roessner, U., Nahid, A., Hunter, A. and 

Bellgard, M. (2011) Metabolomics – the 
combination of analytical chemistry, biology 
and informatics. In Moo-Young, M. (ed.) 
Comprehensive Biotechnology 2nd ed., vol.1, 
pp. 447–459, Elsevier.

Rolland, F., Baena-Gonzalez, E., & Sheen, J. 

(2006). Sugar sensing and signaling in plants: 
Conserved and novel mechanisms. Annual 
Review of Plant Biology, 57, 675–709.

Rudell, D. R., Mattheis, J. P., & Curry, F. A. 
(2008). Prestorage ultraviolet-white light 
irradation alters apple peel metabolome. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
56, 1138–1147.

Saito, K., Hirai, M. Y., & Yonekura-Sakakibara, 

K. (2008). Decoding genes with 
coexpression networks and metabolomics – 
“majority report by precogs.” Trends in Plant 
Science, 13, 36–43.

Saito, K., & Matsuda, F. (2010). Metabolomics 

for functional genomics, systems biology, 
and biotechnology. Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 61, 463–489.

Schad, M., Mungur, R., Fiehn, O., & Kehr, 

J. (2005). Metabolic profiling of laser 
microdissected vascular bundles of 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Methods, 1, 
1–10.

Schauer, N., Semel, Y., Roessner, U., Gur, 
A., Balbo, I., & Carrari, F., et al. (2006). 
Comprehensive metabolic profiling and 
phenotyping of interspecific introgression 
lines for tomato improvement. Nature 
Biotechnology, 24, 447–454.

Schneider, B., & Holscher, D. (2007). Laser 

microdissection and cryogenic nuclear 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy: An 
alliance for cell type-specific metabolite 
profiling. Planta, 225, 763–770.

Schulz-Trieglaff, O., Pfeifer, N., Gröpl, C., 
Kohlbacher, O., & Reinert, K. (2008).  
LC-MSsim – a simulation software for liquid 
chromatography mass spectrometry data. 
BMC Bioinformatics, 9, 423.

Schryer, D. W., Peterson, P., Paalme, T., & 

Vendelin, M. (2009). Bidirectionality and 
compartmentation of metabolic fluxes are 
revealed in the dynamics of isotopomer 
networks. International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences, 10, 1697–1718.

Shrestha, B., & Vertes, A. (2009). In situ 

metabolic profiling of single cells by laser 
ablation electrospray ionization mass 

Plant metabolomics: Applications and opportunities for agricultural biotechnology

C H A P T E R   5

spectrometry. Analytical Chemistry, 81, 
8265–8271.

Smith, A. M. (2008). Prospects for increasing 

starch and sucrose yields for bioethanol 
production. Plant Journal, 54, 546–558.

Smith, C. A., O’Maille, G., Want, E. J., Qin, 

C., Trauger, S. A., & Brandon, T. R., et 
al. (2005). METLIN: A metabolite mass 
spectral database. Therapeutic Drug 
Monitoring, 27, 747–751.

Smith, C. A., Want, E. J., O'Maille, G., 

Abagyan, R., & Siuzdak, G. (2006). XCMS: 
Processing mass spectrometry data for 
metabolite profiling using nonlinear peak 
alignment, matching, and identification. 
Analytical Chemistry, 78, 779–787.

Srere, P. A. (1985). The Metabolon. Trends in 

Biochemical Sciences, 10, 109–110.

Stamova, B. S., Roessner, U., Suren, S., 

Laudencia-Chingcuanco, D., Bacic, A., & 
Beckles, D. M. (2009). Metabolic profiling 
of transgenic wheat over-expressing the 
high-molecular-weight Dx5 glutenin subunit. 
Metabolomics, 5, 239–252.

Ståhlman, M., Ejsing, C. S., Tarasov, K., 

Perman, J., Borén, J., & Ekroos, K. (2009). 
High-throughput shotgun lipidomics 
by quadrupole time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry. Journal of Chromatography B, 
15, 2664–2672.

Stitt, M., Sulpice, R., & Keurentjes, J. (2010). 

Metabolic networks: How to identify key 
components in the regulation of metabolism 
and growth. Plant Physiology, 152, 428–444.
Svatos, A. (2010). Mass spectrometric imaging 
of small molecules. Trends in Biotechnology, 
28, 425–434.

Sweetlove, L. J., & Fernie, A. (2005). 
Regulation of metabolic networks: 
Understanding metabolic complexity in the 
systems biology era. New Phytologist, 168, 
9–24.

Trethewey, R. N. (2004). Metabolite profiling 
as an aid to metabolic engineering in plants. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 7, 
196–201.

Vekiari, S. A., Oreopoulou, V., Kourkoutas, Y., 
Kamoun, N., Msallem, M., & Psimouli, V., 
et al. (2010). Characterization and seasonal 
variation of the quality of virgin olive oil of 
the Throumbolia and Koroneiki varieties 
from Southern Greece. Grasas Y Aceites, 
61, 221–231.

Venneria, E., Fanasca, S., Monastra, G., 

Finotti, E., Ambra, R., & Azzini, E., et al. 
(2008). Assessment of the nutritional values 
of genetically modified wheat, corn, and 
tomato crops. Journal of Agriculture and 
Food Chemistry, 56, 9206–9214.

Verpoorte, R. (1998). Exploration of nature’s 

chemodiversity: The role of secondary 
metabolites as leads in drug development. 
Drug Discovery Today, 3, 232–238.

Villas-Boas, S. G., Rasmussen, S., & Lane, G. 

A. (2005). Metabolomics or metabolite 
profiles? Trends in Biotechnology, 23, 
385–386.

Villas-Bôas, S. G., Roessner, U., & Hansen, 

M., et al. (2007). Metabolome analysis: An 
introduction. New Jersey, NJ, USA: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc..

Ward, J. L., Baker, J. M., & Beale, M. H. 
(2007). Recent applications of NMR 
spectroscopy in plant metabolomics. FEBS 
Journal, 274, 1126–1131.

Weckwerth, W., & Fiehn, O. (2002). Can we 

discover novel pathways using metabolomic 
analysis? Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 
13, 156–160.

Weckwerth, W., Loureiro, M. E., Wenzel, K., 
& Fiehn, O. (2004). Differential metabolic 
networks unravel the effects of silent plant 
phenotypes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 101, 7809–7814.

Wei, R., Li, G., & Seymour, A. B. (2010). 

High-throughput and multiplexed LC/MS/
MRM method for targeted metabolomics. 
Analytical Chemistry, 82, 5527–5533.

Weitzel, M., Wiechert, W., & Noh, K. (2007). 

The topology of metabolic isotope 
labeling networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 
8, 315.

Widodo, , Patterson, J. H., Newbigin, E., 

Tester, M., Bacic, A., & Roessner, U. (2009). 
Metabolic responses to salt stress of barley 
(Hordeum vulgare L.) cultivars, Sahara and 
Clipper, which differ in salinity tolerance. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 60, 
4089–4103.

Wiechert, W. (2007). The thermodynamic 
meaning of metabolic exchange fluxes. 
Biophysical Journal, 93, 2255–2264.

Wiechert, W., Schweissgut, O., Takanaga, H., 

& Frommer, W. B. (2007). Fluxomics: Mass 
spectrometry versus quantitative imaging. 

Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 10, 
323–330.

Williams, A. J. (2008). Public chemical 

compound databases. Current Opinion 
in Drug Discovery and Development, 11, 
393–404.

Winkel, B. S. J. (2004). Metabolic channeling in 

plants. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 55, 
85–107.

Winkel, B. S. J. (2009). Metabolite channeling 

and multi-enzyme complexes. In A. E. 
Osbourne & V. Lanzotti (Eds.), Plant-
derived natural products (pp. 195–208). 
Heidleberg: Springer.

Winter, H., Robinson, D. G., & Heldt, H. W. 

(1993). Subcellular volumes and metabolite 
concentrations in barley leaves. Planta, 191, 
180–190.

Yocum, A. K., & Chinnaiyan, A. M. (2009). 
Current affairs in quantitative targeted 
proteomics: Multiple reaction monitoring-
mass spectrometry. Brief Functional 
Genomics and Proteomics, 8, 145–157.

Zanor, M. I., Rambla, J. L., Chaib, J., Steppa, 

A., Medina, A., & Granell, A., et al. (2009). 
Metabolic characterization of loci affecting 
sensory attributes in tomato allows an 
assessment of the influence of the levels 
of primary metabolites and volatile organic 
contents. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
60, 2139–2154.

Zeng, Z., Chau, F. -T., Chan, H. -y., Cheung, 
C. -y., Lau, T. -y., & Wei, S., et al. (2008). 
Recent advances in the compound-oriented 
and pattern-oriented approaches to the 
quality control of herbal medicines. Chinese 
Medicine, 3, 9.

Zhang, H., Chang, M., Wang, J., & Ye, S. 

(2008). Evaluation of peach quality indices 
using an electronic nose by MLR, QPST 
and BP network. Sensors and Actuators B: 
Chemical, 134, 332–338.

Zhao, J., Yu, H., Luo, H. -J., Cao, Z. W., & 

Li, Y. -X. (2006). Hierarchical modularity 
of nested bow-ties in metabolic networks. 
BMC Bioinformatics, 7, 386.

Zywicki, B., Catchpole, G., Draper, J., & Fiehn, 

O. (2005). Comparison of rapid liquid 
chromatography-electrospray ionization-
tandem mass spectrometry methods 
for determination of glycoalkaloids in 
transgenic field-grown potatoes. Analytical 
Biochemistry, 336, 178–186.

81

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for 
optimizing protein products through plant 
biotechnology

3

Elizabeth Hood  Carole Cramer  Giuliana Medrano  Jianfeng Xu
Arkansas State University, Jonesboro, Arkansas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction: Strategic Decisions about  
How to Express an Output Trait  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  35
Approaches   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 37
Routing proteins to the endomembrane system . . . . . 37
Accumulating proteins in the ER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Accumulating proteins in ER-derived protein bodies. . 39
Accumulating proteins in the vacuole or  
vacuolar protein bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Accumulating proteins in the apoplast . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Accumulating proteins in the chloroplast . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Accumulating proteins on the surface of oil bodies . .   41
Seed-Based Expression Systems  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 41
Leaf Systems   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 44
Stable versus transient leaf expression systems . . . . . 44
Protein bodies in leaves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Hairy Root Cultures   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 47
Advantages of the hairy root culture system . . . . . . . . 48
Recombinant proteins expressed with hairy  
root cultures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   48
Hairy root cultures in bioreactors and scale-up . . . . . . 48
Summary and Conclusions   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 50

Introduction: Strategic Decisions 
about How to Express an Output Trait

Plant-based  bioproduction  has  been  explored  and  docu-
mented for several types of proteins in several plant systems 
by many academic groups and companies (Faye and Gomord, 
2010). This chapter reviews various types of protein expres-
sion  systems  and  how  protein  targeting  is  incorporated  into 
those systems. We do not focus on building a comprehensive 
catalog of examples of recombinant proteins as this has been 
recently  reviewed  (Daniell  et  al.,  2009;  Khan  et  al.,  2010). 

Rather, we are discussing the process of choosing a plant sys-
tem and the mechanisms of how to direct a protein to a par-
ticular site in a tissue or cell.

How does one determine which plant system to use to pro-
duce an output trait? The system of choice depends on several 
factors  (Howard  and  Hood,  2005).  For  example,  should  one 
choose a wild species versus a domesticated species? Much is 
known about domesticated species (how to grow and process 
these  crops).  They  are  also  high-yielding.  In  contrast,  a  wild 
plant species may be clearly distinguishable from a cultivated 
crop,  but  little  is  known  about  the  safety  of  the  plant  and  if 
the yield will be low. What about food versus non-food crops? 
Food crops have the advantage of high safety for human health 
products, but have the potential of becoming intermixed with 
foods (Howard and Hood, 2005). However, non-food or wild 
crops can also become intermixed with food if poorly handled, 
even  if  they  are  very  different  in  appearance.  The  situation 
of  food  intermixing  can  be  prevented  through  good  stew-
ardship,  and  models  for  how  to  safely  grow  transgenic  crops 
with recombinant proteins have been published (Howard and 
Hood, 2007). Finally, the characteristics of the product often 
determine  the  choice  of  crop,  as  discussed  in  the  following 
sections.

Why  is  it  important  to  consider  these  mechanistic  issues 
within  the  context  of  the  system  chosen?  Each  protein  that 
has merit as a product — whether for pharmaceutical, vaccine, 
or industrial applications — has a unique set of circumstances 
that  will  allow  its  most  efficient  production.  The  ability  to 
make the most protein in the best system requires some deci-
sions  about  the  nature  of  the  final  product  use,  the  protein 
being produced, and the circumstances necessary for efficient 
product  formulation  and  quality  (Howard  and  Hood,  2007). 
These  factors  must  be  strategically  considered  to  be  able  to 
commercialize  such  a  trait,  including  the  type  of  crop  to  be 
used  for  production.  We  have  suggested  a  decision  matrix  to 
drive those considerations (Table 3.1).

Most output traits — pharmaceuticals, vaccines, and indus-
trial  products  —  are  produced  for  markets  rather  than  being 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00003-1

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Table 3.1  Decision matrix for a plant bioproduction system — plant, tissue, subcellular location

Production parameter

Production characteristic

Comments

Protein product

Market volume

Margin recovered

Yield per target tissue

Formulation

Metabolic impact

Glycosylation or disulfide bonds

Other post-translational modification

Regulatory issues

Toxic
Pharmaceutical
Industrial
Vaccine

Large
Medium
Small

Large
Small

High

Medium
Low

Purified
Extract
Direct delivery

High
Medium
None

Necessary
No effect
Inhibitory to activity

Food/non-food
Wild relatives
Pesticidal

Full containment — in vitro such as hairy roots
Consider hazard — plant or culture system
Commodity crop — large volume, deregulated
Food quality — oral delivery

Need stability of storage — seed
Other issues may drive
Not driven by production cost — leaf, root okay

Can tolerate high cost of goods
Need large volume and product stability to justify. Seeds most efficient

Ability to increase event expression through site-directed insertion or 
breeding and selection; industrial products; seeds most efficient
Vaccines  — for direct delivery
Pharmaceuticals with high margin; in vitro or leaf — but requires 
immediate extraction

Requires high margin to offset cost
Value of product drives system
Industrial — compatibility with use; vaccine/pharmaceutical — 
compatibility with recipient

Test best location; not cytoplasmic, chloroplast, mitochondrial
Test best location
Only issue is high accumulation

ER/secretion pathway to Golgi
Location in cell does not affect activity
Non-secretory pathway

As needed
In correct compartment to accomplish

USDA; FDA
Containment required
EPA

With thousands of species to select from and a wide variety of possible products, it is unlikely that any one system will work best for all types of products. Thus, depending on 
the protein product, the need for high- or low-volume production and the need for low cost versus high integrity of the protein are some of the issues that need to be considered 
when choosing a production system for recombinant proteins for industry or pharmaceuticals. Molecular product considerations aside from market and cost considerations drive 
decisions about production systems as well. These include post-translational modifications including glycosylation, purification requirements, metabolic impact on the host, and 
regulatory needs. All issues taken together drive the decision for each protein production system.

studied for their scientific interest or the basic research prin-
ciples  that  they  address.  Thus,  commercial  considerations 
drive  the  system  of  choice.  One  of  the  first  considerations  is 
whether a market is known for a particular product in which 
the investigator has interest. An example of a pharmaceutical 
product that has recently been in the news is glucocerebrosi-
dase, an enzyme used to treat Gaucher disease (Cramer et al., 
1996; Radin et al., 1997). Twenty years ago, this enzyme was 
considered  the  most  expensive  drug  on  the  market,  and  one 
could make a lot of money. However, a second consideration is 
how many customers the market supplies — only about 4000 

patients are currently treated for this lysosomal disease — thus 
the  market  is  fairly  small  in  volume  (i.e.,  a  small  number  of 
units  to  be  sold).  For  this  type  of  pharmaceutical,  the  real 
story  is  the  margin  on  each  unit  sold,  which  is  quite  large. 
Producing this protein in plants has allowed this market to be 
addressed with less expense and greater safety than producing 
the enzyme from an animal system (Ratner, 2010). This prod-
uct has been approved for sales in France and is under consid-
eration for approval at the FDA in the United States.

How  much  protein 

is  required  per  tissue  extracted 
to  make  the  product  profitable?  Often  for  a  high-margin 

36

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for optimizing protein products through plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   3

pharmaceutical, there is much flexibility in the answer to this 
question.  The  higher  the  yield  per  tissue,  the  less  extraction 
buffer  (i.e.,  water)  is  required  per  dry  weight  and  the  better 
the economics. Leaf, cell culture, and root systems work well 
in the case of pharmaceuticals but require immediate attention 
upon harvest. Seed systems work as well, but if a commodity, 
the  protein  product  may  be  too  small  a  volume  to  make  the 
seed a viable system when considering containment issues. For 
a product with a low margin recovered per unit sold, a stable, 
low-cost system is required.

Product delivery requires that the protein be in a particu-
lar formulation. For example, is the protein a pharmaceutical 
that  must  be  injected  to  be  useful?  In  that  case  it  will  need 
to  be  purified  and  the  expression  system  should  offer  good 
purification options — hairy roots or cell culture could work 
well here. On the other end of the spectrum is direct deliv-
ery of the product utilizing plant tissue directly with minimal 
processing  and  no  extraction.  If  an  industrial  enzyme,  the 
tissue  must  be  compatible  with  the  process.  If  a  vaccine  or 
pharmaceutical, the system must be a food product to ensure 
safety.

Many  proteins  expressed  in  plants  have  an  impact  on  the 
plant’s  metabolism  (Table  3.1).  Examples  of  this  are  avidin 
(Hood et al., 1997) and laccase in maize (Hood et al., 2003). In 
the avidin case, targeting the protein to the apoplast solved the 
problem.  For  laccase,  the  apoplast  was  the  best  location,  but 
the  enzyme  still  had  detrimental  effects  on  the  plant,  includ-
ing  inhibiting  germination  and  browning  the  leaves.  Perhaps 
this  problem  can  be  solved  by  using  a  different  form  of  the 
enzyme, such as a zymogen (Woodard et al., 2003) or activat-
able enzyme (http://www.agrivida.com/).

The  next  thing  to  consider  is  what  types  of  expres-
sion  systems  are  necessary  to  ensure  the  protein’s  integ-
rity.  What  type  of  post-translational  modifications  does 
the  protein  have?  Are  they  required  for  activity  or  stabil-
ity?  Will  plant  glycosylation  patterns  have  an  impact  (Ma 
et al., 2003)? Does the protein require disulfide bonds to fold 
properly? Are other modifications present or required? Many 
post-translational modifications happen in the endomembrane 
system  (Buchanan  et  al.,  2000)  and  thus  the  protein  should 
be  targeted  there.  If  glycosylation  is  not  required,  the  cyto-
plasm  or  the  chloroplast  can  be  the  final  destination,  but 
each location must be balanced with yield and cost of goods 
considerations.

Finally, regulatory questions must often be considered. Will 
the  plants  be  grown  in  the  field  or  under  greenhouse  or  in 
vitro  conditions?  How  much  material  is  needed?  Answers  to 
these questions may depend on the hazard of the product or 
the size of the market (Howard and Donnelly, 2004). At any 
rate, if field grown, permits will be required unless the crop 
is  deregulated.  If  deregulation  is  the  goal,  then  many  other 
issues become important, such as whether the crop is a food 
or feed crop or if it has wild relatives in the growth zone. All 
of these issues can be resolved, but the costs associated with 
the resolution can vary widely (Chapter 34).

Once a system is chosen, the next thing to consider is how 
to make the protein express the best in that system. We have 
reviewed  general  subcellular  targeting  strategies  as  well  as 
seed, leaf, and hairy root expression systems.

Approaches

As described previously, selecting a site for transgene product 
accumulation must integrate the desired characteristics of the 
product  or  trait  as  well  as  practical  requirements  for  yield, 
stability,  and  recovery.  The  most  common  sites  for  recom-
binant  protein  accumulation  utilize  trafficking  through  the 
endomembrane  system  and  include  the  endoplasmic  reticu-
lum  (ER),  the  vacuole,  and  protein  bodies  derived  from  ER 
or vacuoles, and the apoplast (secretion pathway; Table 3.2). 
The  endomembrane  system  contains  the  cellular  machinery 
for protein glycosylation (N- or O-linked) and disulfide bond 
formation, as well as an elaborate protein folding/quality con-
trol  system  that  may  be  important  for  biological  function  of 
the  target  protein  (e.g.,  see  review  by  Vitale  and  Pedrazzini, 
2005).  Accumulation  of  heterologous  proteins  in  a  non-
endomembrane  compartment  has  also  been  very  successful 
for  some  proteins.  These  compartments  include  the  plastid 
(as products of either the nuclear or the plastid genome) and 
specialized  organelles  such  as  oil  bodies  prevalent  in  oilseed 
crops  (Table  3.2).  The  molecular  signals  required  to  direct 
proteins to each of these compartments are discussed in the 
next section.

Routing proteins to the endomembrane 
system

An N-terminal signal peptide is the pivotal signal for delivery 
of proteins into the ER, the entry point for secreted proteins 
and all luminal proteins that are subsequently trafficked to var-
ious  endomembrane  compartments.  An  analogous  signal  pep-
tide  is  also  utilized  by  transmembrane  proteins  whose  amino 
terminus is positioned in the lumen (and may ultimately reside 
at the extracellular surface of the plasma membrane). This sig-
nal peptide is typically 20–30 amino acids long that comprises 
the  amino  terminus  of  the  translation  product  of  cytosolic 
ribosomes  and  is  generally  followed  by  a  “stop  translation” 
signal. The newly emerged peptide interacts directly with the 
signal recognition particle (SRP), which directs docking to the 
ER membrane via interaction with the membrane-bound SRP 
receptor. This interaction is required for directing the nascent 
peptide  to  a  protein  translocon  complex,  a  prerequisite  for 
resumption  of  protein  translation.  Thus,  insertion  of  proteins 
into  the  ER  is  a  co-translational  process.  The  machinery  for 
signal  peptide  cleavage  (signal  peptidase),  N-linked  glycosyla-
tion  (oligosaccharide-protein,  transferase  glucose  transferases, 
glucosidases,  and  α-mannosidase  I),  and  disulfide  bond  for-
mation  (protein  disulfide  isomerase,  PDI)  reside  in  the  ER 
lumen often associated with the inner surface of the ER mem-
brane.  Thus  initial  post-translational  processing  events  occur 
as the protein is being translated/inserted into the ER lumen. 
An  elaborate  chaperone-mediated  protein  folding  and  edit-
ing process is then instituted to ensure appropriate processing 
of the protein, and those proteins that do not meet the com-
partment’s  quality  control  requirement  (misfolded  or  incor-
rectly  glycosylated)  are  shunted  into  the  ERAD  pathway  for 
degradation  (ER-associated  degradation  typically  involving 

37

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Table 3.2  Protein targeting strategies to subcellular compartments

Target organelle

Location in protein

Nature of signal

Signal removed

Comments

Endomembrane system 
(lumen)

N-term

1–3 basic aa followed by 6–12 
hydrophobic aa

ER retention

C-term

KDEL; HDEL; SEKDEL

Vacuole

Chloroplast

N-term

C-term
Internal

N-term

NPIR conserved domain

No consensus identified
No consensus identified

Varied, often rich in S, T, small 
hydrophobic aa; lacking D, E

Yes

No

Yes

Yes
Varies

Yes

Entry point for secreted proteins 
and proteins residing in ER, Golgi, 
vacuoles, PBs, and PSV

Retention/retrieval for luminal 
proteins; transmembrane proteins 
traffic by distinct signals

NTPPs and CTPP interact with 
distinct receptors for sorting to the 
vacuole

Additional signals direct to 
specific locations within thylakoid 
membranes

Multiple locations are available in the cell to accumulate proteins. However, for over-expressed pharmaceutical or industrial proteins, not all locations are equally viable. Because 
the “rules” of expression and accumulation are not known, often proteins must be empirically tested in a number of compartments to determine their best location. Some basic 
characteristics are described here in Table 3.2. Abbreviations: aa, amino acid; PBs, protein bodies; PSV, protein storage vacuoles; NTPP, N-terminal pro-peptide; CTPP, C-terminal 
pro-peptide; D, E, H, K, L, S, T, amino acid single letter code.

ubiquitinization and delivery to the cytosolic proteosome com-
plex; reviewed in Vitale and Boston, 2008). Proteins that clear 
the ER quality control are packaged into vesicles for delivery 
to  the  Golgi  for  additional  processing  (e.g.,  modification  of 
glycans)  and  sorting  to  vacuoles  or  other  membrane-bound 
organelles. The “default pathway” in plants (i.e., where a pro-
tein  goes  if  no  additional  targeting  information  is  presented), 
is secretion to the extracellular space (Denecke et al., 1999). 
For  Type  I  (single  pass)  and  Type  IIIa  transmembrane  pro-
teins (those with N-terminus localized to the ER lumen), the 
signal peptide is typically cleaved and the hydrophobic trans-
membrane domains are set within the membrane during pro-
tein synthesis by a series of “stop transfer” and “start transfer” 
signals.

Signal peptides are “necessary and sufficient” for delivery of 
proteins to the ER and are generally “interchangeable.” The sig-
nal sequence is not a defined sequence but a pattern or motif 
that typically comprises one or more positively charged amino 
acid residues at the N-terminus followed by a stretch of 6–12 
hydrophobic  residues  and  a  cleavage  site.  Signal  peptide  pre-
diction  tools  and  databases  have  been  developed  (e.g.,  http://
www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/;  links  cited  in  http://www.
signalpeptide.de/index.php?mlinks) to identify putative signal 
peptides and the signal peptide cleavage site. For expression of 
heterologous  proteins,  plant-specific  signal  peptides  (SPs)  are 
often  used.  Common  plant  signal  sequences  include  the  sig-
nal peptides from tobacco extensin (De Loose et al., 1991; Xu 
et al., 2005), PR-S (Sijmons et al., 1990), and osmotin, (Dieryck 
et al., 1997), the barley α-amylase SP (Rogers, 1985) and the 
potato  patatin  SP  (Medrano  et  al.,  2009).  In  many  cases,  the 
signal peptide from the heterologous protein (e.g., a human or 

fungal sequence) efficiently targets its protein to the plant ER  
and  is  recognized  by  the  plant  signal  peptidase  to  create  the 
precise  N-terminus  of  the  mature  product  seen  in  its  native 
organism,  such  as  human  IL-2,  interferon-β,  and  β-casein 
(Edelbaum  et  al.,  1991;  Chong  et  al.,  1997;  Magnuson  et  al., 
1998);  fungal  phytase  (Verwoerd  et  al.,  1995);  and  xylanase 
(Herbers et al., 1995). However, there are other examples of 
proteins whose expression levels were enhanced by the use of 
a  plant  SP  (e.g.,  Sojikul  et  al.,  2003)  and  ones  where  plants 
inefficiently  processed  more  complex  “pre-  pro-”  sequences 
from  mammalian  proteins  (human  serum  albumin,  Sijmons  
et  al.,  1990).  For  researchers  wanting  to  optimize  product 
yield,  often  multiple  SPs  are  tested  for  initial  assessment  of 
production  strategies.  For  pharmaceutical  applications,  precise 
cleavage  of  the  SP  —  whether  from  animal,  fungal,  or  plant 
sources  —  is  critical  and  generally  confirmed  by  N-terminal 
sequencing of the final purified product.

Accumulating proteins in the ER

A specific protein motif is typically required to retain proteins 
within the ER. The most widely used motif is the KDEL ER 
retention  motif.  Proteins  having  C-terminal  KDEL  (lys-asp-
glu-leu)  or  HDEL  (his-asp-glu-leu)  interact  with  the  KDEL 
receptor, a transmembrane protein that functions in vesicular 
trafficking  primarily  between  the  ER  and  the  Golgi.  KDEL-
containing  proteins  are  typically  released  in  the  ER  environ-
ment  and  bound  in  the  Golgi  environment  leading  to  ER 
retention  or  retrieval,  respectively.  There  are  many  exam-
ples  of  plant-produced  recombinant  proteins  that  have  been 
engineered to contain the KDEL retrieval signal, and in many 

38

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for optimizing protein products through plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   3

cases  this  has  led  to  higher  levels  of  protein  accumulation 
(reviewed  in  Boothe  et  al.,  2010).  However,  there  are  also 
examples where addition of the KDEL motif did not enhance 
protein  yields  in  plant  systems  so  each  protein  of  interest 
must be tested. It should also be noted that retention of the 
protein  of  interest  in  the  ER  may  have  consequences  with 
respect to glycan composition, extractability, and “non-native” 
sequences of the final product. In situations where addition of 
a KDEL sequence has resulted in significantly higher product 
levels, it is possible that the greater protein stability is linked 
with  development  of  “protein  bodies”  that  partition  prod-
ucts  from  proteinases  and  other  destabilizing  plant  proteins. 
Systems to specifically engineer product accumulation within 
ER-derived  protein  bodies  have  been  developed  and  are  dis-
cussed in the next section.

Accumulating proteins in ER-derived 
protein bodies

Plant seeds function to store all of the resources required to 
support germination and initial growth prior to onset of pho-
tosynthesis.  Thus,  they  have  evolved  unique  mechanisms  to 
accumulate  and  densely  pack  proteins  in  a  way  that  retains 
function.  This  typically  takes  the  form  of  membrane  delim-
ited  storage  organelles  that  are  derived  either  from  the  ER, 
termed “protein bodies” (PBs), or from post-Golgi organelles 
termed  “protein  storage  vacuoles”  (PSVs;  reviewed  by 
Herman  and  Larkins,  1999).  By  understanding  the  mecha-
nisms  that  trigger  PB  formation  during  seed  development 
(Galili, 2004), technologies have been developed that induce 
ER-derived  PBs  in  plant  leaves  and  other  tissues  (Kogan 
et al., 2001; Mainieri et al., 2004). The storage proteins aggre-
gate within the ER and either remain within this organelle or 
are  budded  off  into  discrete  organelles.  Products  stored  in 
ER-derived  versus  vacuole-derived  PBs  often  differ  in  their 
glycan  composition  (routing  through  the  Golgi  facilitates 
processing  of  high-mannose  N-glycans  to  complex  glycans), 
and  both  types  of  protein  bodies  are  considered  stable  envi-
ronments  for  protein  storage.  It  should  be  noted  that  plant-
derived  protein  bodies  do  not  seem  to  display  the  negative 
aspects  of  bacterial  protein  inclusion  bodies  that  result  from 
high-level  expression  of  heterologous  proteins  in  bacterial 
systems.  Accumulation  of  foreign  proteins  in  bacterial  inclu-
sion  bodies  often  yields  insoluble  product  requiring  harsh 
processes  of  resolubilization  and  renaturation  to  recover  an 
active  product.  Analogous  issues  have  not  been  common  in 
plant systems (with the possible exception of plastid localized 
proteins).

repetitive 

includes  a  highly 

The  proline-rich  N-terminal  domain  of  the  γ-zein  (maize 
storage  protein) 
sequence 
(VHLPPP)n  that  forms  an  amphipathic  polyproline  helix  and 
is  critical  for  zein  protein  aggregation  at  the  ER  membrane 
(Kogan et al., 2001). Mainieri et al. (2004) demonstrated that 
the  fusion  of  89  amino  acid  residues  of  γ-zein  is  sufficient  to 
mediate the assembly of a target protein into PBs. A synthetic 
sequence consisting of (PPPVHL)8 has been developed as a tar-
geting  tag  (termed  Zera®)  to  facilitate  assembly  and  recovery 
of  recombinant  proteins  (Torrent  et  al.,  2009).  Although  PBs 

are  seed  storage  organelles,  the  zein-derived  sequences  enable 
PB  formation  in  leaf  tissue  (e.g.,  in  Arabidopsis  and  tobacco) 
and  interestingly,  also  direct  formation  of  ER-derived  pro-
tein  bodies  in  non-plant  species  including  fungal,  insect,  and 
mammalian cells (Torrent et al., 2009; Llompart et al., 2010). 
Accumulation of proteins in PBs may facilitate higher levels of 
accumulation  as  PBs  typically  sequester  proteins  away  from 
proteinases and other destabilizing factors. In addition, the high 
density of PBs may provide a purification advantage (Llompart 
et al., 2010).

Accumulating proteins in the vacuole  
or vacuolar protein bodies

The  plant  vacuole  is  one  of  the  largest  subcellular  compart-
ments in a leaf, stem, or root, particularly if the cell is expand-
ing.  They  are  lytic  compartments,  function  as  reservoirs  for 
ions and metabolites, and participate in cellular detoxification 
and  general  cell  metabolism  (Marty,  1999).  Because  of  their 
lytic nature, vacuoles can be hostile environments for foreign 
protein  accumulation.  Nevertheless,  some  proteins  are  sta-
ble  and  accumulate  to  high  levels  in  this  acidic  environment. 
In seeds, vacuoles store the protein reserves destined to feed 
the  growing  embryo  upon  germination  and  thus  have  the 
potential  for  the  efficient  packing  and  long-term  storage  that 
may be optimal for certain applications. It has been suggested 
that  protein  storage  vacuoles  are  distinct  organelles  with  dis-
tinct  resident  biomarkers  and  biogenesis  (Paris  et  al.,  1996; 
Vitale  and  Raikhel,  1999;  Frigerio  et  al.,  2008).  Targeting 
domains  from  seed  storage  proteins  have  been  used  to  spe-
cifically localize recombinant proteins to these types of vacu-
oles  (discussed  further  in  the  next  section).  It  should  also 
be  noted  that  vacuoles  may  possess  additional  glycan-modi-
fying  enzymes  and  thus,  targeting  to  vacuoles  may  provide  a 
glycoprotein  with  more  defined  or  desirable  N-linked  glycan 
compositions.

Vacuolar targeting of a protein encoded by a nuclear gene 
requires  dual  targeting  signals  (Table  3.2).  First,  an  ER  sig-
nal  sequence  is  required  for  entry  into  the  endomembrane 
system.  A  second  signal  is  active  after  the  protein  has  pro-
gressed  through  the  ER  and  Golgi  network  where  it  is  car-
ried in vesicles to the vacuole. Receptors for these sequences 
allow  binding  and  delivery  to  the  organelle.  Vacuolar  target-
ing signals are less tightly defined compared to the N-terminal 
ER-signal peptides and have been identified at the C-terminus 
(C-terminal pro-peptide, CTPP; e.g., barley lectin, phaseolin, 
tobacco chitinase) and the N-terminal region of the “mature” 
protein (N-terminal pro-peptide, NTPP, located immediately 
upstream of the ER signal sequence; e.g., sporamin, aleurain) 
as well as internal domains that direct vacuolar targeting (e.g., 
phytohemagglutinin,  legumin,  ricin).  The  NTPP  and  CTPP 
are  typically  removed  by  proteases  within  the  vacuole.  In 
some cases (e.g., the A-B plant toxins such as ricin and abrin), 
the  internal  vacuolar  targeting  sequences  are  also  removed 
within the vacuole as part of protein processing to the mature 
active  toxin.  All  three  types  of  vacuolar  targeting  signals  (C, 
N,  and  internal)  have  been  shown  to  be  necessary  and  suffi-
cient to sort model proteins from the default secretion route 

39

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

into vacuoles (reviewed in Marty, 1999; Neuhaus and Rogers, 
1998).  However,  specific  vacuolar  targeting  signals  may  not 
function  for  a  particular  heterologous  protein  of  interest. 
Choices for vacuole signal selection may reflect the target host 
plant (monocot or dicot), a desire to have the signal cleaved, 
potential  impacts  of  vacuolar  signal  on  secondary  structure 
and  recombinant  protein  activity,  and  interest  in  directing 
product to the lytic versus storage vacuoles.

Several  examples  of  vacuolar  accumulation  of  recom-
binant proteins are available including those that exhibit pro-
tein  accumulation  in  the  seed.  In  maize,  the  barley  aleurain 
vacuolar  targeting  sequence  (Holwerda  et  al.,  1992)  pro-
vides  both  ER  and  vacuolar  targeting  signals  and  directs  the 
arrival  of  the  foreign  protein  to  the  storage  vacuole  in  the 
seed (embryo). Using the aleurain targeting motif, Streatfield 
et  al.  (2001)  demonstrated  high  levels  of  vacuolar  accu-
mulation  of  the  Escherichia  coli  heat  labile  toxin,  LT-B.  The 
β-1,4-endoglucanase  from  Acidothermus  cellulolyticus  is  also 
highly  stable  in  the  vacuole  using  this  sequence,  although  a 
cellobiohydrolase  from  Trichoderma  reesei  did  not  accumu-
late within vacuoles but was active when secreted to the cell 
wall, suggesting that the vacuolar environment was inhospita-
ble for this enzyme (Hood et al., 2007). A recombinant dog 
gastric lipase (active in a highly acidic environment) was pro-
duced  in  tobacco  plants  comparing  enzymes  targeted  to  the 
vacuole  versus  the  apoplast  for  yield  and  activity  (Gruber 
et  al.,  2001).  Expression  levels  were  5%  (vacuole)  and  7% 
(secreted)  of  total  acid-extractable  protein  with  equivalent 
activity suggesting that both compartments support this acid-
stable  protein.  These  examples  illustrate  the  utility  of  the 
compartment  as  well  as  the  empirics  of  the  process  —  we 
need to know more to predict the stability of the protein of 
interest.

The  first  plant-made  pharmaceutical  protein  to  complete 
clinical  trials  (currently  under  FDA  review  in  the  United 
States but approved for human use in several European coun-
tries)  is  a  human  enzyme  targeted  to  the  plant  cell  vacuole. 
Glucocerebrosidase is a lysosomal enzyme and thus was con-
sidered  likely  to  be  stable  in  the  more  acidic  vacuolar  com-
partment. As described by Shaaltiel et al. (2007), the human 
acid  β-glucosidase,  glucocerebrosidase  (enzyme  replacement 
therapeutic  for  Gaucher  disease),  was  modified  to  contain 
the SP from the Arabidopsis basic endochitinase gene (Samac 
et  al.,  1990)  and  the  C-terminus  storage  vacuole  targeting 
motif from tobacco chitinase A (DLLVDTM; Neuhaus et al., 
1991). Additionally, the mannose-terminated glycan, thought 
to be the dominant complex glycan of vacuolar glycoproteins 
(Faye  and  Gomord,  2010),  is  considered  advantageous  for 
uptake and lysosomal delivery of the protein administered to 
patients.

Accumulating proteins in the apoplast

Secretion is the default pathway of the plant endomembrane 
system and without addition of specific signals for sorting or 
retention,  proteins  that  traffic  through  the  endomembrane 
system  will  typically  be  secreted  to  the  extracellular  space. 
Most  large  recombinant  proteins  accumulate  within  the 

apoplast — the region between the plasma membrane and the 
cell  wall  —  as  diffusion  through  the  cell  wall  matrix  is  size 
delimiting.  However,  recombinant  protein  strategies  using 
plant  cell  cultures  are  often  employed  to  recover  the  target 
protein in the culture medium, which decreases the complex-
ity  of  the  initial  purification  stream  and  minimizes  exposure 
to  vacuolar/intracellular  proteinases.  Strategies  to  direct  and 
enhance  recovery  of  secreted  proteins  in  plant  cell  culture 
systems are discussed in the next section.

Accumulating proteins in the chloroplast

Plastids  (primarily  chloroplasts  but  potentially  tuber  amy-
loplasts  or  fruit/flower  chromoplasts)  represent  a  relatively 
unique  site  for  recombinant  protein  accumulation  with  sev-
eral key advantages for high level protein production as well as 
distinct limitations. Proteins can be routed to plastids by sev-
eral mechanisms. Proteins encoded by the nuclear genome (or 
proteins  synthesized  in  the  cytosol  from  viral  or  transfected 
DNAs) can be targeted to plastids by plastid transit peptides 
that  direct  proteins  across  the  chloroplast  membrane  and 
into  specific  compartments  within  the  chloroplast  (reviewed 
in Bruce, 2000). However, the most compelling approach for 
using  plastids  involves  direct  transformation  of  the  plastid 
genome (reviewed in Daniell et al., 2009; Bock and Warzecha, 
2010). This technology provides significant gene copy number 
advantages since a plant leaf cell can contain up to 100 chlo-
roplasts  and  each  chloroplast  has  many  copies  of  the  plastid 
genome,  supporting  very  high  levels  of  recombinant  protein 
production. For example, recombinant protein yields of more 
than  70%  of  total  soluble  proteins  have  been  reported  (Oey 
et  al.,  2009)  and,  as  reviewed  by Bock  and  Warzecha,  2010, 
vaccine  antigens  from  numerous  groups  have  been  accumu-
lated in tobacco leaves at levels ranging from 1% to more than 
30%  of  total  soluble  proteins.  In  addition:  (1)  plastid  trans-
formation supports strong homologous recombination so that 
efficient  sites  for  transcription  can  be  reliably  targeted,  (2) 
the plastid genome appears resistant to gene silencing, and (3) 
plastids are generally maternally inherited providing strategies 
to  minimize  gene-flow  issues.  However,  currently  relatively 
few  plants  support  efficient  plastid  transformation  (solana-
ceous  plants  such  as  tobacco  and  tomato  have  been  most 
successful),  and  plastids  do  not  support  the  more  complex 
post-translational  modifications  (e.g.,  glycosylation,  disulfide 
bonding)  that  are  required  by  many  eukaryotic  proteins  for 
bioactivity  or  stability.  In  addition,  to  exploit  the  high  level 
of  protein  accumulation  in  chloroplasts,  the  tissue  of  choice 
is  typically  leaves  (i.e.,  tissues  actively  involved  in  photosyn-
thesis),  which  elevates  plastid  numbers  and  synthetic  capac-
ity. Leaf tissues often have greater post-harvest challenges for 
short- and long-term storage compared to seeds and may have 
greater variations in production levels in the field and process-
ing  recoveries  compared  to  seed-based  production  strategies. 
In addition, like bacterial systems, some heterologous proteins 
are difficult to recover in active form suggesting that inclusion 
bodies  similar  to  those  common  in  bacterial  expression  sys-
tems may come into play in plastid-based expression (Gleba 
et al., 2005).

40

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for optimizing protein products through plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   3

Accumulating proteins on the surface  
of oil bodies

Plants,  especially  oilseed  crops,  typically  store  seed  oils  in  oil 
bodies.  These  are  organelles  that  encompass  oils  (e.g.,  triglyc-
erides)  in  a  single  layer  phospholipid  membrane  that  contains 
the highly hydrophobic protein oleosin. Heterologous proteins 
have  been  expressed  as  oleosin  fusions  (Boothe  et  al.,  2010; 
van Rooijen and Maloney, 1995). Oleosins, low molecular mass 
(Mr 16–24 kDa) polypeptides, consist of a hydrophobic domain 
flanked by two hydrophilic domains. Oleosins are initially tar-
geted  to  the  ER  membranes  although  both  C-  and  N-termini 
remain in the cytosol and the proteins are subsequently trans-
ferred to the oil bodies (Napier et al., 1996; Abell et al., 2004). 
Thus, the fused protein of interest essentially coats the oil bod-
ies  and  is  positioned  on  the  cytosolic  face.  Advantages  of  this 
protein  production  strategy  can  include  very  stable  long-term 
storage  in  dry  seeds  and  efficient  purification  based  on  “float-
ing” the oil bodies. The recombinant protein-decorated oil bod-
ies  can  be  used  directly  in  some  applications  such  as  topical 
applications, vaccines, or in vitro catalysis. Additional strategies 
include the incorporation of a proteolytic cleavage site between 
the  oleosin  and  the  protein  of  interest  enabling  release  of  the 
target protein after purification of the oil bodies. Applications 
of  this  technology  could  be  limiting  for  some  proteins  that 
require  post-translational  modifications 
localized  to  the 
endomembrane system or are unstable in the cytosolic milieu. 
Researchers  at  SemBioSys  have  cleverly  overcome  this  issue 
by  targeting  the  protein  of  interest  through  the  endomem-
brane systems, often with an ER retrieval domain as well, then 
retrieving  the  protein  onto  oil  body  surfaces  through  binding 
with  an  anti-oleosin  single  chain  antibody  (scFv).  Thus,  the 
product  is  trafficked  and  accumulated  within  the  endomem-
brane  system  for  post-translational  processing,  but  associates 
with  the  oil  bodies  upon  cell  breakage,  providing  the  advan-
tages of oil-body-based flotation centrifugation (see Boothe et 
al., 2010), combining the benefits of both systems.

Examples of pharmaceutical proteins produced using this oil 
body  system  include  human  insulin  (Nykiforuk  et  al.,  2005), 
human growth factor (Boothe et al., 2010), and Apolipoprotein 
A1Milano (Nykiforuk et al., 2010). Apo-A1Milano, a protein with 
significant cardioprotective potential, was produced in safflower 
seeds at levels of 7 g recombinant protein per kilogram of seeds. 
Human growth factor was expressed at levels up to 1.58% of 
total seed protein and, using the oil body flotation centrifuga-
tion  process,  more  than  90%  of  soluble  plant  proteins  were 
removed by the liquid–liquid separation with full retention of 
the hGF:oleosin fusions (Boothe et al., 2010).

Seed-Based Expression Systems

Seeds are one of the likely locations for accumulating a pro-
tein for utilization as a pharmaceutical or vaccine product, or 
for application to an industrial process. What are some of the 
major  reasons  that  one  would  choose  seed-based  expression 
for an output trait? Seeds are easy to store and the processes 
for storage are well-developed. As long as the seeds are from 

a  well-known  crop,  whether  for  food/feed  or  other  use,  the 
handling  processes  are  also  well-established.  Seeds  are  very 
stable  environments  for  proteins  and  many  examples  show 
stable  long-term  storage  of  recombinant  proteins  (Kusnadi 
et  al.,  1997;  Tackaberry  et  al.,  1999;  Howard,  2005),  with 
many protease inhibitors and carbohydrates that assist in long-
term storage, and stabilization of protein integrity.

A number of proteins have been expressed as output traits 
specifically in seeds with excellent results (Table 3.3; Daniell 
et al., 2009; Khan et al., 2010). Proteins from viruses, bacte-
ria, fungi, plants, animals, and humans have been transformed 
into  plants  with  successful  seed-based  expression,  although 
relatively  few  examples  from  each  group  are  represented. 
The  following  discussion  focuses  on  proteins  from  groups  of 
organisms.

Although  few  viral  proteins  have  been  expressed  in  seed 
(Table  3.3;  Daniell  et  al.,  2009;  Khan  et  al.,  2010),  one  can 
observe that the examples to date of viral proteins in seed show 
a  tendency  toward  relatively  low  expression  levels  compared 
to  proteins  from  other  organisms.  The  glycoprotein  B  (gB) 
from  cytomegalovirus,  a  human  herpes  virus,  was  expressed 
in  tobacco  from  the  rice  glutelin  promoter  (Tackaberry  et  al., 
1999). gB is a 150 kDa membrane-bound glycoprotein that also 
has disulfide bonds (i.e., has many post-translational modifica-
tions). The protein was correctly processed and showed activ-
ity  although  the  accumulation  level  was  only  0.015%  of  total 
soluble  protein  (TSP).  This  monocot  seed  storage  protein 
promoter  functioned  well  in  tobacco,  a  dicot,  to  produce  the 
mRNA  for  this  complex  protein.  In  contrast,  the  hepatitis 
E  virus  (HEV)  E2  antigen  from  the  second  viral  open  read-
ing frame (ORF2) was expressed in tobacco plastids using the 
rice  psbA  promoter  (Zhou  et  al.,  2006).  Although  significant 
amounts of the protein were expressed in leaves (0.1% TSP), 
100-fold less protein (0.001% TSP) accumulated in seeds using 
this system (Table 3.3). This is likely due to the plastids being 
less prevalent or less developed in tobacco seeds than in leaves. 
In  the  maize  seed  system,  two  viral  proteins  have  been  accu-
mulated  to  several-fold  higher  amounts  than  those  expressed 
in  tobacco.  The  hepatitis  B  virus  (HepB)  surface  antigen  was 
expressed  from  the  maize  globulin-1  promoter  and  targeted 
to  the  endomembrane  system.  This  membrane  protein  likely 
is  localized  to  the  plasma  membrane  and  may  form  virus-like 
particles as has been shown for HepB in tobacco leaves (Mason 
et al., 1992), although the observation of this phenomenon in 
seeds has not been confirmed. The S (spike) protein from the 
transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), a porcine virus, was 
also expressed in maize seed (Streatfield et al., 2001). A maize 
constitutive promoter was used and the protein moved through 
the endomembrane system with the barley alpha amylase signal 
sequence (Rogers, 1985). The gene was completely re-synthe-
sized with maize codon usage bias and showed expression levels 
of  0.4%  TSP  (Table  3.3).  Thus,  the  best  viral  expression  was 
shown with genes expressed from strong promoters, targeted to 
the membrane system, and codon optimized.

The heat labile antigen from E. coli (LT-B) is the best exam-
ple  of  a  bacterial  protein  expressed  in  plants  (Streatfield  and 
Howard,  2003;  Chikwamba  et  al.,  2002).  Chikwamba  et  al. 
(2002) used an LT-B gene that was synthesized with averaged 
maize and potato optimized codons (Mason et al., 1992). The 

41

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Table 3.3  Examples of seed-based expression of recombinant proteins

Plant system

Protein

Promoter

Subcellular 
location

Expression level

Comments

Reference

Tobacco

Cytomegalovirus 
glycoprotein B (viral)

Rice glutelin

Apoplast

0.015% TSP

Tobacco

HEV E2 (viral)

Rice psbA

Plastids

Lvs 0.1% TSP

686 μg/g DW

Maize

Maize

HepB surface antigen 
(viral)

Maize globulin

Plasma 
membrane

TGEV S protein (viral)

Maize ubiquitin 1

Apoplast

Seeds 0.001% TSP

0.1% TSP

0.004% DW  
(~0.4% TSP)

Maize

E. coli LT-B (bacterial)

CaMV 35S

Apoplast

0.01% TSP (T1)

Maize

E. coli LT-B (bacterial)

Maize globulin

Vacuolar

10% TSP

γ-zein

0.07% TSP (T1)

Rice

Tobacco

Lipoprotein (Ag473) 
(bacterial)

Growth hormone 
(human)

CaMV 35S

Not discussed

0.8% TSP

Sorghum γ-kafirin

Apoplast

0.16% TSP

Monocot promoter in 
dicot; active in cellular 
assay

Tackaberry et al. 
(1999)

Plastid accumulation 
in seed is low with CP 
transformation

Zhou et al. (2006)

First 40 codons maize-
optimized

J. Howard, 
unpublished

Gene completely 
optimized; active in 
preventing disease

Mistargeted to 
amyloplast; stable over 
three generations

Streatfield et al. 
(2001)

Chikwamba et al. 
(2002, 2003)

Highest T1 seed; better 
than ER or apoplast

Streatfield and 
Howard (2003)

Also expressed in leaves; 
better than Rubisco SS 
in seed

Monocot promoter in 
dicot; no protein in 
leaves or roots

Yiu et al. (2008)

Leite et al. (2000)

Tobacco

hIGFBP-3 (human)

Phaseolin

Protein storage 
vacuoles

0.08% DW

Correctly targeted; codon 
optimized

Cheung et al. 
(2009)

Rice

Insulin-like growth 
factor (human)

Luminal binding 
protein (BiP)

ER

6.8% TSP

BiP may be transported 
out of Golgi with 
saturated HDEL receptor

Xie et al. (2008)

Arabidopsis

Insulin (human)

Phaseolin

Oleosin fusion

0.13% TSP protein

Visible on stained gel

Tobacco

Acid β-glucosidase 
(human)

Soybean 7S 
globulin

Protein storage 
bodies

200–500 U/kg seed

Glycosylation essential; 
no fucose or xylose; 
leaf expression failed; 
inhibitory to seed viability

Nykiforuk et al. 
(2006)

Reggi et al. (2005)

Rice

Rice

hGM-CSF (human)

Rice glutelin

Type II collagen-4X 
peptide (human)

Glutelin

Protein storage 
bodies

Glutelin-fusion 
protein bodies

Maize

Avidin (bovine)

Maize ubiquitin

Apoplast

1.3% TSP

Biologically active

Sardana et al. 
(2007)

1 μg per seed

In protein bodies — 
correctly targeted

Hashizume et al. 
(2008)

0.2% DW in mixed 
population

Toxic in cytoplasm; 
seventh generation 
backcrosses; 0.4%  
DW in positive seed

Hood et al. (1997); 
Masarik et al. 
(2003)

42

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for optimizing protein products through plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   3

Table 3.3  (Continued)

Plant system

Protein

Promoter

Subcellular 
location

Expression level

Comments

Reference

Maize

Maize

Maize

Maize

Maize

Maize

Trypsin (bovine)

Maize globulin

Apoplast

0.3% TSP

Brazzein (plant)

Maize globulin

Apoplast

10% TSP

Laccase (fungal)

Maize globulin

Apoplast

0.8% TSP 
extractable

Mn peroxidase (fungal)

Maize globulin

Apoplast

14%TSP

Endo-cellulase E1 
(bacterial)

Exo-cellulase CBH I 
(fungal)

Maize globulin

ER and vacuole

0.1% DW

Maize globulin

CW and ER

0.2% DW

Requires zymogen form 
to be expressed

Woodard et al. 
(2003)

Small, stable sweet 
protein

Inhibits germination; 
90% non-extractable

Lamphear et al. 
(2005)

Hood et al. (2003)

Plant damage with 
constitutive promoter

Clough et al. 
(2006)

Seventh generation 
backcrosses

Seventh generation 
backcrosses

Hood et al. 
(2007) and Hood, 
unpublished

Hood et al. (2007)

Abbreviations: TSP, total soluble protein; DW, dry weight; CW, cell wall; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; CBH I, cellobiohydrolase I; hGM-CSF, human granulocyte macrophage colony 
stimulating factor.

promoter  and  subcellular  location  had  a  dramatic  effect  on 
protein accumulation — γ-zein promoter driven LT-B accumu-
lated to seven times higher levels than CaMV 35S promoted 
gene  expression  in  maize  seed  (Chikwamba  et  al.,  2002). 
In  this  case,  the  signal  sequence  used  with  the  gene  was  the 
native  bacterial  signal  peptide  plus  or  minus  the  SEKDEL 
for  ER  retention.  The  protein  with  just  the  signal  peptide 
accumulated  in  the  amyloplast,  which  was  a  totally  differ-
ent  compartment  than  expected  (Chikwamba  et  al.,  2003). 
This  phenomenon  indicates  that  not  all  parameters  of  target-
ing are completely understood (Hood, 2004a). Streatfield and 
Howard  (2003)  expressed  the  LT-B  from  a  constitutive  pro-
moter,  maize  ubiquitin,  and  targeted  the  protein  to  various 
compartments.  In  this  case,  the  targeting  sites  included  the 
nucleus,  the  chloroplast,  the apoplast, the ER, the cytoplasm, 
and the vacuole (Streatfield and Howard, 2003). The top three 
locations were the vacuole, the apoplast, and the ER, although 
the vacuole was the best for this maize codon optimized gene. 
The cytoplasm was the worst by over four orders of magnitude.
Human proteins have been expressed in numerous systems, 
numerous  tissues,  and  with  numerous  targeting  sequences 
(Giddings, 2001; Ma et al., 2003; Stoger et al., 2005; Daniell 
et al., 2009). Among the examples in Table 3.3, many expres-
sion levels have been achieved, although all are expressed from 
strong  seed-specific  promoters.  One  of  the  obvious  conclu-
sions  from  the  data  (Table  3.3)  is  that  the  proteins  represent 
extremely  divergent  character  from  growth  factors,  to  colla-
gen, to a lysosomal enzyme. Thus, comparing their expression 
characteristics is not highly relevant. However, two interesting 
examples  stand  out.  First,  the  human  acid  β-glucosidase  (gly-
cocerebrosidase)  was  originally  designed  to  be  expressed  in 

leaves  but  no  plants  with  expression  were  recovered  (Reggi 
et al., 2005). The authors switched to a seed-specific promoter 
and  recovered  plants  with  high  activity.  Because  glycosylation 
is critical to protein function, this protein was targeted to the 
endomembrane  system.  Although  good  expression  could  be 
recovered,  the  seeds  showed  symptoms  of  physiological  dam-
age  at  the  higher  expression  levels.  Nevertheless,  this  same 
enzyme  was  successfully  expressed  by  the  Cramer  group  in 
tobacco leaves in the early 1990s, but targeted to the vacuole 
(Cramer et al., 1996; Radin et al., 1997). The promoters and 
targeting  sequences  differed  from  those  of  the  Reggi  group, 
reinforcing the concept of exploring several plant/organ/subcel-
lular combinations to achieve success.

An  interesting  application  of  seed-based  expression  is  the 
oil  body  fusion  (Boothe  et  al.,  2010).  Several  enzymes  and 
pharmaceutical proteins have been expressed using this tech-
nology  including  insulin,  xylanase,  and  Apolipoprotein  B. 
These protein fusions accumulate to high levels on oil bodies 
in oil seeds and are easily purified by flotation.

The  maize  seed  expression  system  has  been  employed  to 
express for a number of proteins from viral, bacterial, fungal, 
plant, and animal sources (Table 3.3). Several subcellular loca-
tions in the embryo have been tested for the best location(s) 
for foreign protein accumulation, as described earlier for LT-B 
(Streatfield and Howard, 2003; Hood, 2004b). Laccase accu-
mulation  was  also  tested  in  numerous  subcellular  locations, 
with the apoplast yielding the best results (Hood et al., 2003). 
All  plants  expressing  laccase  showed  damage,  suggesting  that 
the  tissue-specific  promoter  was  leaky.  Interestingly,  the  ER 
was  predicted  to  be  an  additional  high-expressing  location, 
but  this  was  true  only  when  expressed  from  a  constitutive 

43

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

promoter  (Hood  et  al.,  2003).  When  the  ER  was  the  tar-
get  location  using  the  high-expressing,  embryo-specific  maize  
globulin-1  promoter,  no  plants  were  recovered.  This  suggests 
that  the  expression  may  have  been  high  in  the  ER,  but  the 
enzyme damaged the cells and they could not survive.

Thus,  in  the  maize  studies  looking  at  multiple  subcellular 
locations  and  with  tissue-specific  as  well  as  constitutive  pro-
moters, three locations stand out as the winning locations for 
high-level accumulation of proteins: the apoplast, the ER, and 
the  vacuole  (Table  3.3).  This  information  allows  one  to  nar-
row the systems to test when a new protein of interest is in the 
queue. These three locations were used in all subsequent maize 
protein  expression  studies.  Almost  all  examples  of  proteins 
expressed  in  maize  accumulated  to  the  highest  levels  in  the 
apoplast with either the tissue-specific or the constitutive pro-
moter. Two exceptions are the endo- and exo-cellulases (Hood 
et  al.,  2007).  The  E1  bacterial  endocellulase  accumulated  to 
the  highest  levels  in  the  ER  and  vacuole,  whereas  the  fungal 
CBH  I  exo-cellulase  accumulated  to  the  highest  levels  in  the 
ER.  Unfortunately,  the  ER-localized  protein,  although  enzy-
matically  active,  was  truncated  and  not  useable  for  industrial 
applications. Neither gene was codon optimized but was fused 
to a maize-optimized barley alpha amylase signal sequence.

In  summary,  the  seed-based  expression  system  offers  the 
advantages  of  protein  storage  stability,  high  volume  produc-
tion,  and  oral  delivery  when  in  a  food  crop.  Seed  systems 
are  amenable  to  breeding  for  better  quality  germplasm  and 
higher protein accumulation levels (Hood et al., 2003, 2007). 
There are numerous organs, tissues, and subcellular locations 
that allow the accumulation of high levels of different protein 
classes. The details are still empirical, although a great deal of 
information is now available to guide our choices.

Leaf Systems

Plant-based bioproducts from plants with large foliage volume 
(i.e.,  tobacco,  alfalfa,  lettuce,  etc.)  allow  high  biomass  yield 
and  easy  scale-up  of  a  target  protein.  Examples  abound  of 
recombinant proteins in tobacco leaves (Table 3.4). Nicotiana 
tabacum  and  N.  benthamiana  have  served  as  model  species 
for plant sciences for almost two decades, having succeeded as 
a  crop  system  for  molecular  farming.  They  are  strong  candi-
dates as hosts for production of recombinant proteins (Cramer 
et  al.,  1999;  Schillberg  et  al.,  2002;  Stoger  et  al.,  2002; 
Commandeur et al., 2003).

The  pharmaceutical  industry  needs  an  efficient  expression 
system  for  therapeutic  proteins.  The  advantages  of  tobacco 
leaves  as  a  bioproduction  system  include:  (1)  transformation 
procedures are well established; (2) biomass yield is high in a 
leafy  plant;  (3)  scale-up  is  easy;  (4)  high  soluble  protein  lev-
els can be achieved; (5) flexibility is available in the expression 
methods  (transient-based  via  Agrobacterium  or  viral  vectors, 
and  stable  nuclear  or  chloroplast  genome  transformation); 
(6) it is not a food or feed crop, therefore it has a low risk for 
transgenic products to enter the food or feed chain; (7) plant 
growth  requirements  are  inexpensive  and  simple;  (8)  it  has 
the  ability  to  perform  eukaryotic  post-translational  modifica-
tions; and (9) it is possible to co-express several genes at the 

same time. Among the disadvantages of using Nicotiana leaves 
are: (1) high levels of toxic alkaloids exist, although some low- 
alkaloid varieties are available (such as cultivar 81V9), of par-
ticular  importance  for  oral  delivery;  (2)  the  protein  product 
may  be  unstable  and  subject  to  degradation;  and  (3)  highly 
efficient purification is expensive and time-consuming because 
of  the  high  protein  background  in  leaves  (Ma  et  al.,  2003; 
Clemente, 2006; Goodin et al., 2008; Tremblay et al., 2010).

Antibodies  represent  one  of  the  major  classes  of  proteins 
that  have  been  produced  in  plants.  Several  plants  have  been 
hosts, but the overwhelming majority of them have been pro-
duced in tobacco leaves (De Muynck et.al., 2010). They are 
targeted to the endomembrane system since they require gly-
cosylation, disulfide bonds, and assembly of multiple subunits. 
Plants are a great system for antibody production because the 
capacity of mammalian cell culture is limiting. Plants, particu-
larly tobacco, are a rapid system that produces a diverse array 
of product (De Muynck et al., 2010).

Besides tobacco, alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.), cherry toma-
tillo (Physalis ixocarpa Brot), collard (Brassica oleracea), let-
tuce (Lactuca sativa), potato leaves (Solanum tuberosum), rice 
leaves  (Oryza  sativa),  spinach  (Spinacia  oleracea),  soybean 
(Glycine max), and tomato leaves (Solanum lycopersicum) are 
other leafy crops that have been used for production of recom-
binant proteins (Table 3.4). Alfalfa has ample biomass suitable 
for the production of high-value and -volume recombinant pro-
teins,  and  has  no  nitrogen  fertilizer  requirements  because  it 
fixes atmospheric nitrogen through symbiotic association with 
root-invading bacteria. Alfalfa is easily propagated by stem cut-
tings (Vlahova et al., 2005).

One  of  the  major  limitations  of  the  expression  of  recom-
binant  antigens  in  transgenic  plants  is  achievement  of  a  yield 
that  is  sufficient  to  meet  commercial  needs.  Yield  remains 
largely  unpredictable  and  there  is  great  variation  of  expres-
sion of different proteins even using the same promoter, vec-
tor, and expression system. To achieve higher yields, different 
stages  of  protein  expression  in  plants  can  be  optimized.  Our 
research  results  using  a  tobacco  transient  transformation  sys-
tem for three homologous genes: mouse, chicken, and human 
interleukin-12  (IL-12),  have  shown  completely  different  lev-
els  of  expression.  For  example,  mouse  IL-12  had  the  high-
est  expression  (89 μg/g  FW)  and  can  meet  commercial  levels 
when  expressed  in  plants,  but  human  IL-12  is  very  poorly 
expressed  (0.12 μg/g  FW;  Figure  3.1),  whereas  the  chicken 
IL-12  counterpart  had  intermediate  expression  (4.5 μg/g  FW: 
Medrano  et  al.,  2009,  2010).  All  three  genes  had  the  same 
promoter  and  targeting  site,  illustrating  again  the  empirical 
state of the science and the principles yet to be elucidated.

Stable versus transient leaf expression 
systems

Research  using  plants  for  recombinant  protein  expression 
originally was accomplished by stably transforming the nuclear 
genome of N. tabacum. DNA is first introduced into the target 
cell. After passage through the plant cell wall and membrane, 
the  introduced  DNA  then  proceeds  to  the  nucleus,  passes 
through  the  nuclear  membrane,  and  becomes  integrated  into 

44

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for optimizing protein products through plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   3

Table 3.4  Leaf-based expression of recombinant proteins

Plant system

Protein

Promoter

Subcellular location

Comments

Reference

35S CaMV and CsVMV

Cytoplasm, ER

0.015–0.023% TSP

Alvarez et al. (2010)

Aguilar et al. (2009)

90–300 ng/ FW

Gao et al. (2003)

100 mg/kg FW

Golovkin et al. (2007)

7.3% (CTB-ama1) and 
6.1% (CTB msp1) TSP

Davoodi-Semiromi  
et al. (2010)

1–2 % TSP

Kim et al. (2007)

Apoplast and 
subcellular outer 
membrane anchor

Chloroplast

Chloroplast

Up to ~2.5% TSP

Ruhlman et al. (2007)

Alfalfa leaves

Alfalfa leaves

Zera-Yersinia pestis F1-V 
antigen

Human granulocyte colony 
stimulating factor (hG-CSF)

Cherry tomatillo 
leaves

Hepatitis B surface antigen 
HBsAg

35S CaMV

Collard leaves

Smallpox vaccine virus B5 
antigenic domain

35S CaMV and RbcS

Lettuce leaves

Lettuce leaves

Malaria (CTB-ama1 and  
CTB msp1)

Heat-labile enterotoxin B 
subunit (LTB)

35S CaMV

Lettuce leaves

Cholera toxin B subunit-human 
proinsulin (CTB-Pins)

psbA

Tobacco N. 
benthamiana

Tobacco N. 
benthamiana

Tobacco N. 
benthamiana

Tobacco N. 
benthamiana

Tobacco N. 
benthamiana

Tobacco N. 
benthamiana

Tobacco N. 
benthamiana

Tobacco N. 
benthamiana

Tobacco N. 
benthamiana

Tobacco N. 
tabacum

Tobacco N. 
tabacum

Zera-human growth hormone 
(hGH)

35S CaMV

ER

3 mg/kg

Llompart et al. (2010)

Zera-Yersinia pestis F1-V 
antigen

35S CaMV and  
CsVMV promoter

Cytoplasm, ER

0.08–0.11% TSP

Alvarez et al. (2010)

Chicken IL-12

Mouse IL-12

Double-enhanced 35S 
CaMV

Double-enhanced 35S 
CaMV

0.4% TSP

Medrano et al. (2010)

3–7% TSP

Medrano et al. (2009)

Elastin-like polypeptide-GFP 
fusion

35S CaMV

Cytoplasm, chloroplasts, 
apoplast, and ER

11% TSP in the ER

Conley et al. (2009)

Resveratrol synthase (RS)

Double-enhanced 35S 
CaMV

Cytoplasm

ND

Condori et al. (2009)

HIV type 1 mucosal vaccine 
(CTB-MPR) membrane proximal 
(ectodomain) region of gp41

Recombinant hemagglutinin 
(HA) from pathogenic avian 
influenza virus (H5N1) subtype

Pathogenic avian influenza  
virus (H5N1 subtype)

Malaria (CTB-ama1 and CTB 
msp1)

35S CaMV

35S CaMV

ER

ER

ER

Chloroplast

Zera-Ct and Zera-EGF

Enhanced 35S CaMV

ER

0.01–0.2% TSP

Matoba et al. (2009)

400 mg/kg FW

Shoji et al. (2009a)

60 mg/kg FW

Shoji et al. (2009b)

13.17% (CTB-ama1) 
and 10.11% (CTB 
msp1) TSP

Zera-EGF 0.5 g/kg FW 
and Zera-hGH 3.2 g/
kg FW

Davoodi-Semiromi  
et al. (2010)

Torrent et al. (2009)

Tobacco N. 
tabacum

Cholera toxin B subunit-human 
proinsulin (CTB-Pins)

psbA

Chloroplast

16% TSP

Ruhlman et al. (2007)

(Continued )

45

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Table 3.4  (Continued)

Plant system

Protein

Tobacco leaves 
N. tabacum

Zein and phaseolin

Promoter

35S CaMV

ER

Tobacco leaves 
N. benthamiana 
and N. tabacum

HA1 antigenic domain of the 
H5N1

Ribulose bisphosphate 
carboxylase (RBC)

Apoplast secretion 
and ER

Subcellular location

Comments

Reference

Zeolin 3.5% TSP and 
phaseolin-KDEL 0.5% 
TSP

Mainieri et al. (2004)

Stable 4 mg/kg of FW

Spitsin et al. (2009)

Potato leaves

Rotavirus caprid protein (VP6)

35S CaMV

0.006% TSP

Matsumura et al. 
(2002)

Rice leaves

Antigenic lipoprotein (Ag473)

35S CaMV

0.18–0.6% TSP

Yiu et al. (2008)

Spinach leaves

Rabies virus glycoprotein and 
nucleoprotein

Subgenomic mRNA 
promoters specific for 
AlMV and TMV CP

Soybean leaves

Bean pod mottle virus (BPMV)-
GFP

Tomato leaves

Accessory colonization factor 
subunit A (ACFA)-CTB

Double-enhanced 35S 
CaMV

Tomato leaves

Mouse IL-12

35S CaMV

60 μg/g FW

Yusibov et al. (2002)

1% TSP

Ghabrial et al. (2009)

0.0003% to 0.06% 
TSP (ACFA) 0.006% to 
0.02% TSP (CTB-ACFA)

2.7–7.3 μg/g FW

Sharma et al. (2008)

Gutierrez-Ortega et al. 
(2005)

)

W
F
g

 

/

g
µ
(
 
n
o

i
t

a
r
t

n
e
c
n
o
c
 

2
1
-
L

I

1000

100

10

1

0.1

0.01

89 µg/g FW

4.5 µg/g FW

0.12 µg/g FW

mIL-12

chIL-12

hIL-12

Figure 3.1 l Three different IL-12 homologous genes have 
different expression levels in the same transient expression 
system. l Three different sandwich ELISA methods were used to 
determine protein quantity of each IL-12 species (mouse, chicken, 
and human IL-12) expressed in a transient system in N. benthamiana 
leaves. Transient expressed empty vector was used as a negative 
control for all three ELISAs.

the  genome.  It  is  believed  that  the  introduced  DNA  can  func-
tion  for  a  short  time  in  the  nucleus  as  an  extrachromosomal 
entity,  but  integration  into  the  genetic  material  of  the  target 
cell  is  necessary  for  long-term  functionality  and  expression. 
Nuclear  transformation  for  tobacco  plants  has  a  number  of 
advantages  including  that  transgene  expression  is  more  stable 

46

and it is useful when the objective is to study protein distribu-
tion within cell types other than leaf epidermis.

In  contrast,  transient  expression  is  typically  carried  out 
in  tobacco  leaves  of  N.  benthamiana  (Thomas  et  al.,  2003; 
Voinnet  et  al.,  2003).  Transient  expression  systems  are  vec-
tored either by Agrobacterium, viral vectors, or a combination 
of these, and are rapid techniques to assess the expression of 
different  targeted  proteins  whose  respective  precursor  genes 
are  transcribed  extrachromosomally.  Stably  transformed 
plants  are  not  generated  (Wydro  et  al.,  2006).  Transient 
expression usually takes from 2 to 4 days, whereas stable lines 
are  generated  after  approximately  2  to  6  months  —  a  more 
time-consuming method. The transient expression method is 
generally  used  to  facilitate  rapid  analysis  of  the  transforma-
tion construct integrity and to validate activity of new recom-
binant  proteins  (Sheen,  2001;  Voinnet  et  al.,  2003;  Dhillon 
et al., 2009). Development of this agro-infiltration process for 
large-scale  recombinant  protein  production  is  actively  being 
explored by both academic and industry researchers (Fischer 
et al., 2004; Wydro et al., 2006). In contrast to stable nuclear 
transformation,  the  transient  infiltration  system  yields  high 
levels  of  expression,  does  not  require  sterile  conditions  after 
transformation, and is a rapid protein production system. One 
disadvantage  of  the  transient  system  is  that  harvesting  at  a 
particular time is necessary.

We  have  developed  an  Agrobacterium-mediated  tran-
sient  expression  system  in  tobacco  that  provides  high  yields 
of  protein  and  a  significant  amount  of  leaf  tissue.  This  sys-
tem  provides  a  rapid  source  of  transgene  product  for  assess-
ing  post-translational  modifications,  purification  strategies, 
and  bioactivity,  as  well  as  an  effective  system  for  optimizing 

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for optimizing protein products through plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   3

(A)

chIL-12 ELISA

m
m
0
5
4
D
O

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

mIL-12 ELISA

(B)

m
m
0
5
4
D
O

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Figure 3.2 l Comparison of the expression 
levels of IL-12 by two methods, stable 
and transient transformation. l The highest 
expressing line obtained by stable transformation 
in N. tabacum was used to compare levels with 
transient expression system in N. bethamiana 
using the same construct (A) chIL-12 or  
(B) mIL-12.

Stable

Transient

0

Stable

Transient

construct elements. Using the immunomodulator mouse IL-12 
as  a  model  pharmaceutical  product,  we  obtained  bioactive 
recombinant  protein  at  levels  exceeding  5%  of  total  soluble 
leaf  protein  (Medrano  et  al.,  2009).  What  we  have  learned 
from  our  experience  using  IL-12  as  a  model  protein  is  that 
higher  yields  are  possible  using  the  transient  method  com-
pared with stable transformation using the same construct.

cytokine 

is 

an 

immunomodulator 

In  Figure  3.2,  IL-12  serves  as  the  model  gene  of  inter-
est  for  discussion  of  yields  in  stable  versus  transient-based 
protein  expression  methods.  This  70 kDa  heterodimeric 
glycosylated 
com-
posed  of  an  α-chain  (p35  subunit)  and  a  β-chain  (p40 
subunit)  with  promising  therapeutic  and  vaccine  appli-
cations  due  to  its  role  in  directing  cell-mediated  immu-
nity  (Adorini,  1999;  Fieschi  and  Casanova,  2003).  We 
have  expressed  a  single  chain  form  of  chicken  (Medrano 
et  al.,  2010)  and  mouse  IL-12  (Medrano  et  al.,  2009)  with 
a  glycine-serine  linker.  Both  forms  retain  the  full  biological 
function  of  the  native  heterodimer  (Lieschke  et  al.,  1997). 
In addition, we analyzed the highest expressor from 26 stable 
independent chIL-12 clones from N. tabacum and compared 
them  with  chIL-12  derived  from  transient  transformation  of 
N. benthamiana. Higher yield was obtained from the transient 
expression host, 7 times more for chIL-12 and 3.4 times more 
for mIL-12 compared with stable expression in N. tabacum.

Protein bodies in leaves

The ER seems to be a compartment that efficiently accumu-
lates  proteins,  where  stability,  folding,  and  post-translational 
modifications  are  enhanced.  This  organelle  appears  to  allevi-
ate  downstream  issues  and  facilitate  production  of  difficult 
proteins,  making  the  production  of  biopharmaceuticals  at 
commercial  levels  possible.  A  proprietary  technology  called 
Zera®  (originally  named  γ-zein)  is  being  developed  by  ERA 
Biotech  (Barcelona,  Spain).  The  technology,  discussed  in  the 
previous section, is based on in vivo protein accumulation in 
ER-derived  artificial  storage  organelles  called  StorPro  bodies. 
It simplifies purification and enhances productivity of known 
cell  lines  by  in  vivo  encapsulation  and  one-step  concentra-
tion of protein by density followed by Zera®-affinity capture 
(Herman and Larkins, 1999; Llompart et al., 2010).

The Zera® peptide is a proline-rich domain of a plant storage 
protein, that when fused to a target protein has two functions: 
(1) self-assembling of non-secretory storage organelles, and (2) 
protein body formation properties in the ER. Zera® technology 
has  a  number  of  advantages:  (1)  streamlines  protein  recovery 
by  density,  delivering  pre-purified  protein  that  has  an  impact 
on  cost-savings,  time  consumption,  and  process  development; 
(2) protects proteins inside of StorPro bodies from proteolytic 
degradation; (3) is suitable for expression of difficult-to-express 
proteins, such as toxic-to-cell molecules, unstable or labile prod-
ucts, and membrane proteins; (4) is compatible with transient 
and  stable  transformation;  (5)  increases  yield  and  quality  due 
to in vivo encapsulation that improves the capacity of the cell 
factory to assemble and accumulate complex products; and (6) 
simplifies/accelerates downstream processing.

Hairy Root Cultures

In  addressing  increased  concerns  about  regulatory  compli-
ance  and  product  safety,  there  has  been  renewed  interest  in 
“molecular  farming”  with  in  vitro  cultured  plant  cells,  tis-
sues,  and  organs  (Huang  and  McDonald,  2009;  Shih  and 
Doran,  2009).  Hairy  roots  appear  as  one  of  the  most  attrac-
tive  in  vitro  expression  systems  with  several  advantages 
when  compared  with  field-cultured  plants  (Guillon  et  al.,  
2006;  Georgiev  et  al.,  2007).  Hairy  roots  are  generated  by 
infection  of  plants  with  the  gram  negative  soil  bacterium 
Agrobacterium rhizogenes, which contains a large root-inducing 
(Ri) plasmid (Shanks and Morgan, 1999). Integration into the 
plant genome of the T-DNA carried on the Ri plasmid results 
in  differentiation  and  growth  of  neoplastic  (oncogenic)  roots, 
called  hairy  roots,  at  the  infection  site  (Guillon  et  al.,  2006; 
Shanks and Morgan, 1999). These induced root tissues can be 
excised  from  the  host  plants  and  grown  indefinitely  in  vitro. 
For  the  past  three  decades,  hairy  roots  have  been  success-
fully  induced  from  more  than  116  plant  species  (Rigano  and 
Walmsley, 2005) and have become an essential tool in a wide 
range  of  fundamental  studies  as  well  as  for  large-scale  tissue 
culture purposes (Guillon et al., 2006). Except for the natural 
genes introduced into hairy roots by A. rhizogenes, other genes 
of interest, such as those encoding animal proteins, can be read-
ily  introduced  using  the  same  process  as  that  used  to  create 

47

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

transgenic  plants  in  other  systems.  This  makes  hairy  root  cul-
tures a viable alternative production platform for heterologous 
proteins  from  which  the  first  product  is  now  on  the  verge  of 
commercialization.

Advantages of the hairy root culture  
system

Several  general  features  of  hairy  root  cultures  confer  signifi-
cant  regulatory  and  technical  advantages  compared  with  the 
culture  of  whole  plants  or  dedifferentiated  plant  suspension 
cells.  Since  hairy  roots  are  cultured  in  sterile  and  controlled 
environmental  conditions,  the  cultures  are  independent  of 
the climate, soil quality, season, and weather (Hellwig et al., 
2004). No issues with pathogen and herbicide contaminants, 
transgene  dissemination,  or  other  environmental  concerns 
linked  with  whole  plant  systems  are  present  (Guillon  et  al., 
2006a;  Putalun  et  al.,  2003).  Thus  Good  Manufacturing 
Practices  (GMP)  procedures  can  be  readily  implemented 
throughout  the  production  pipeline  in  alleviating  a  number 
of  regulatory  concerns  regarding  plant-made  pharmaceuti-
cals.  Another  important  advantage  of  the  hairy  root  culture 
system  is  the  possible  extracellular  secretion  of  expressed 
proteins. This Rhizosecretion (Guillon et al., 2006b) offers a 
simplified  method  for  the  recovery  of  foreign  proteins  from 
an inexpensive and well-defined medium that lacks exogenous 
proteins. Therefore, the cost for downstream processing could 
be significantly reduced. In addition, hairy roots are fast grow-
ing  cultures  that  reach  large  biomass  volumes  within  a  short 
time (approximately one month), so they are especially useful 
when the product is required more quickly than that obtained 
from  agriculture  (Putalun  et  al.,  2003).  Although  these 
advantages are shared by suspension cell culture systems, the 
genetic and biochemical stability of hairy roots and their effi-
cient productivity offer substantial advantages over suspension 
cells  where  somaclonal  variations  and  production  instabil-
ity can occur with relatively high frequency (Martinez et al., 
2005).  In  addition,  due  to  altered  auxin  metabolism,  hairy 
roots are able to grow on plant hormone-free media (Georgiev 
et  al.,  2007),  thus  offering  another  attractive  advantage  over 
suspension  cell  cultures.  Hairy  root  cultures  integrate  the 
merits  of  whole-plant  cultivation  with  those  of  a  suspension 
cell  culture  system,  holding  immense  potential  for  the  phar-
maceutical industry.

Recombinant proteins expressed with hairy 
root cultures

Due to the rapid growth, long-term genetic stability, and high 
productivity properties of hairy root cultures, they have been 
explored  for  decades  for  their  potential  to  produce  valuable 
metabolites,  particularly  secondary  metabolites  (Kim  et  al., 
2002). The interest in production of pharmaceutical proteins 
with the hairy root system started in 1997 when Wongsamuth 
and  Doran  (1997)  reported  the  first  application  of  hairy 
roots  for  synthesis  of  a  full-length  murine  IgG1  monoclonal 

antibody.  Fully  functional  antibody  with  a  maximum  yield 
of  18 mg/L  was  achieved  in  their  research,  and  up  to  43% 
of  the  antibody  was  secreted  when  the  culture  medium  was 
supplemented  with  polyvinylpyrrolidone  (PVP)  and  gelatin. 
Since  then,  production  of  15–20  recombinant  proteins  have 
been  reported  from  hairy  root  cultures,  as  shown  in  Table 
3.5.  These  include  reporter  proteins  (e.g.,  GUS  and  GFP; 
Medina-Bolivar and Cramer, 2004; Lee et al., 2007), enzymes 
(Gaume  et  al.,  2003;  Woods  et  al.,  2008),  antibodies  (Sharp 
and Doran, 2001a; Martinez et al., 2005), antigens (Ko et al., 
2006;  Kumar  et  al.,  2006;  Rukavtsova  et  al.,  2007),  growth 
hormone and growth factor (Komarnytsky et al., 2006; Parsons 
et al., 2010), and immunomodulators such as ricin B (the non-
toxic lectin subunit; Medina-Bolivar et al., 2003) and murine 
interleukin-12 (mIL-12; Liu et al., 2008; 2009). A high yield 
of protein was observed in the expression of acetylcholinester-
ase that accumulated to levels of up to 3.3% of TSP (Woods 
et al., 2008). Because foreign proteins expressed in hairy roots 
are  often  secreted  into  the  culture  medium,  this  feature  has 
been exploited recently for expression of human alkaline phos-
phatase  (Gaume  et  al.,  2003),  ricin  B  (Medina-Bolivar  et  al., 
2003),  and  IgG  antibodies  (Wongsamuth  and  Doran,  1997; 
Sharp and Doran, 2001a,b; Komarnytsky et al., 2006). These 
proteins  contain  a  signal  sequence  for  secretion  through  the 
endomembrane system. However, the secreted proteins were 
found to be vulnerable to protease degradation in the medium 
(Sharp and Doran, 2001a,b; Zhang et al., 2005). To overcome 
this problem, Zhang et al. (2005) developed an aqueous two-
phase  extraction  (ATPE)  system  comprising  PEG/sodium 
sulfate for fast recovery of ricin B, not only to partially purify 
the protein but also to improve its stability. In addition, due to 
long-term genetic stability of root tissues compared with sus-
pension  cells,  the  production  of  antibody  IgG1  with  tobacco 
hairy root cultures could sustain a constant level for a period 
of three years in comparison with severely declining yields in 
transgenic  tobacco  cell  cultures  (Sharp  and  Doran,  2001a). 
The biosynthetic capability of hairy root cultures for molecular 
farming thus has been largely recognized.

Hairy root cultures in bioreactors and 
scale-up

Scaling  up  hairy  root  cultures  in  a  bioreactor  is  a  critical 
step  toward  commercial  exploitation  of  this  culture  system 
(Mishra and Ranjan, 2008). A number of bioreactor configu-
ration  designs  have  been  examined  for  the  growth  of  hairy 
roots  ranging  from  conventional  airlift  (Liu  et  al.,  1999a), 
bubble  column  (Suresh  et  al.,  2004;  Rudrappa  et  al.,  2005), 
and stirred tank (Mehrotra et al., 2008) to specially designed 
trickle-bed  (Ramakrishnan  and  Curtis,  2004),  airlift  bal-
loon  (Sivakumar  et  al.,  2008),  and  nutrient  mist  bioreactors 
(Liu  et  al.,  2009).  These  bioreactors  can  be  roughly  divided 
into  three  types:  liquid-phase,  gas-phase,  or  hybrid  reactors 
that are a combination of both (Kim et al., 2002). Due to spe-
cial  morphological  and  physiological  characteristics  of  hairy 
roots, conventional bioreactors without appropriate modifica-
tions are usually inefficient to support hairy roots growing to 
high-density  as  the  cultured  roots  tend  to  form  clumps  that 

48

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for optimizing protein products through plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   3

Table 3.5  Recombinant proteins expression in hairy root cultures

Recombinant proteins

Plant species

Culture approaches

Protein yields

Reference

Murine IgG1

14D9 murine IgG1

Human single-chain IgG1

Human IgG4

N. tabacum cv  NT-1

N. tabacum cv  NT-1
N. tabacum cv  NT-1

Shake flask
Airlift bioreactor (2L)
Shake flask
Shake flask

18.0 mg/L, 14.0% secreted
19.8 mg/L, 21.5% secreted.
7.0 mg/L, 26% secreted
3.6 mg/L or 12% of TSP

Wongsamuth and Doran (1997)

Sharp and Doran (2001a)
Sharp and Doran (2001a)

N. tabacum

N. tabacum

Shake flask

Shake flask

64.03 mg/L

Martinez et al. (2005)

9.7 μg/gFW/day, secreted

Komarnytsky et al. (2006)

Murine single chain interlukin-12  
(mIL-12)

N. tabacum cv Xanthi
N. tabacum cv Xanthi

Hepatitis B surface antigens (HBsAg)

Potato (var. Kufri 
Bahar)
N. tabacum L.

Shake flask
Shake flask
Mist bioreactor (4L)
Airlift bioreactor (2L)

21.8 μg/gFW/day, secreted

0.5% of TSP
434.8 μg/L, 21% secreted
5.3 μg/gFW
3.5 μg/gFW

Liu et al. (2008)
Liu et al. (2009)

Shake flask

97.1 ng/(gFW)

Kumar et al. (2006)

Shake flask

0.01% of TSP

Rukavtsova et al. (2007)

Cholera toxin B-surface protective  
antigen (CTB-spaA)

N. plumbaginifolia

Petri dish

Ricin-B

N. tabacum cv Xanthi

Shake flask

Human epidermal growth factor (hEGF)

N. tabacum

Shake flask

Human growth hormone (hGH)

N. benthamiana

Shake flask

N/A

N/A

2 μg/gFW

N/A

Ko et al. (2006)

Medina-Bolivar et al. (2003), 
Zhang et al. (2005)

Parsons et al. (2010)

Skarjinskaia et al. (2008)

Human acetylcholinesterase

N. benthamiana

Shake flask

3.3% of TSP

Woods et al. (2008)

Rabbit cytochrome P450 2E1

Atropa belladonna

Shake flask

N/A

Banerjee et al. (2002)

Human secreted alkaline phosphatase 
(SEAP)

N. tabacum

Plastic chamber

280 μg/gDW, secreted

Gaume et al. (2003)

β-glucuronidase (GUS)

N. tabacum

Shake flask

N/A

Lee et al. (2007)

Green fluorescence protein (GFP)

N. tabacum cv Xanthi

Plastic sleeve 
bioreactor (5L)

820 μg/L, 20% secreted

N. benthamiana
Catharanthus roseus

Shake flask
Shake flask

50 μg/gFW
N/A

Abbreviations: FW, fresh weight; DW, dry weight; TSP, total soluble protein; NA: date not available.

Skarjinskaia et al. (2008), 
Medina-Bolivar and Cramer 
(2004)
Skarjinskaia et al. (2008)
Hughes et al. (2002)

resist  the  percolation  of  oxygen  (Ramakrishnan  and  Curtis, 
2004; Kino-Oka et al., 1999), and are prone to damage when 
exposed to high-shear environments (Kim and Yoo, 1993). It 
is  therefore  necessary  to  have  bioreactors  that  can  maintain 
low hydrodynamic stress and high volumetric oxygen transfer 
to achieve high-density cultures of hairy roots (Kim and Yoo, 
1993).  In  this  regard,  various  modifications  to  conventional 
bioreactors  were  attempted  such  as  a  stirred  tank  in  which 
the impellers were separated by a mesh from roots to reduce 
the  shear  (Jung  and  Tepfer,  1987),  a  stirred  tank  in  which 
internal supporting matrices were installed to immobilize the 

roots (Mehrotra et al., 2008; Abbasi et al., 2009), and a bub-
ble column bioreactor with multiple spargers for better aera-
tion (Kwok and Doran, 1995). While these modifications are 
simple in form, they introduce large differences in operation 
(Mehrotra et al., 2008).

So  far,  two  types  of  bioreactor  systems  are  regarded  as 
the  most  successful  for  hairy  root  cultures.  One  is  based  on 
the  airlift  and  bubble  column  concept.  This  type  of  bioreac-
tor  has  been  used  for  the  scale-up  of  many  species  of  hairy 
roots  such  as  Artemisia  annua  (Liu  et  al.,  1998),  N.  taba-
cum (Wongsamuth and Doran, 1997), Solanum chrysotrichum 

49

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

(Caspeta et al., 2005), red beet (Neelwarne and Thimmaraju, 
2009),  and  Beta  vulgaris  (Rudrappa  et  al.,  2004),  either  for 
synthesis  of  secondary  metabolites  or  recombinant  proteins. 
The second culture system, called a mist reactor, was specially 
designed  for  growing  plant  tissues  and  organs  such  as  shoots 
and roots (Towler et al., 2006; Weathers et al., 2009). This is 
a gas-phase bioreactor in which the plant tissues are exposed 
to humidified air or a gas mixture and nutrients are delivered 
as  droplets  by  spray  nozzles  or  ultrasonic  transducers  (Eibl 
and  Eibl,  2008).  The  mist  reactor  offers  advantages  in  that 
the oxygen transfer limitation found in other systems can be 
reduced  or  eliminated  even  at  high  root-bed  densities,  and 
hydrodynamic stress imparted on root biomass is totally elim-
inated  (Weathers  and  Giles,  1988;  Kim  et  al.,  2001;  Towler 
et  al.,  2006).  However,  due  to  the  continuous  gas  phase  in 
mist reactors, internal root-anchor matrices such as horizontal 
mesh trays and cylindrical stainless steel meshes are required 
(Eibl and Eibl, 2008). Various species of hairy roots have been 
grown in mist reactors, mainly for the purpose of production 
of secondary metabolites (Liu et al., 1999b; Kim et al., 2001; 
Souret  et  al.,  2003;  Huang  et  al.,  2004;  Ramakrishnan  and 
Curtis, 2004; Suresh et al., 2005). In a recent report of scal-
ing  up  tobacco  root  cultures  for  expression  of  mIL-12,  bet-
ter protein production was observed in a mist reactor than in 
an  airlift  reactor  (Liu  et  al.,  2009).  This  is  actually  the  first 
demonstration  of  successful  production  of  a  pharmaceuti-
cal protein in a mist bioreactor with potential for large-scale 
applications.  Finally,  there  has  been  a  trend  toward  the  use  
of  disposable  bioreactors  for  large-scale  cultures  of  hairy 
roots  to  reduce  production  costs  and  minimize  validation 
efforts under GMP regulations (Ducos et al., 2010; Eibl et al., 
2010). These disposable bioreactors consist of a sterile plastic 
chamber  or  bag  that  is  partially  filled  with  liquid  medium 
or  nutrient  mist,  inoculated  with  root  tissues,  and  dis-
carded  after  harvest  (Eibl  and  Eibl,  2008).  The  disposable 
bioreactor  has  been  successfully  exploited  for  growing  
tobacco hairy roots to produce functional mIL-12 (Liu et al., 
2009) and GFP (Medina-Bolivar and Cramer, 2004). Results 
have  proved  useful  for  further  optimization  and  scale-up 
studies.

Hairy  root  cultures  have  shown  promising  biosynthetic 
capability  for  recombinant  proteins.  Their  substantial  advan-
tages  over  field-cultured  plants  or  suspension  cells  include 
fast  growth,  freedom  from  pathogen  and  herbicide  contami-
nation, genotype and phenotype stability, and autotrophy for 
plant  hormones.  However,  they  provide  challenges  for  cul-
ture scale-up due to the special morphological characteristics 
of the differentiated tissues. Future research should focus on 
establishing  effective  and  economical  bioreactor  culture  sys-
tems for industrial production. If such a goal is achieved, the 
application  of  hairy  root  cultures  for  molecular  farming  will 
become reality.

Summary and Conclusions

Protein  targeting  within  the  context  of  an  appropriate  plant, 
organ,  tissue,  and  subcellular  location  is  still  a  somewhat 
empirical  science.  However,  due  to  the  intensity  of  research 
in  plant-made  pharmaceutical,  vaccine,  and  industrial  pro-
teins,  a  great  deal  of  information  has  been  gathered  on  the 
utility of various combinations. Leaves, seeds, and hairy roots 
each  have  their  advantages  and  disadvantages,  as  do  food/
feed versus non-food plant systems. The cytoplasm is often an 
inhospitable compartment for high-level protein accumulation 
but works well for selectable marker proteins such as for kana-
mycin  or  bialaphos  resistance.  The  endomembrane  system  is 
necessary for proteins that require post-translational modifica-
tions.  Many  choices  exist  within  the  endomembrane  system 
for  storage  and  degree  of  modification,  and  mechanisms  to 
reach these specific compartments are well known. However, 
what  is  not  known  in  many  cases  is  whether  the  particular 
protein  of  interest  will  perform  well  in  that  location.  The 
chloroplast has worked well for many proteins, particularly if 
they are from chloroplast transformation methods. However, 
these proteins are not post-translationally modified.

As new information is learned about protein targeting, better 
predictions of the most likely location for the best expression 
can be made. Nevertheless, empirical tests with multiple sites 
will still be needed because biology is not always predictable.

References

Abbasi, B. H., Liu, R., Saxena, P. K., & Liu, C. 
Z. (2009). Cichoric acid production from 
hairy root cultures of Echinacea purpurea 
grown in a modified airlift bioreactor. 
Journal of Chemical Technology and 
Biotechnology, 84, 1697–1701.

Abell, B., Hahn, M., Holbrook, L., & Moloney, 

M. (2004). Membrane topology and 
sequence requirements for oil body targeting 
of oleosin. The Plant Journal, 37, 461–470.

Adorini, L. (1999). Interleukin-12, a key 

cytokine in Th1-mediated autoimmune 
diseases. Cellular and Molecular Life 
Science, 55, 1610–1625.

sativa) exploiting a 3-D technique. Journal of 
Separation Science, 32, 3223–3231.
Alvarez, M. L., Topal, E., Martin, F., & 

Cardineau, G. A. (2010). Higher 
accumulation of F1-V fusion recombinant 
protein in plants after induction of protein 
body formation. Plant Molecular Biology, 
72, 75–89.

Banerjee, S., Shang, T. Q., Wilson, A. M., 

Moore, A. L., Strand, S. E., &  
Gordon, M. P., et al. (2002). Expression 
of functional mammalian P450 2E1 in 
hairy root cultures. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 77, 462–466.

Aguilar, O., Glatz, C. E., & Rito-Palomares, M. 

(2009). Characterization of green-tissue 
protein extract from alfalfa (Medicago 

Bock, R., & Warzecha, H. (2010). Solar-powered 

factories for new vaccines and antibiotics. 
Trends in Biotechnology, 28, 246–252.

Boothe, J., Nykiforuk, C., Shen, Y., 

Zaplachinski, S., & Szarka, S., et al. (2010). 
Seed-based expression systems for plant 
molecular farming. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 8, 588–606.

Bruce, B. (2000). Chloroplast transit peptides: 
Structure, function, and evolution. Trends in 
Cell Biology, 10, 440–447.

Buchanan, B., Gruissem, W., & Jones, 

R. (2000). Biochemistry and molecular 
biology of plants. Somerset, NJ: Wiley and 
Sons.

Caspeta, L., Quintero, R., & Villarreal, M. L.  

(2005). Novel airlift reactor fitting for 
hairy root cultures: Developmental and 
performance studies. Biotechnology Progress, 
21, 735–740.

50

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for optimizing protein products through plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   3

Cheung, S. C. K., Sun, S. S. M., Chan, J. C. 

N., & Tong, P. C. Y. (2009). Expression and 
subcellular targeting of human insulin-like 
growth factor binding protein-3 in transgenic 
tobacco plants. Transgenic Research, 18, 
943–951.

Chikwamba, R. K., Scott, M. P., Mejia, L. B., 

Mason, H. S., & Wang, K.  
(2003). Localization of a bacterial protein in 
starch granules of transgenic maize kernels. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
100, 11127–11132.

Chikwamba, R., Cunnick, J., Hathaway, D., 

McMurray, J., Mason, H., &  
Wang, K. (2002). A functional antigen in 
a practical crop: LT-B producing maize 
protects mice against Escherichia coli heat 
labile enterotoxin (LT) and cholera toxin 
(CT). Transgenic Research, 11, 479–493.
Chong, D., Roberts, W., Arakawa, T., & Illes, 
K., et al. (1997). Expression of the human 
milk protein beta-casein in transgenic potato 
plants. Transgenic Research, 6, 289–296.
Clemente, T. (2006). Nicotiana (Nicotiana 

tobaccum, Nicotiana benthamiana). Methods 
in Molecular Biology, 343, 143–154.
Clough, R. C., Pappu, K., Thompson, K., 
Beifuss, K., Lane, J., & Delaney, D. E., 
et al. (2006). Manganese peroxidase 
from the white-rot fungus Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium is enzymatically active and 
accumulates to high levels in transgenic maize 
seed. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 4, 53–62.

Commandeur, U., Twyman, R. M., & Fischer, R. 

(2003). The biosafety of molecular farming 
in plants. AgBiotechNet, 110, 1–9.

Condori, J., Medrano, G., Sivakumar, G., Nair, 
V., Cramer, C., & Medina-Bolivar, F. (2009). 
Functional characterization of a stilbene 
synthase gene using a transient expression 
system in planta. Plant Cell Reports, 28, 
589–599.

Conley, A. J., Joensuu, J. J., Menassa, R., & 

Brandle, J. E. (2009). Induction of protein 
body formation in plant leaves by elastin-like 
polypeptide fusions. BMC Biology, 7, 48.
Cramer, C. L., Boothe, J. G., & Oishi, K. K. 
(1999). Transgenic plants for therapeutic 
proteins: Linking upstream and downstream 
strategies. Current Topics in Microbiology 
and Immunology, 240, 95–118.

Cramer, C., Weissenborn, D., Oishi, K., & 
Grabau, E., et al. (1996). Bioproduction 
of human enzymes in transgenic tobacco. 
Annual New York Academy of Science, 792, 
62–71.

Daniell, H., Singh, N. D., Mason, H., & 

Streatfield, S. J. (2009). Plant-made vaccine 
antigens and biopharmaceuticals. Trends in 
Plant Science, 14, 669–679.

Davoodi-Semiromi, A., Schreiber, M., Nalapalli, 
S., Verma, D., Singh, N. D., & Banks, R. K., 
et al. (2010). Chloroplast-derived vaccine 
antigens confer dual immunity against 
cholera and malaria by oral or injectable 
delivery. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 8, 
223–242.

De Loose, M., Gheysen, G., Tire, C., Gielen, 

J., & Villarroel, R., et al. (1991). The 
extensin signal peptide allows secretion of a 
heterologous protein from protoplasts. Gene, 
99, 95–100.

De Muynck, B., Navarre, C., & Boutry, 

M. (2010). Producton of antibodies in 
plants: Status after twenty years. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 8, 529–563.

Denecke, J., Botterman, J., & Deblaere, R. 

(1999). Protein secretion  
in plant cells can occur via a default 
pathway. The Plant Cell, 2, 51–59.

Dhillon, T., Chiera, J., Lindbo, J., & Finer, 
J. (2009). Quantitative evaluation of six 
different viral suppressors of silencing using 
image analysis of transient GFP expression. 
Plant Cell Reports, 28, 639–647.

Dieryck, W., Pagnier, J., Poyart, C., & 
Marden, M., et al. (1997). Human 
haemoglobin from transgenic tobacco. 
Nature, 386, 29–30.

Ducos, J. P., Terrier, B., & Courtois, 

D. (2010). Disposable bioreactors for 
plant micropropagation and mass plant 
cell culture. Advances in Biochemical 
Engineering/Biotechnology, 115, 89–115.

Edelbaum, O., Sher, N., Rubinstein, M., 
Novick, D., & Tal, N., et al. (1991). 
Two antiviral proteins, gp35 and gp22, 
correspond to beta-1,3-glucanase and an 
isoform of PR-5. Plant Molecular Biology, 
17, 171–173.

Eibl, R., & Eibl, D. (2008). Design of 

bioreactors suitable for plant cell and 
tissue cultures. Phytochemistry Reviews, 7, 
593–598.

Eibl, R., Kaiser, S., Lombriser, R., & Eibl, 
D. (2010). Disposable bioreactors: The 
current state-of-the-art and recommended 
applications in biotechnology. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 86, 41–49.

Faye, L., & Gomord, V. (2010). Success 
stories in molecular farming – a brief 
overview. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 8, 
525–528.

Fieschi, C., & Casanova, J. (2003). The role of 
interleukin-12 in human infectious diseases: 
Only a faint signature. European Journal of 
Immunology, 33, 1461–1464.

Fischer, R., Stoger, E., Schillberg, S., Christou, 

P., & Twyman, R. M. (2004). Plant-based 
production of biopharmaceuticals. Current 
Opinion In Plant Biology, 7, 152–158.

Frigerio, L., Hinz, G., & Robinson, D. (2008). 

Multiple vacuoles in plant cells: Rule or 
exception? Traffic, 9, 1564–1570.

Galili, G. (2004). ER-derived compartments 
are formed by highly regulated processes 
and have special functions in plants. Plant 
Physiology, 136, 3411–3413.

Gao, Y., Ma, Y., Li, M., Cheng, T., Li, S. W., & 
Zhang, J., et al. (2003). Oral immunization 
of animals with transgenic cherry tomatillo 
expressing HBsAg. World Journal of 
Gastroenterology: WJG, 9, 996–1002.

Gaume, A., Komarnytsky, S., Borisjuk, N., 
& Raskin, I. (2003). Rhizosecretion of 
recombinant proteins from plant hairy roots. 
Plant Cell Reports, 21, 1188–1193.

Georgiev, M. I., Pavlov, A. I., & Bley, T. (2007). 

Hairy root type plant in vitro systems as 
sources of bioactive substances. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 74, 
1175–1185.

Ghabrial, S. A., Zhang C., & Gu, H. (2009). 

Viral vector useful in soybean and methods 
of use. In States, U., (ed.).

Giddings, G. (2001). Transgenic plants as 
protein factories. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 12, 450–454.

Gleba, Y., Klimyuk, V., & Marillonnet, S. 

(2005). Magnifection – a new platform for 
expressing recombinant vaccines in plants. 
Vaccine, 23, 2042–2048.

Golovkin, M., Spitsin, S., Andrianov, V., 

Smirnov, Y., Xiao, Y., & Pogrebnyak, N., 
et al. (2007). Smallpox subunit vaccine 
produced in Planta confers protection in 
mice. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
104, 6864–6869.

Goodin, M. M., Zaitlin, D., Naidu, R. A., 

& Lommel, S. A. (2008). Nicotiana 
benthamiana: Its history and future as a model 
for plant-pathogen interactions. Molecular 
Plant–Microbe Interactions, 21, 1015–1026.
Gruber, V., Berna, P., Arnaud, T., Bournat, P., 
Clement, C., & Mison, D., et al. (2001). 
Large-scale production of a therapeutic 
protein in transgenic tobacco plants: Effect 
of subcellular targeting on quality of a 
recombinant dog gastric lipase. Molecular 
Biology, 7, 329–340.

Guillon, S., Tremouillaux-Guiller, J., Pati, P. K., 
Rideau, M., & Gantet, P. (2006). Harnessing 
the potential of hairy roots: Dawn of a new 
era. Trends in Biotechnology., 24, 403–409.
Guillon, S., Tremouillaux-Guiller, J., Pati, P. 

K., Rideau, M., & Gantet, P. (2006). Hairy 
root research: Recent scenario and exciting 
prospects –- Commentary. Current Opinion 
in Plant Biology, 9, 341–346.

Gutierrez-Ortega, A., Sandoval-Montes, C., de 
Olivera-Flores, T. J., Santos-Argumedo, L., 
& Gomez-Lim, M. A. (2005). Expression 
of functional interleukin-12 from mouse 
in transgenic tomato plants. Transgenic 
Research, 14, 877–885.

Hashizume, F., Hino, S., Kakehashi, M., & 

Okajima, T., et al. (2008). Development 
and evalutation of transgenic rice seeds 
accumulating a type II – collagen tolergenic 
peptide. Transgenic Research, 17, 1117–1129.

Hellwig, S., Drossard, J., Twyman, R. M., & 

Fischer, R. (2004). Plant cell cultures for the 
production of recombinant proteins. Nature 
Biotechnology, 22, 1415–1422.

Herbers, K., Wilke, I., & Sonnewald, U. (1995). 

A thermostable xylanase from Clostridium 
thermocellum expressed at high levels in 
the apoplast of transgenic tobacco has no 
detrimental effects and is easily purified. 
Nature Biotechnology, 13, 63–66.

Herman, E. M., & Larkins, B. A. (1999). 

Protein storage bodies and vacuoles. Plant 
Cell, 11, 601–614.

Holwerda, C., Padgett, H., & Rogers, J. (1992). 
Proaleurain vacuolar targeting is mediated by 
short contiguous peptide interactions. The 
Plant Cell, 4, 307–318.

Hood, E. (2004). Where, oh where has my 

protein gone? Trends in Biotechnology, 22, 
53–55.

Hood, E. E. (2004) Bioindustrial and 

biopharmaceutical products from plants. 
In New directions for a diverse planet: 
Proceedings of the 4th International Crop 
Science Congress.

Hood, E. E., Bailey, M. R., Beifuss, K., 

Magallanes-Lundback, M., Horn, M. E., 

51

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

& Callaway, E., et al. (2003). Criteria for 
high-level expression of a fungal laccase gene 
in transgenic maize. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 1, 129–140.

Hood, E., Love, R., Lane, J., Bray, J., Clough, 
R., & Pappu, K., et al. (2007). Subcellular 
targeting is a key condition for high-
level accumulation of cellulase protein in 
transgenic maize seed. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 5, 709–719.

Hood, E., Witcher, D., Maddock, S., Meyer, 

T., & Baszczynski, C., et al. (1997). 
Commercial production of avidin from 
transgenic maize: Characterization of 
transformant, production, processing, 
extracting, and purification. Molecular 
Breeding, 3, 291–306.

Howard, J. A. (2005). Commercialization of 

biopharmaceutical and bioindustrial proteins 
from plants. Crop Science, 45, 468–472.
Howard, J. A., & Donnelly, K. C. (2004). A 
quantitative safety assessment model for 
transgenic protein products produced in 
agricultural crops. Journal of Agricultural and 
Environmental Ethics, 17, 545–558.

Howard, J. A., & Hood, E. (2005). Bioindustrial 
and biopharmaceutical products produced in 
plants. Advances in Agronomy, 85, 91–124.
Howard, J. A., & Hood, E. E. (2007). Methods 
for growing nonfood products in transgenic 
plants. Crop Science, 47, 1255–1262.

Huang, S. Y., Hung, C. H., & Chou, S. N. 

(2004). Innovative strategies for operation 
of mist trickling reactors for enhanced hairy 
root proliferation and secondary metabolite 
productivity. Enzyme and Microbial 
Technology, 35, 22–32.

Huang, T. K., & McDonald, K. A. (2009). 
Bioreactor engineering for recombinant 
protein production in plant cell suspension 
cultures. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 
45, 168–184.

Hughes, E. H., Hong, S. B., Shanks, J. 

V., San, K. Y., & Gibson, S. I. (2002). 
Characterization of an inducible promoter 
system in Catharanthus roseus hairy roots. 
Biotechnology Progress, 18,
 1183–1186.

Jung, G., & Tepfer, D. (1987). Use of 

genetic transformation by the RiT-DNA 
of Agrobacterium rhizogenes to stimulate 
biomass and tropane alkaloid production in 
Atropa belladonna and Calystegia sepium 
roots grown in vitro. Plant Science, 50, 
141–151.

Khan, S., Rajan, V., & Howard, J. (2010). 
Plant molecular pharming – industrial 
enzymes. In R. Meyers (Ed.), Encyclopedia 
of sustainability science and technology. 
New York, NY: Springer Science  Business 
Media. (In press)

Kim, T. G., Kim, M. Y., Kim, B. G., Kang, T. 
J., Kim, Y. S., & Jang, Y. S., et al. (2007). 
Synthesis and assembly of Escherichia 
coli heat-labile enterotoxin B subunit in 
transgenic lettuce (Lactuca sativa). Protein 
Expression and Purification, 51, 22–27.

Kim, Y. H., & Yoo, Y. J. (1993). Development 
of a bioreactor for high-density culture of 
hairy roots. Biotechnology Techniques, 7, 
859–862.

Kim, Y., Wyslouzil, B. E., & Weathers, P. J. 

(2001). A comparative study of mist and 

52

bubble column reactors in the in vitro 
production of artemisinin. Plant Cell 
Reports, 20, 451–455.

Kim, Y., Wyslouzil, B. E., & Weathers, 

P. J. (2002). Invited review: Secondary 
metabolism of hairy root cultures 
in bioreactors. In Vitro Cellular & 
Developmental Biology-Plant, 38, 1–10.
Kino-Oka, R., Hitaka, Y., Taya, M., & Tone, 

S. (1999). High-density culture of red 
beet hairy roots by considering medium 
flow conditions in a bioreactor. Chemical 
Engineering Science, 54, 3179–3186.

Ko, S., Liu, J. R., Yamakawa, T., & Matsumoto, 

Y. (2006). Expression of the protective 
antigen (SpaA) in transgenic hairy roots of 
tobacco. Plant Molecular Biology Reporter, 
24 251a–251g

Kogan, M., Dalcol, I., & Gorostiza, P., et al. 

(2001). Self-assembly of the amphipathic 
helix (VHLPPP): A mechanism for 
Zein protein body formation. Journal of 
Molecular Biology, 312, 907–913.

Komarnytsky, S., Borisjuk, N., Yakoby, N., 

Garvey, A., & Raskin, I. (2006). Cosecretion 
of protease inhibitor stabilizes antibodies 
produced by plant roots. Plant Physiology, 
141, 1185–1193.

Kumar, G. B. S., Ganapathi, T. R., Srinivas, 
L., Revathi, C. J., & Bapat, V. A. (2006). 
Expression of hepatitis B surface antigen 
in potato hairy roots. Plant Science, 170, 
918–925.

Kusnadi, A. R., Nikolov, Z. L., & Howard, J. A. 
(1997). Production of recombinant proteins 
in transgenic plants: Practical considerations. 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 56, 
473–484.

Kwok, K. H., & Doran, P. M. (1995). Kinetic 
and stoichiometric analysis of hairy roots 
in a segmented bubble column bioreactor. 
Biotechnology Progress, 11, 429–435.

Lamphear, B., Barker, D., Brooks, C., Delaney, 

D., Lane, J., & Beijuss, K., et al. (2005). 
Expression of the sweet protein brazzein in 
maize for production of a new sweetener. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 3, 103–114.

Lee, K. T., Chen, S. C., Chiang, B. L., & 
Yamakawa, T. (2007). Heat-inducible 
production of beta-glucuronidase in tobacco 
hairy root cultures. Applied Microbiology 
and Biotechnology, 73, 1047–1053.

Leite, A., Kemper, E. L., da Silva, M. J., & 

Luchessi, A. D., et al. (2000). Expression of 
correctly processed human growth hormone 
in seeds of transgenic tobacco plants. 
Molecular Breeding, 47–53.

Lieschke, G., Rao, P., Gately, M., & Mulligan, 

R. (1997). Bioactive murine and human 
interleukin-12 fusion proteins which 
retain antitumor activity in vivo. Nature 
Biotechnology, 15, 35–40.

Liu, C. Z., Towler, M. J., Medrano, G., Cramer, 

C. L., & Weathers, P. J. (2009). Production 
of mouse interleukin-12 is greater in tobacco 
hairy roots grown in a mist reactor than 
in an airlift reactor. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 102, 1074–1086.

Liu, C. Z., Wang, Y. C., Ouyang, F., Ye, H. C., 

& Li, G. F. (1999). Production of artemisinin 
by Artemisia annua hairy root culture in a 
internal loop airlift bioreactor. Acta Botanica 
Sinica, 41, 181–183.

Liu, C. Z., Wang, Y. C., Zhao, B., Guo, C., 
Ouyang, F., & Ye, H. C., et al. (1999). 
Development of a nutrient mist bioreactor 
for growth of hairy roots. In Vitro Cellular & 
Developmental Biology-Plant, 35, 271–274.
Liu, C., Wang, Y., Guo, C., Ouyang, F., Ye, H., 

& Li, G. (1998). Enhanced production of 
artemisinin by Artemisia annua L. hairy 
root cultures in a modified inner-loop airlift 
bioreactor. Bioprocess Engineering, 19, 
389–392.

Liu, J., Dolan, M. C., Reidy, M., & Cramer, C. 

L. (2008). Expression of bioactive single-
chain murine IL-12 in transgenic plants. 
Journal of Interferon and Cytokine Research, 
28, 381–392.

Llompart, B., Llop-Tous, I., Marzabal, P., 
& Torrent, M., et al. (2010). Protein 
production from recombinant protein 
bodies. Process Biochemistry (in press)

Ma, J. K. -C., Drake, P., & Christou, P. 

(2003). The production of recombinant 
pharmaceutical proteins in plants. Nature 
Reviews Genetics, 4, 794–805.

Magnuson, N., Linzmaier, P., Reeves, R., & An, 

G., et al. (1998). Secretion of biologically 
active human interleukin-2 and interleukin-4 
from genetically modified tobacco cells in 
suspension culture. Protein Expression and 
Purification, 13, 45–52.

Mainieri, D., Rossi, M., Archinti, M., Bellucci, 

M., De Marchis, F., &  
Vavassori, S., et al. (2004). Zeolin. A new 
recombinant storage protein constructed 
using maize gamma-zein and bean phaseolin. 
Plant Physiology, 136, 3447–3456.

Martinez, C., Petruccelli, S., Giulietti, A. M. A., 

& Alvarez, M. A. (2005). Expression of the 
antibody 14D9 in Nicotiana tabacum hairy 
roots. Electronic Journal of Biotechnology, 8, 
170–176.

Marty, F. (1999). Plant vacuoles. The Plant Cell, 

11, 587–600.

Masarik, M., Kizek, R., Kramer, K., Billova, S., 

Brazdova, M., & Vacek, J., et al. (2003). 
Application of Avidin–Biotin technology 
transfer stripping square-wave voltammetry 
for detection of DNA hybridization and 
avidin in transgenic avidin maize. Analytical 
Chemistry, 75, 2663–2669.

Mason, H., Lam, D. and Arntzen, C. (1992) 
Expression of hepatitis B surface antigen 
in transgenic plants. PNAS USA, 89, 
11745–11749. 

Matoba, N., Kajiura, H., Cherni, I., Doran, 
J. D., Bomsel, M., & Fujiyama, K., et al. 
(2009). Biochemical and immunological 
characterization of the plant-derived 
candidate human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 mucosal vaccine CTB-MPR. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 7, 129–145.

Matsumura, T., Itchoda, N., & Tsunemitsu, 
H. (2002). Production of immunogenic 
VP6 protein of bovine group A rotavirus 
in transgenic potato plants. Archives of 
Virology, 147, 1263–1270.

Medina-Bolivar, F., & Cramer, C. (2004). 

Production of recombinant proteins by hairy 
roots cultured in plastic sleeve bioreactors. 
Methods in Molecular Biology, 267, 
351–363.

Medina-Bolivar, F., Wright, R., Funk, V., Sentz, 

D., Barroso, L., & Wilkins, T. D., et al. (2003). 

Protein targeting: Strategic planning for optimizing protein products through plant biotechnology

C H A P T E R   3

A non-toxic lectin for antigen delivery of 
plant-based mucosal vaccines. Vaccine, 21, 
997–1005.

Medrano, G., Dolan, M. C., Stephens, N. T., 
McMickle, A., Erf, G., & Radin, D., et al. 
(2010). Efficient plant-based production 
of chicken interleukin-12 yields a strong 
immunostimulatory cytokine. Journal of 
Interferon and Cytokine Research, 30, 
143–154.

Medrano, G., Reidy, M. J., Liu, J., Ayala, J., 
Dolan, M. C., & Cramer, C. L. (2009). 
Rapid system for evaluating bioproduction 
capacity of complex pharmaceutical proteins 
in plants. Methods in Molecular Biology, 
483, 51–67.

Mehrotra, S., Kukreja, A. K., Khanuja, S. 
P. S., & Mishra, B. N. (2008). Genetic 
transformation studies and scale up of 
hairy root culture of Glycyrrhiza glabra 
in bioreactor. Electronic Journal of 
Biotechnology, 11, 6.

Mishra, B. N., & Ranjan, R. (2008). Growth of 
hairy-root cultures in various bioreactors for 
the production of secondary metabolites. 
Biotechnology and Applied Biochemistry, 
49, 1–10.

Napier, J., Stobart, A., & Shewry, P. (1996). 
The structure and biogenesis of plant oil 
bodies: The role of the ER membrane and 
the oleosin class of proteins. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 31, 945–956.

Neelwarne, B., & Thimmaraju, R. (2009). 

Bioreactor for cultivation of red beet hairy 
roots and in situ recovery of primary and 
secondary metabolites. Engineering in Life 
Sciences, 9, 227–238.

Neuhaus, J., & Rogers, J. (1998). Sorting of 
proteins to vacuoles in plant cells. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 38, 127–144.

Neuhaus, J., Stitcher, L., Meins, F., Jr., & Boller, 

T. (1991). A short C-terminal sequence is 
necessary and sufficient for the targeting of 
chitinase to the plant vacuole. Proceeding 
from the National Academy of Science, 88, 
10362–10366.

Nykiforuk, C., Boothe, J., Murray, E., 

& Keon, R., et al. (2005). Transgenic 
expression and recovery of biologically 
active recombinant-human insulin 
from Arabidopsis thaliana seeds. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 4, 77–85.

Nykiforuk, C., Shen, Y., Murray, E., & 

Boothe, J., et al. (2010). Expression and 
recovery of biologically active recombinant 
Apolipoprotein Al-milano from transgenic 
safflower (Carthamus tinctorius) seeds. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 9, 250–263.

Oey, M., Lohse, M., Kreikemeyer, B., & Bock, 

R. (2009). Exhaustion of the chloroplast 
protein synthesis capacity by massive 
expression of a highly stable protein 
antibiotic. The Plant Journal, 57, 436–445.

Paris, N., Stanley, C., Jones, R., & Rogers, J. 

(1996). Plant cells contain two functionally 
distinct vacuolar compartments. Cell, 85, 
563–572.

Parsons, J., Wirth, S., Dominguez, M., 

Bravo-Almonacid, F., Giulietti, A. M., & 
Rodriguez Talou, J. (2010). Production of 
human epidermal growth factor (hEGF) 
by in vitro cultures of Nicotiana tabacum: 
Effect of tissue differentiation and sodium 
nitroprusside addition. International Journal 

of Biotechnology and Biochemistry, 6, 
131–138.

Putalun, W., Taura, F., Qing, W., Matsushita, 

H., Tanaka, H., & Shoyama, Y. (2003). Anti-
solasodine glycoside single-chain Fv antibody 
stimulates biosynthesis of solasodine 
glycoside in plants. Plant Cell Reports, 22, 
344–349.

Radin, D., Cramer, C., Oishim, K., & 

Weissenborn, D. (1997). Production 
of Lysosomal Enzymes in Plant-based 
Expression Systems. United States.

Ramakrishnan, D., & Curtis, W. (2004). 

Trickle-bed root culture bioreactor design 
and scale-up: Growth, fluid-dynamics, and 
oxygen mass transfer. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 88, 248–260.

Ratner, M. (2010). Pfizer stakes a claim in 

plant cell-made biopharmaceuticals. Nature 
Biotechnology, 28, 107–108.

Reggi, S., Marchetti, S., Patti, T., & de Amicis, 

F., et al. (2005). Recombinant human 
acid b-glucosidase stored in tobacco seed 
is stable, active and taken up by human 
fibroblasts. Plant Molecular Biology, 
101–113.

Rigano, M. M., & Walmsley, A. M. (2005). 

Expression systems and developments in 
plant-made vaccines. Immunology and Cell 
Biology, 83, 271–277.

Rogers, J. C. (1985). Two barley alpha-amylase 

gene families are regulated differently 
in aleurone cells. Journal of Biological 
Chemistry, 260, 3731–3738.
Rudrappa, T., Neelwarne, B., & 

Aswathanarayana, R. G. (2004). In situ and 
ex situ adsorption and recovery of betalains 
from hairy root cultures of Beta vulgaris. 
Biotechnology Progress, 20, 777–785.
Rudrappa, T., Neelwarne, B., Kumar, V., 

Lakshmanan, V., Venkataramareddy, S. R., & 
Aswathanarayana, R. G. (2005). Peroxidase 
production from hairy root cultures of red 
beet (Beta vulgaris). Electronic Journal of 
Biotechnology, 8, 185–196.

Ruhlman, T., Ahangari, R., Devine, A., Samsam, 

M., & Daniell, H. (2007). Expression of 
cholera toxin B-proinsulin fusion protein 
in lettuce and tobacco chloroplasts – oral 
administration protects against development 
of insulitis in non-obese diabetic mice. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 5, 495–510.

Rukavtsova, E. B., Abramikhina, T. V., Shulga, 

N. Y., Bykov, V. A., & Bur'yanov, Y. I. (2007). 
Tissue specific expression of hepatitis B 
virus surface antigen in transgenic plant cells 
and tissue culture. Russian Journal of Plant 
Physiology, 54, 770–775.

Samac, D., Hironaka, C., Yallaly, P., & Shah, D. 
(1990). Isolation and characterization of the 
genes encoding basic and acidic chitinase in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Physiology, 93, 
907–914.

Sardana, R., Dudani, A. K., Tackaberry, E., 
Alli, Z., et al. (2007) Biologically active 
human GM-CSF produced in the seeds of 
transgenic rice plants. In Transgenic research 
(pp. 713-721). Springer.

Schillberg, S., et al. (2002). Antibody 

molecular farming in plants and plant cells. 
Phytochemistry Reviews, 1, 45–54.

Shaaltiel, Y., Bartfed, D., Hashmueli, S., Baum, 

G., Brill-Almon, E., & Galili, G., et al. 
(2007). Production of glucoceebrosidase 

with terminal mannose glycans for enzyme 
replacement therapy of Gaucher's disease 
using a plant cell system. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 5, 579–590.

Shanks, J. V., & Morgan, J. (1999). Plant 

‘hairy root’ culture. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 10, 151–155.

Sharma, M. K., Jani, D., Thungapathra, M., 
Gautam, J. K., Meena, L. S., & Singh, Y., 
et al. (2008). Expression of accessory 
colonization factor subunit A (ACFA) 
of Vibrio cholerae and ACFA fused to 
cholera toxin B subunit in transgenic 
tomato (Solanum lycopersicum). Journal of 
Biotechnology, 135, 22–27.

Sharp, J., & Doran, P. (2001). Characterization 

of monoclonal antibody fragments 
produced by plant cells. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 73, 338–346.

Sharp, J. M., & Doran, P. M. (2001). 

Strategies for enhancing monoclonal 
antibody accumulation in plant cell and 
organ cultures. Biotechnology Progress, 
17, 979–992.

Sheen, J. (2001). Signal transduction in maize 

and Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts. 
Plant Physiology, 127, 1466–1475.

Shih, S. M. H., & Doran, P. M. (2009). Foreign 

protein production using plant cell and 
organ cultures: Advantages and limitations. 
Biotechnology Advances, 27, 1036–1042.

Shoji, Y., Bi, H., Musiychuk, K., Rhee, A., 

Horsey, A., & Roy, G., et al. (2009). Plant-
derived hemagglutinin protects ferrets 
against challenge infection with the A/
Indonesia/05/05 strain of avian influenza. 
Vaccine, 27, 1087–1092.

Shoji, Y., Farrance, C. E., Bi, H., Shamloul, M., 

Green, B., & Manceva, S., et al. (2009). 
Immunogenicity of hemagglutinin from A/
Bar-headed Goose/Qinghai/1A/05 and A/
Anhui/1/05 strains of H5N1 influenza viruses 
produced in Nicotiana benthamiana plants. 
Vaccine, 27, 3467–3470.

Sijmons, P., Dekker, B., Schrammeijier, B., & 
Verwoerd, T., et al. (1990). Production of 
correctly processed human serum albumin 
in transgenic plants. Nature Biotechnology, 
8, 217–221.

Sivakumar, G., Dolan, M. C., Condori, J., 

Bennett, S., Bacchetta, L., & Medina-Bolivar, 
F. (2008). Air lift balloon type bioreactor: 
Platform for commercial production of plant 
based small molecules and tissues. In Vitro 
Cellular & Developmental Biology-Animal, 
44, S4–S5.

Skarjinskaia, M., Karl, J., Araujo, A., Ruby, 

K., Rabindran, S., & Streatfield, S. J., et al. 
(2008). Production of recombinant proteins 
in clonal root cultures using episomal 
expression vectors. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering., 100, 814–819.

Sojikul, P., Buehner, N., & Mason, H. (2003). 
A plant signal peptide–hepatitis B surface 
antigen fusion protein with enhanced 
stability and immunogenicity expressed 
in plant cells. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA, 100, 2209–2214.
Souret, F. F., Kim, Y., Wysiouzil, B. E., Wobbe, 

K. K., & Weathers, P. J. (2003). Scale-up 
of Artemisia annua L. hairy root cultures 
produces complex patterns of terpenoid 
gene expression. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering., 83, 653–667.

53

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Spitsin, S., Andrianov, V., Pogrebnyak, N., 

Smirnov, Y., Borisjuk, N., & Portocarrero, 
C., et al. (2009). Immunological assessment 
of plant-derived avian flu H5/HA1 variants. 
Vaccine, 27, 1289–1292.

Stoger, E., Ma, J. K. C., Fischer, R., & Christou, 

P. (2005). Sowing the seeds of success: 
Pharmaceutical proteins from plants. 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 16, 
167–173.

Stoger, E., Sack, M., Perrin, Y., Vaquero, 

C., & Torres, E., et al. (2002). Practical 
considerations for pharmaceutical antibody 
production in different crop systems. 
Molecular Breeding, 9, 149–158.

Streatfield, S. J., & Howard, J. A. (2003). 

Plant-based vaccines. International Journal 
for Parasitology, 33, 479–493.

Streatfield, S., Jilka, J., Hood, E., Turner, D., 

Bailey, M., & Mayor, J., et al. (2001). Plant-
based vaccines: Unique advantages. Vaccine, 
19, 2742–2748.

Suresh, B., Bais, H. P., Raghavarao, K. S. 

M. S., Ravishankar, G. A., & Ghildyal, 
N. P. (2005). Comparative evaluation of 
bioreactor design using Tagetes patula L. 
hairy roots as a model system. Process 
Biochemistry, 40, 1509–1515.

Suresh, B., Thimmaraju, R., Bhagyalakshmi, N., 
& Ravishankar, G. A. (2004). Polyamine and 
methyl jasmonate-influenced enhancement 
of betalaine production in hairy root cultures 
of Beta vulgaris grown in a bubble column 
reactor and studies on efflux of pigments. 
Process Biochemistry, 39, 2091–2096.

Tackaberry, E. S., Dudani, A., Prior, F., Tocchi, 

M., Sardana, R., & Alotsaar, I., et al. (1999). 
Development of biopharmaceuticals in plant 
expression systems: Cloning, expression, 
and immunological reactivity of human 
cytomegalovirus glycoprotein B (UL55) in 
seeds of transgenic tobacco. Vaccine, 17, 
3020–3029.

Thomas, C. L., Leh, V., Lederer, C., & Maule, 

A. J. (2003). Turnip crinkle virus coat 
protein mediates suppression of RNA 
silencing in Nicotiana benthamiana. 
Virology, 306, 33–41.

Torrent, M., Llompart, B., Lasserre-Ramassamy, 
S., Llop-Tous, I., Bastida, M., & Marzabal, P., 
et al. (2009). Eukaryotic protein production 
in designed storage organelles. BMC Biology, 
7, 5.

Towler, M., Kim, Y. J., Correll, M., Wyslouzil, 

B., & Weathers, P. J. (2006). Design, 
development, and applications of mist 

bioreactors for micropropagation and hairy 
root culture. In S. D. Gupta & Y. Ibaraki 
(Eds.), Plant tissue culture engineering 
(pp. 119–134). Dordrecht: Springer.

Wongsamuth, R., & Doran, P. M. (1997). 

Production of monoclonal antibodies by 
tobacco hairy roots. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 54, 401–415.

Tremblay, R., Wang, D., Jevnikar, A. M., & Ma, 
S. (2010). Tobacco, a highly efficient green 
bioreactor for production of therapeutic 
proteins. Biotechnology Advances, 28, 
214–221.

van Rooijen, G., & Maloney, M. (1995). Plant 

seed oil-bodies as carriers for foreign 
proteins. Nature Biotechnology, 13, 72–77.

Verwoerd, T., van Paridon, P., van Ooyen, A., 

van Lent, J., Hoekema, A., & Pen, J. (1995). 
Stable accumulation of Aspergillus niger 
phytase in transgenic tobacco leaves. Plant 
Physiology, 109, 1199–1205.

Vitale, A., & Boston, R. (2008). Endoplasmic 
reticulum quality control and the unfolded 
protein response: Insights from plants. 
Traffic, 9, 1581–1588.

Vitale, A., & Pedrazzini, E. (2005). 

Recombinant pharmaceuticals from 
plants: The plant endomembrane system 
as bioreactor. Molecular Interventions, 5, 
216–225.

Vitale, A., & Raikhel, N. (1999). What do 

proteins need to reach different vacuoles? 
Trends in Plant Science, 4, 149–155.

Vlahova, M., Stefanova, P., Petkov, A., & 
Barbulova, D., et al. (2005). Genetic 
modification of alfalfa (Medicago Sativa L.) 
for quality improvement and production 
of novel compounds. Biotechnology & 
Biotechnological Equipment, 19, 56–62.

Voinnet, O., Rivas, S., Mestre, P., & Baulcombe, 

D. (2003). An enhanced transient 
expression system in plants based on 
suppression of gene silencing by the p19 
protein of tomato bushy stunt virus. The 
Plant Journal, 33, 949–956.

Weathers, P., & Giles, K. (1988). Regeneration 

of plants using nutrient mist culture. In 
Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology-
Plant, 24, 727–732.

Weathers, P. J., Sivakumar, G., Liu, C., Towler, 
M. J., & Medina-Bolivar, F. (2009). Scaling 
up a new version of the mist bioreactor 
for hairy root cultures. In Vitro Cellular 
& Developmental Biology-Animal, 45, 
S69–S70.

Wongsamuth, R., & Doran, P. (1997). Hairy 

roots as an expression system for production 
of antibodies. In P. M. Doran (Ed.), Hairy 
roots: Culture and applications (pp. 89–97). 
Amsterdam: Harwood Academic.

Woodard, S., Mayor, J., Bailey, M., Barker, D., 

Love, R., & Lane, J.,  
et al. (2003). Maize (Zea mays)-derived 
bovine trypsin: Characterization of the first 
large-scale, commercial protein  
product from transgenic plants. 
Biotechnology and Applied Biochemistry, 38, 
123–130.

Woods, R. R., Geyer, B. C., & Mor, T. S. 

(2008). Hairy-root organ cultures for the 
production of human acetylcholinesterase. 
BMC Biotechnology, 8

Wydro, M., Kozubek, E., & Lehmann, P. (2006). 

Optimization of transient Agrobacterium-
mediated gene expression system in leaves  
of Nicotiana benthamiana. Acta Biochimica 
Polonica, 53, 289–298.

Xie, T., Qui, Q., Zhang, W., Ning, T., Yang, W., 

& Zheng, C., et al. (2008). A biologically 
active rhIGF-1 fusion accumulated in 
transgenic rice seeds can reduce blood 
glucose in diabetic mice via oral delivery. 
Peptides, 1862–1870.

Xu, J., Shpak, E., & Gu, T., et al. (2005). 
Production of recombinant plant gum 
with tobacco cell culture in bioreactor and 
gum characterization. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 90, 578–588.

Yiu, J., Tseng, M., Yang, C., & Liu, C., et 
al. (2008). Transgenic rice expresses 
an antigenic lipoprotein of Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae. Journal of the Science of Food 
and Agriculture, 88, 1603–1613.

Yusibov, V., Hooper, D. C., Spitsin, S. V., 

Fleysh, N., Kean, R. B., & Mikheeva, T., 
et al. (2002). Expression in plants and 
immunogenicity of plant virus-based 
experimental rabies vaccine. Vaccine, 20, 
3155–3164.

Zhang, C. M., Medina-Bolivar, F., Buswell, S., 

& Cramer, C. L. (2005). Purification and 
stabilization of ricin B from tobacco hairy 
root culture medium by aqueous two-phase 
extraction. Journal of Biotechnology, 117, 
39–48.

Zhou, Y., Lee, M., Ng, J., Chye, M., Yip, 

W., & Zee, S., et al. (2006). A truncated 
hepatitis E virus ORF2 protein expressed 
in tobacco plastids is immunogenic in mice. 
World Journal of Gastroenterology., 12, 
306–312.

54

Introduction to plant biotechnology 2011: 
Basic aspects and agricultural implications

Arie Altman1 Paul Michael Hasegawa2
1Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, 2Purdue University, Indiana

The Role of Plants and Agriculture: 
Food Security, the Changing 
Environment and Novel Biomaterials

Current  agricultural  crops  are  products  of  plant  domestica-
tion,  along  with  gradual  long-term  changes  in  their  qualita-
tive  and  quantitative  traits  because  of  continuous  natural 
and  human-directed  selection.  Whereas  some  of  the  first 
improvements in plants and animals could have resulted from 
chance  alone,  the  eye  and  brain  of  the  “primitive”  scientist-
farmer  were  crucial  in  selecting  the  good  from  the  bad,  and 
the  productive  and  quality  crop  from  the  less  worthy.  Thus, 
advancements  in  agriculture  and  plant  science  are,  primarily, 
the  result  of  scientific  discoveries  and  judgments,  historic 
innovations, and are sometimes revolutionary, such as fermen-
tation of food products, use of inorganic fertilizers, and more 
recently, plant genetic transformation.

Man-made technologies and biotechnologies, including food 
and  fiber,  have  shaped  human  life  since  time  immemorial. 
Fermented plant and animal products (e.g., bread, cheese, and 
wine),  conventional  crop  breeding  since  the  birth  of  agricul-
tural communities, the “Green Revolution” of later years, and 
molecular  marker-assisted  selection  and  recombinant  DNA 
techniques  are  all  biotechnologies  by  definition  (Meiri  and 
Altman,  1998;  Altman,  1999;  Chrispeels  and  Sadava,  2003; 
Science,  2010).  The  urgent  need  to  look  for  alternative  bio-
technologies and the actual accelerated rate of adopting plant 
molecular biotechnologies since the breakthrough report of the 
first transgenic plant in 1982–1983 (Otten et al., 1981; Barton 
et al., 1983) is due to four major causes:
1. Increase in world population and the need for more food
2. Recognition that human health is affected by disease-

causing pathogenic organisms and by the nutritional quality 
of foods, especially vitamins and minerals

3. Adverse global climatic changes accompanied by 

4. Human societies searching for novel, non-food plant 

products such as biomaterials, therapeutics, and biofuels.
Thus,  in  a  world  where  population  growth  is  outstripping 
food  production  (both  for  quantity  and  quality),  agricultural 
and plant biotechnologies need to be swiftly implemented.

World population and food

According  to  recent  reports  and  learned  estimations  (FAO, 
2009),  the  world’s  population  will  reach  9.1  billion  by  2050, 
34%  higher  than  today,  and  nearly  all  of  this  increase  will 
occur  in  developing  countries.  It  is  also  predicted  that  due  to 
the accelerated rate of urbanization, about 70% of the world’s 
population  will  be  urban  (compared  to  49%  today)  accompa-
nied probably by higher income levels. To feed this larger urban 
population,  food  production  will  have  to  increase  by  70%;  for 
example,  cereal  production  will  need  to  reach  about  3  billion 
tons, compared with 2.1 billion today. The Food and Agriculture 
Organization  (FAO)  report  further  argues  that  the  required 
increase  in  food  production  can  be  achieved  if  the  necessary 
investments,  policies,  and  regulations  for  agricultural  produc-
tion  are  undertaken.  It  is  estimated  that  in  developing  coun-
tries  80%  of  the  necessary  production  increases  would  come 
from yield increase and cropping intensity, and only 20% from 
expansion  of  arable  land,  which  emphasizes  an  even  greater 
need  for  improved  agricultural  technologies  and  biotechnolo-
gies. It should be mentioned that the discussion of food supply 
refers not only to caloric demands, but also to increased intake 
of vitamins, essential minerals, and other nutritional factors via 
production of biofortified food to improve the health of under-
nourished people, especially in children and in poorer countries. 
This aspect is further discussed in the next section.

Climate and environmental changes

detrimental biotic and abiotic hazards (stresses) to crops 
and ecosystems

Climate  changes  and  desertification  pose  additional  risks 
to  long-term  food  security  by  detrimentally  affecting  plant 

Plant biotechnology and agriculture

physiological processes and increasing soil erosion. CO2 concen-
trations have increased significantly, rising from about 270 μmol 
mol1  in  1750  to  over  385 μmol  mol1  currently  (Solomon 
et al., 2007; Le Quéré et al., 2009). The accompanying increase 
in methane, ozone, and nitrous oxide (greenhouse gases) due to 
intensified burning of fossil oils and other man-made activities 
will exceed concentrations of 550 μmol mol1 by 2050 (Raven 
and  Karley,  2006;  Brouder  and  Volenec,  2008).  The  resulting 
increase  in  the  greenhouse  effect  is  the  key  factor  in  current 
global  warming,  with  a  projected  average  annual  mean  warm-
ing increase of 3–5°C in the next 50–100 years (Solomon et al., 
2007). The combined effects of climatic changes, global warm-
ing, drought, and salinity have led to increased desertification in 
many parts of the world. Desertification, caused by overexploi-
tation by local inhabitants, results in increased soil erosion and 
decreased  land  and  agricultural  productivity  (Altman,  1999; 
Reynolds  et  al.,  2007).  Dry  lands  cover  about  41%  of  Earth’s 
land surface and are home to more than 38% of the total cur-
rent global population of 6.5 billion. Some form of severe land 
degradation  is  present  on  10–20%  of  these  lands,  the  conse-
quences  of  which  are  estimated  to  affect  directly  more  than 
250 million people in the developing world, an estimate likely 
to  increase  substantially  in  the  face  of  climate  change  and 
population  growth  (UNCCD,  1994;  GLP,  2005;  MEA,  2005; 
Reynolds  et  al.,  2007).  The  combined  climatic  changes  and 
desertification cause not only an alarming increase in dry lands, 
but also result in soil salinization. This is estimated to result in a 
30% arable land loss over the next 25 years, and up to 50% land 
loss by 2050.

Novel biomaterials

Increasing  food  production  through  plant  and  agricultural 
biotechnologies  is  still  the  major  target;  however,  the  last 
two  decades  have  witnessed  a  shift  from  the  production  of 
low-priced  food  and  bulk  commodities  to  high-priced,  spe-
cialized,  plant-derived,  and  novel  non-food  products,  collec-
tively termed biomaterials. This move coincided also with the 
increasing  market  demand  for  novel  biotechnology-derived 
industrial products (e.g., bio-plastics, bio-glues), pharmaceuti-
cals, medical devices (such as vaccines and other therapeutics, 
and  collagen),  and  plant  resource-derived  bioenergy  produc-
tion. As for the latter, increased biofuel production from food 
crops  is  likely  to  affect  food  supply  and  costs.  Therefore, 
there is currently a need to move from first-generation biofuel 
crop plants to second-generation plants.

In  addition  to  continuously  improving  traditional  agri-
cultural  practices,  only  two  major  potential  solutions  exist 
to  increase  food  supply  and  agricultural  commodities:  (1)  a 
search  for  alternative  food  sources  (e.g.,  marine  or  extrater-
restrial  products,  single-cell  proteins);  or  (2)  enhanced  plant 
breeding  efficiency  for  crop  improvement  by  utilizing  the 
new biotechnological tools, including production of transgenic 
crops  and  molecular  marker-assisted  selection.  Expectations 
for reliable sources of alternative foods have not been realized 
so  far.  On  the  other  hand,  the  products  of  agricultural  bio-
technology  and  recombinant  DNA  technologies,  which  first 
came to the marketplace in 1996, have increased impressively 

xxx

since  their  introduction.  Over  one  billion  hectares  of  geneti-
cally modified (GM) crops (currently planted with four major 
crops,  but  many  more  will  soon  be  commercially  produced) 
are now grown by 15.4 million farmers (most of them small-
scale,  resource-poor  farmers  in  developing  countries)  in  29 
countries  around  the  globe  (James,  2010).  It  is  noteworthy 
that  developing  countries  grew  48%  of  the  global  biotech 
crops  in  2010  and  will  exceed  industrialized  nations  in  their 
plantings of biotech crops by 2015. The revolutionary impact 
to agriculture in only 30 years is unprecedented.

The Need for Integration: Merging 
Understanding of Plant Mechanisms 
and Advancing Technologies to 
Biotechnology

Classical  agriculture  is  no  longer  sufficient  to  supply  the 
demand  of  developed  and  developing  countries  worldwide 
for  food  production,  as  well  as  for  new  plant  commodities. 
Human survival, vis-à-vis a continuous increase in agricultural 
productivity,  is  dependent  on  an  effective  merging  of  classi-
cal breeding and plant biotechnology. The Green Revolution, 
for example, led to a 10-fold increase in wheat production in 
India and in several other countries of Southeast Asia, feeding 
three times as many people. This was followed by the adop-
tion of dwarf rice varieties for use in agriculture, which led to 
comparable increases in food production. However, their ben-
efits have been thoroughly exploited, and alternative solutions 
are  required  to  breed  improved  crops.  Now  biotechnology, 
integrated with classical breeding, is on the verge of creating 
the “evergreen revolution.”

The last decade has led to a phenomenally greater under-
standing  of  plant  biology,  which  is  the  underpinning  foun-
dation  for  substantial  translational  potential  to  enhance 
plant-derived food, fiber, biopolymer, biofuel, and metabolite 
production. Technical understanding and capacities in molecu-
lar genetics and omics technologies drive this biotechnological 
revolution in agriculture. Further advances will be made based 
on this current foundation, continued scientific input, and the 
technological advances that will be derived. A dynamic para-
digm  is  in  motion  similar  to  when  humans  went  from  being 
hunters and gatherers to being farmers, which was paramount 
to the development of societal structures that led to substan-
tial  population  increase  and  the  pre-eminence  of  humans  as 
the  dominant  species  on  the  planet  (Doebley  et  al.,  2006). 
Plant and crop domestication resulted from naturally existing 
genetic variation and selection for desirable agricultural traits 
made  by  our  ancestral  progenitors  (see  Chapter  1).  Human 
selection  changed  the  genetic  composition  of  uncultivated 
crops,  initiating  the  process  of  domestication  and  leading  to 
substantially  increased  production  of  plant-based  food,  fiber, 
and forage materials.

Millennia  after  the  onset  of  domestication,  we  are  now 
in  an  era  where  omics  technologies  are  contributing  to  tech-
nical  advancements  and  resources  that  will  lead  to  improve-
ment  of  crops  at  a  heretofore  unimaginable  pace.  These  will 
enable  exploitation  of  genetic  variation  to  meet  current  and 

Introduction to plant biotechnology 2011: Basic aspects and agricultural implications

future societal needs for food as caloric and nutrient sources, 
biopolymers  and  biofuels,  and  plant  metabolites.  The  under-
standing of genomics paradigms has advanced so much in the 
last decade that it has resulted in a fundamentally more inte-
grative  and  in-depth  comprehension  about  how  genetic  and 
epigenetic processes regulate plant growth and development, 
and  responses  to  abiotic  and  biotic  factors  (see  Chapter  2).  
This  new  age  is  driven  by  novel  technologies  for  genomic 
sequence and synteny linkage data acquisition and mining and 
pathway integration for a much more robust understanding of 
intra-  and  inter-organismal  complex  processes,  such  as  yield 
and abiotic and biotic stress tolerance mechanisms. The era of 
omics  including  genomics,  transcriptomics,  epigenomics,  and 
proteomics  is  poised  to  facilitate  biotechnological  improve-
ment of crops, particularly for phenotypes that are controlled 
by complex genetic and epigenetic mechanisms and processes.
Epigenomics  has  substantial  implications  on  plant  breed-
ing and cultivar development (see Chapter 14). Many devel-
opmental  and  environmental  responses  are  regulated  by 
epigenetics,  and  it  is  predicted  that  reprogramming  of  the 
epigenome is a substantial factor in crop development through 
biotechnology.  Genomics  technologies  are  moving  from 
models  to  crop  systems  (see  Chapter  6).  High-throughput 
sequencing technologies and dataset analyses make it feasible 
to obtain genomic sequence information of new crop species, 
even  those  with  large  genomes,  and  related  species  make  it 
feasible  to  build  comparative  maps,  define  syntenic  relation-
ships,  and  identify  allelic  variation  for  important  adaptive 
traits.

Substantial advancements in plant genomics and transcrip-
tomics  spurred  interest  in  proteomics  and  metabolomics. 
Today,  modern  methodologies  can  structurally  characterize 
and  quantify  the  proteome,  as  well  as  any  post-translational 
modifications that may be important for metabolic and there-
fore biological function (see Chapter 4). Proteomics provides 
a detailed understanding of plant metabolic networks that will 
lead  to  predictions  about  altering  pathway  fluxes  to  achieve 
targeted  end-product 
formation.  Biotechnologically,  the 
future will entail protein modifications that will modify meta-
bolic networks to enhance agriculturally important crop phe-
notypes, regardless of genetic complexity. Biotechnology also 
will promote using plants for production of protein products, 
such as using plants as bio-factories (see Chapter 3). Products 
will include vaccines, antigens, antibodies, peptide hormones, 
enzymes,  reagents,  and  storage  proteins.  This  capacity  is  the 
result  of  decades  of  dissecting  mechanisms  and  processes 
involved in intracellular protein trafficking and targeting; cell, 
tissue, or organ accumulation; and developing engineering sys-
tems that can translate this information into large- and small-
scale  production  that  is  economically  viable  and  societally 
useful. It is estimated that the plant metabolome consists of 
200,000  to  1,000,000  different  molecules  (see  Chapter  5). 
These  metabolites  represent  the  chemical  capacity  of  cells. 
Specific individual metabolites and their concentrations make 
up  the  metabolic  signature(s)  that  direct  plant  responses  to 
developmental  and  environmental  cues.  The  metabolic  pro-
file is the most definitive indicator of plant status and a likely 
regulator  of  processes.  Metabolites  are  also  sources  of  food, 
nutraceuticals,  pharmaceuticals,  fiber  and  other  primary  and 

secondary  products,  and  biofuels.  Profile  modification  based 
on  precursor-production  modulation  and  changes  in  meta-
bolic flux will substantially affect production of biomolecular 
resources and alterations in developmental and environmental 
response pathways.

Tissue  culture,  as  it  is  generically  referred  to,  is  the  most 
prominent  first  plant  biotechnology.  It  was  developed  pri-
marily as a platform for basic research on cellular and tissue 
differentiation,  and  morphogenesis  and  hormone  identifica-
tion  and  function  (see  Chapter  9).  Tissue  culture  has  led  to 
numerous  biotechnological  spinoffs.  These  include  rapid 
clonal  multiplication,  somatic  breeding  methodologies  (e.g., 
proptoplast  fusion,  generation  of  haploids  by  pollen  culture, 
cell selection, etc.), disease eradication, transgenic plants, and 
germplasm preservation (see Chapters 10, 15, and 17).

A  major  achievement  in  plant  biology  was  the  develop-
ment  of  the  molecular  genetic  resources  and  the  techniques 
for  cellular  gene  transfer,  which  include  integration  into  the 
host  genome  and  stable  replication  (see  Chapters  7  and  8). 
Combined  with  the  knowledge  derived  from  tissue  culture 
research,  plants  can  be  reconstituted  from  transfected  cells, 
which  are  capable  of  stable  expression  and  inheritance  by 
progeny of transgenes; a process referred to as genetic trans-
formation. Agrobacterium-mediated transformation is the pre-
dominant method used in biotechnology. “Disarmed” forms of 
Agrobacterium, which is a natural plant pathogen, possess the 
genetic  determinants  involved  in  host  recognition,  transgene 
replication,  and  transfer  into  host  cells  and  integration  into 
the  host  genome  (see  Chapter  7).  Microprojectile  bombard-
ment  and  other  non-Agrobacterium  methods  of  plant  trans-
formation  are  used  to  generate  transgenic  plants  of  species 
outside the Agrobacterium host range (see Chapter 8).

Coincident  with  the  development  of  omics  technologies 
and genetic transformation efficacy, a new basic understanding 
of plant biological processes and molecular applications is also 
driving  the  biotechnology  revolution.  Apomixis  is  the  forma-
tion of somatic embryos from maternal tissue of the ovule or 
unreduced  gametes  (see  Chapter  16).  This  naturally  occur-
ring  process  allows  superior  traits  to  be  fixed  in  hybrids  and 
genetically  stabilized  and  inherited  through  seed  propagation. 
This process is thought to maintain a type of genetic variation 
that  is  evolutionarily  required  for  the  maintenance  of  certain 
plant  species.  Since  key  genetic  determinants  of  apomixis 
are  known,  it  may  be  feasible  to  co-opt  apomixis  to  facili-
tate  hybrid  seed  production.  DNA  marker-assisted  selection 
refined the process of screening for phenotypes in segregating 
populations,  greatly  accelerating  cultivar  development  (see 
Chapter 11). Rapid technological advances are accelerating the 
utility of the technique for application to crops whose molecu-
lar  genetic  characterization  is  rudimentary.  Male  sterility  is 
the basis for hybrid seed production of many important crops  
(see Chapter 12). The molecular genetic basis of cytoplasmic 
male  sterility  and  fertility  restoration  mechanisms  is  well- 
characterized at the molecular level to the extent that effective 
biotechnology strategies can be designed. Biotechnology is also 
poised  to  exploit  natural  genetic  variation  (see  Chapter  13). 
Understanding  and  technology  development  gained  by  using 
model species such as Arabidopsis have led to the feasibility of 
accessing superior alleles from crop relatives.

xxxi

Plant biotechnology and agriculture

The Need to Protect Against Abiotic 
and Biotic Stresses

Plant  adaptation  to  environmental  stresses,  both  abiotic  (e.g., 
drought,  salinity,  and  temperature  extremes)  and  biotic  (e.g., 
bacterial, fungal, and viral diseases, and insect and other pests), 
is  controlled  by  cascades  of  genes  and  molecular  networks. 
These  activate  numerous  stress  responsive  mechanisms  neces-
sary to re-establish homeostasis and to protect and repair dam-
aged  proteins  and  membranes.  Plant  engineering  strategies  for 
environmental  stress  tolerance  rely  on  the  expression  of  genes 
that are involved in signaling and regulatory pathways or genes 
that  encode  proteins  conferring  stress  tolerance  or  enzymes 
present  in  pathways  leading  to  the  synthesis  of  functional  and 
structural metabolites (see Chapters 2 and 18). Present efforts 
to  improve  plant  stress  tolerance  by  genetic  transformation 
resulted in several important achievements; however, the geneti-
cally  complex  mechanisms  involved  in  abiotic  stress  tolerance 
have  made  it  difficult  to  achieve  substantive  effects  in  crops 
without  side  effects  on  yield.  For  this  reason,  biotechnology 
should be fully integrated with classical physiology and breeding.
Crop losses due to climatic and edaphic (abiotic) extremes, 
and  biotic  pathogens  and  pests  are  greater  than  for  all  other 
maladies  that  affect  plant  growth,  development,  and  yield. 
These stresses have been the focus of intensive research efforts 
over the last decade, particularly to determine the mechanisms 
by which stresses negatively affect plant growth and develop-
ment,  and  plants’  responses  to  stresses.  Substantial  inroads 
have  been  made  in  the  identification  of  genetic  determinants 
that  are  necessary  or  sufficient  for  resistance  or  tolerance 
due  to  the  substantial  advances  in  molecular  genetic  tech-
nologies. This section of chapters focuses on critical advances 
made in the understanding of stress etiology and acclimation, 
and  adaptation  responses  of  plants  that  enhance  the  capac-
ity  of  the  organism  to  cope  with  these  stresses.  The  primary 
focus  is  on  the  genetic  determinants  that  are  necessary  and, 
in  some  instances,  sufficient  for  plant  tolerance/resistance  to 
a particular abiotic or biotic stress. Loss- and gain-of-function 
approaches  have  identified  determinants  and  mechanisms  for 
plant  responses  that  help  a  plant  cope  with  the  deleterious 
effects of stresses. In addition, natural variation studies identi-
fied  adaptive  mechanisms  fixed  by  selection  for  fitness  in  an 
environment afflicted with one or more of these stresses.

Drought and salinity are two of the most significant water-
stress-related  abiotic  stresses  that  limit  crop  productivity. 
Diminishing supplies of water for agriculture and humans are 
indicative that the biogeochemical cycle for replenishment is 
no  longer  in  balance  to  sustain  fresh  water  production  (Yoo 
et  al.,  2009).  In  addition,  high  salinity  negatively  influences 
water  available  for  agriculture.  Predicted  global  population 
increases  and  climate  changes  are  major  factors  exacerbating 
the  water  use  versus  replenishment  imbalance.  Combining 
and  synergizing  classical  and  high-throughput  (omics)  tech-
nologies  is  an  efficient  and  effective  way  to  develop  water 
and salt stress tolerant crops (see Chapter 18). After studying 
genes involved in water and salt stress tolerance for more than 
10 years, it is now feasible to introgress better stress tolerance 
alleles  from  genetically  distant  relatives.  Systems  approaches 

xxxii

will  facilitate  pyramiding  loci  and  alleles  for  multiple  traits 
that  must  be  linked  in  combination  with  stress  tolerance  to 
maintain yield stability of stress-tolerant germplasm.

This period has also brought greater understanding of plant 
responses  critical  for  low  temperature  acclimation  and  toler-
ance (see Chapter 19). Striking results have been achieved in 
the  identification  of  low-temperature  signaling  networks  that 
control  regulons,  which  are  necessary  for  tolerance.  These 
networks  regulate  the  plant  response  to  low  temperature 
by  both  transcriptional  and  post-transcriptional  regulatory 
mechanisms. High-temperature regulatory networks have also 
been  characterized.  Interestingly,  there  are  overlapping  char-
acteristics  of  low-temperature  signaling  pathways.  The  basic 
resources  appear  in  hand  for  molecular  breeding  and  genetic 
transformation  to  impact  crop  tolerance  to  low-  and  high- 
temperature  extremes.  Plants,  and  their  associated  microbes, 
possess  an  inherent  capacity  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  inor-
ganic  and  organic  pollutants  by  degradation,  volatilization, 
or  accumulation  (see  Chapter  20).  Recent  identification  of 
genetic determinants and characterization of their function in 
phytoremediation  is  now  translated  through  gain-of-function 
biotechnology to enhance phytoremediation capacity of plants.
An exemplary example of how knowledge is obtained from 
basic research, including the use of high-throughput molecu-
lar  genetic  technologies,  has  contributed  to  agricultural  con-
trol  strategies  highlighted  by  research  in  the  area  of  plant 
responses  to  biotic  stress.  Here  translation  of  basic  research 
discoveries is occurring by amalgamating both classical breed-
ing and biotechnology efforts.

Detailed  strategies  can  be  devised  to  enhance  durable 
(genetically  sustainable)  resistance  to  fungal  and  bacterial 
pathogens  (see  Chapter  21).  Durable  resistance  is  based  on 
gene  function  that  either  increases  the  plant  immune  sys-
tem  or  interferes  with  the  pathogen  infection  mechanism. 
Pathogen responsive promoters and tissue-specific expression 
substantially reduce the yield drag that can occur in conjunc-
tion with pathogen resistance achieved by differential expres-
sion  of  a  transgene.  Virus  resistance  crops  are  already  under 
cultivation  and  others  are  in  the  development  phase  (see 
Chapter 22). This is attributable to more than a decade long 
understanding  that  pathogen-derived  viral  resistance  is  due 
to  RNA  silencing  mechanisms,  which  result  in  viral  disease 
resistance  of  plants.  Most  strategies  target  different  mecha-
nisms involved mainly in viral replication.

Biotechnology  also  offers  an  economically  efficacious  and 
environmentally  durable  and  sustainable  approach  to  control 
of insects and other plant pests (see Chapter 23). The prime 
example  is  insect-resistant  crops  that  are  obtained  by  gain-
of-function  expression  of  the  bacterial  Bt  endotoxin  gene  in 
transgenic plants of cotton and maize. The Bt endotoxin inhib-
its insect digestion, which impairs survival and fecundity.

Growth and Development Control: 
Improving Yield and Quality Traits

Growth  and  development  and  metabolic  genetic  programs 
govern  yield  (e.g.,  biomass,  fruit,  or  seed).  Root  and  shoot 

Introduction to plant biotechnology 2011: Basic aspects and agricultural implications

development and architecture, and flowering and fruit devel-
opment  are  the  major  determinants  of  growth,  yield,  and 
quality  of  crop  plants  and  forest  trees.  These  organs  inter-
act  with  and  are  affected  by  the  environment;  roots  are  the 
immediate  sensors  and  reacting  tissues  when  plants  are  con-
fronted  with  soil  drought,  salinity,  and  nutritional  or  toxic 
ions; and development of shoots, flowers, and fruits are con-
trolled  by  and  respond  in  many  ways  to  light,  temperature, 
and  humidity  signals,  as  well  as  to  postharvest  conditions. 
Careful molecular analysis and biotechnological manipulations 
of genes and gene products that play a central role in shoot, 
root, flower, and fruit development, as well as in the nutritive 
value of the plant products, revealed a wealth of information 
that can now be practically exploited (implemented) in both 
model and crop plants.

Today,  at  least  for  the  model  Arabidopsis,  the  critical 
genetic  determinants  of  root  organization  and  growth  pat-
terning  are  well-characterized  (see  Chapter  24).  Currently 
the focus is on how root architecture is influenced by factors 
in  the  soil  environment,  which  directs  the  capacity  of  these 
organs  to  access  water  and  essential  nutrients.  This  basic 
understanding of root organization and development, and their 
modulation by the environment, is likely to be baseline infor-
mation for the design of agricultural crops in the future that 
are more efficient in nutrient and water acquisition. Flowering 
time  is  fundamental  to  the  timing  of  yield  and  is  regulated 
by  developmental,  hormonal,  and  environmental  factors  (see 
Chapter 25). These influence flowering time through signaling 
and  effector  determinants  that  are  under  epigenetic  regula-
tion,  many  of  which  have  been  well-defined  in  this  last  dec-
ade,  including  the  elusive  florigen.  To  date,  plant  breeders 
have selected for desired flowering traits by classical methods. 
The  near  future  likely  will  involve  research  that  utilizes  cur-
rent understanding in biotechnological approaches.

Flowering  signifies  the  transition  from  juvenile  to  adult 
stages of plant growth, which ultimately leads to reproductive 
maturity  and  reproduction.  The  flower  contains  the  female 
reproductive  structures,  including  the  ovary  or  fruit,  which 
is the receptacle for seed-bearing ovules. Fruit has been culti-
vated as a food source for its nutritive value and organoleptic 
properties. Humans have applied selection pressure for genes 
that regulate fruit size, shape, and attractiveness; that reduce 
accumulation  of  toxins;  that  enhance  nutraceutical  value; 
and  that  control  ripening  to  enhance  uniformity  and  shelf 
life.  The  critical  determinants  have  been  identified,  opening 
a vast potential for biotechnology to contribute to the devel-
opment  of  fruit  crops  (see  Chapter  26).  Postharvest  storage 
life  of  fresh  market  produce  is  a  critical  factor  (see  Chapter 
27). The biochemical and physiological processes involved in 
senescence  are  genetically  determined  and  have  often  been 
selected  for  during  cultivation.  Knowledge  of  critical  deter-
minants  of  focal  processes  offers  substantial  promise  for  the 
development  of  crops  with  improved  postharvest  qualities 
through molecular breeding or biotechnology.

As  previously  indicated,  the  demand  for  plant  agri-
cultural  products  is  on  the  rise  worldwide.  Not  only  is 
there  greater  demand  because  of  an  increase  in  population 
number,  but  also  because  people  need  crop  products  with 
higher  nutritive  value.  Quality-trait  improvement  involves 

low molecular weight metabolites such as essential nutrients, health- 
promoting  phytochemicals,  and  volatiles  (see  Chapter  28). 
Recent  advances  in  secondary  product  biosynthesis  and  pro-
duction  have  developed  the  resources  for  biotechnologi-
cal  improvement  of  crops  for  highly  desirable  metabolites, 
even  though  their  function  in  plants  is  not  well  understood. 
Nonetheless,  these  are  valued  products  for  improving  the 
quality of crop produce.

Expanding the Horizons: Plants as 
Factories for Industrial Products, 
Pharmaceuticals, Biomaterials, and 
Bioenergy

Traditionally,  agriculture  and  forestry  have  tried  to  improve 
the  quantity  and  quality  of  plant-derived  food  products,  as 
well  as  production  of  timber  and  fiber  for  construction,  fab-
rics, and fuel. In fact, humankind has used plants as a renew-
able source of common biomaterials, especially polymers, for 
thousands  of  years,  so  it  is  not  surprising  these  are  also  the 
primary targets of plant biotechnology. Even though there are 
a  finite  number  of  genes  for  each  plant  species,  a  large  vari-
ety  of  the  resulting  gene  permutations  yield  a  much  larger 
number of plant metabolites, many of them still unidentified. 
Plants produce a diverse array of more than 100,000 second-
ary metabolites, including many polymers, and it is estimated 
that  the  total  number  exceeds  500,000.  This  is  in  addition 
to  several  thousand  primary  metabolites  (Singer,  2003).  The 
wealth  of  plant-derived  metabolites,  in  addition  to  the  fact 
that all naturally produced plant metabolites are not depend-
ent on additional energy inputs other than harvesting the sun’s 
energy via photosynthesis, further emphasizes the importance 
of plants as biotechnological factories for new biomaterials.

Natural  metabolites  include  two  major  categories  of  new 
biomaterials based on engineering plant biosynthetic machin-
ery. These occur from: (1) direct improvement and metabolic 
modification of plant constituents; or (2) the manufacture in 
plants of non-plant compounds such as pharmaceuticals (i.e., 
“plant  factories”).  This  potential  of  plant  biotechnology  is 
now  possible  because  of  novel  gene  discovery,  and  the  avail-
ability  of  metabolomic  platforms  and  the  power  of  genetic 
engineering  (including  gene  stacking)  —  resulting  in  novel 
metabolic engineering pathways. In fact, plants have emerged 
as the ultimate organic biochemists.

Moreover,  while  plants,  like  microorganisms  and  animals, 
perform many of the known metabolic reactions (e.g., oxida-
tion, hydroxylation, methylation, hydrolysis, reduction), they 
are  unique  in  the  versatility  of  their  conjugation  systems  in 
the  production  of  secondary  metabolites  and  biopolymers. 
Genetic engineering of a metabolic pathway, most often those 
responsible  for  the  production  of  secondary  metabolites, 
results in modulating the increase or decrease in the quantity 
of a certain compound or group of compounds. This can now 
be achieved by a variety of approaches. These include modify-
ing  the  expression  of  one  or  a  few  genes,  thereby  overcom-
ing  specific  rate-limiting  steps  in  the  pathway  and  shutting 
down competitive pathways; knocking out an enzymatic step 

xxxiii

Plant biotechnology and agriculture

in the pathway (e.g., by reducing the level of the correspond-
ing mRNA via antisense, co-suppression, or RNA interference 
technologies,  or  by  over-expressing  an  antibody  against  the 
enzyme),  and  diversion  of  the  flux  into  a  competitive  path-
way, or an increase in the catabolism of the target compound. 
Control of metabolite biosynthesis has also been achieved by 
regulating the expression of regulatory genes that control bio-
synthetic genes (Verpoorte and Memelink, 2002).

Biotechnologies, mostly based on the engineering of meta-
bolic  pathways,  are  now  available  for  modifying  many  plant 
constituents  that  are  used  in  the  food,  chemical,  and  energy 
industries.  This  includes,  in  addition  to  secondary  metabo-
lites,  many  “primary”  nutritional  metabolites:  carbohydrates 
(starch  yield  and  allocation,  production  of  high-amylose  or 
high-amylopectin  starch,  fructan  production,  etc.);  proteins 
(improved amino acid composition and protein content); and 
oils  and  fats  (ratio  of  saturated  to  non-saturated  fatty  acids, 
increased  content  of  specific  valuable  fatty  acids  and  others; 
Altman, 1999).

Two  major  factors  have  recently  increased  the  focus  for 
supply  of  plant-based  biopolymers:  (1)  the  declining  glo-
bal  availability  of  fossil  fuels  for  both  energy  resources  and 
the  petroleum-based  plastics  and  other  chemicals;  and  (2) 
climatic  changes  combined  with  the  need  for  enhanced  car-
bon  sequestration  and  diminishing  air  pollution.  These  have 
led  to  a  major  interest  in  exploiting  plants  for  the  sustain-
able  synthesis  of  a  variety  of  chemicals  and  materials,  espe-
cially for the production of renewable energy, such as biofuels 
and  biodiesel.  The  U.S.  federal  government  has  set  a  target 
of  replacing  36  billion  gallons  of  current  U.S.  petroleum 
consumption  within  the  transportation  sector  with  plant-
based  renewable  biofuels  by  2022.  China,  New  Zealand, 
the  European  Union,  UK,  Brazil,  Canada,  and  Australia  are 
examples  of  other  countries  that  have  established  similar 
renewable bioenergy production targets. Currently, the major-
ity  of  biofuel  production  is  ethanol  derived  from  starch-  or 
grain-based  feedstocks  such  as  corn  and  sugarcane.  The  bio-
fuel  feedstocks  are  primarily  distributed  among  forestry  and 
agricultural  resources:  total  biomass  available  for  conversion 
into  biofuels  within  the  United  States  is  estimated  at  about 
1.4  billion  dry  tonnes  per  year,  about  1  billion  of  it  from 
agricultural  resources  and  400  million  from  forest  resources 
(mainly  short-rotation  hybrid  poplar,  eucalyptus,  loblolly 
pine,  and  willow)  and  other  non-food  energy  crops  (grasses 
such as switchgrass, Miscanthus, and sorghum) grown on mar-
ginal lands (see Chapters 30 and 31; J. S. Yuan et al., 2008; 
Simmons  et  al.,  2008;  Boernke  and  Broer,  2010).  Plant  bio-
mass  will  play  a  central  role  in  the  development  of  low  car-
bon, renewable energy supplies capable of partially displacing 
fossil fuels, but the time required to achieve significant levels 
of sustainable production is still questionable.

In  addition  to  their  use  for  renewable  energy,  plant-based 
novel biomaterials are now recognized as attractive substitutes 
for  petrochemical-based  materials  (such  as  biodegradable 
thermoplastics and elastomers) and a variety of novel biopoly-
mers  produced  in  transgenic  plants.  These  biopolymers 
include  polyhydroxyalkanoates;  poly-amino  acids;  polysac-
charides  with  heat  hysteresis  properties  and  for  bioaffinity 

xxxiv

purification;  temperature  and  salt-resistant  enzymes  for  the 
food  industry;  novel  polymers  produced  in  transgenic  plants 
such as polyhydroxyalkanoates, cyclodextrins, and poly-amino 
acids  for  the  chemical  industry;  and  fibrous  proteins,  such 
as  collagen,  elastin,  and  silk,  which  have  important  material 
properties  (see  Chapter  30;  Boernke  and  Broer,  2010).  All 
in  all,  appropriate  targets  for  novel  compound  production  in 
plants are compounds that can either be produced more effi-
ciently  in  plants,  can  have  stable  production  without  nega-
tively  affecting  crop  yield,  can  have  better  properties  when 
produced  in  plants,  or  are  needed  as  a  bulk  material  at  low 
cost via photosynthesis.

The use of plants as bioreactors for the production of “for-
eign,”  non-plant  biopharmaceuticals  has  gained  considerable 
momentum during the last decade. These include production 
of  bioactive  peptides,  vaccines,  antibodies,  and  a  variety  of 
pharmaceutical proteins and enzymes for the pharmaceutical 
industry. The initial concept of “molecular pharming” — pro-
duction  of  edible  vaccines  where  the  pharmaceutical  prod-
uct  is  expressed  in  the  plant,  which  is  consumed  by  people 
(Mason and Arntzen, 1995; Twyman et al., 2003) — has been 
recently  combined  with  efficient  pharmaceutical  produc-
tion platforms in plants that serve as bioreactors for extract-
ing the product rather than directly consuming the plant (see 
Chapter 29; Ma et al., 2005).

Plants  are  rapidly  becoming  accepted  manufacturing 
hosts  for  biopharmaceuticals  based  on  technologies  involving 
the  use  of  stable  nuclear  genetic  transformation,  and  more 
recently  the  use  of  plastid  transformation,  as  well  as  various 
transient expression technologies. Over the last several years, 
plant-based  expression  of  heterologous  proteins  has  become 
the  basis  of  several  manufacturing  processes  used  for  the 
industrial production and pilot manufacturing of many clinical 
proteins,  including  vaccines,  antigens,  and  antibodies.  There 
are currently three pharmaceutical proteins approved for mar-
ket manufacturing: anti-caries antibody; Newcastle virus subu-
nit;  and  glucocerebrosidase.  Thus,  the  new  era  where  plants 
are used, in addition to traditional agriculture, as factories for 
industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioen-
ergy, may eventually lead to alternative types of agriculture.

Plant and Agricultural Biotechnology: 
A Societal and Public Approach

Former  scientific  achievements  and  technical  advancements 
in “traditional” agriculture were not accompanied by negative 
public reactions; on the contrary, they were usually welcomed 
and  adopted  (e.g.,  use  of  inorganic  fertilizers  and  pesticides, 
precision  irrigation).  However,  the  very  recent  agricultural 
revolution  (i.e.,  generation  of  transgenic  plants)  and  use  of 
molecular tools has evoked public and regulatory concerns and  
sociological  issues.  It  is  now  clear  that  public  acceptance  
and full commercialization of genetically enhanced crop plants 
and forest trees depend, in addition to breakthrough science, 
on  proper  regulatory,  economic,  environmental,  ethical,  and 
societal factors.

Introduction to plant biotechnology 2011: Basic aspects and agricultural implications

Biotechnology affects not only our biological understanding, 
but also social and economic conditions and moral values, giv-
ing rise to many questions. What are the major public concerns 
and what are the proper (scientific) answers? First, we should 
be aware that the plant GM debate is not the only one that has 
occurred in science. Debates on scientific discoveries are part 
of our history and result most often from ignorance and hypoc-
risy, mingled with religious belief. Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–
1543)  was  attacked  as  being  “the  devil.”  Giordano  Bruno 
(1548–1600)  was  charged  by  the  Roman  Inquisition  and  was 
burned  at  the  stake  because  of  his  revolutionary  ideas  about 
astronomy  and  the  universe.  Galileo  Galilei  (1564–1642), 
who played a major role in the scientific revolution about the 
universe,  was  condemned  and  subjected  to  home  arrest  and 
warned to abandon his work after being charged with support-
ing the heliocentric view of the universe. Three hundred years 
later, Charles Darwin (1809–1882) was attacked and charged 
with being “the antichrist.” It is clear, however, that scientific 
discoveries  and  revolutions,  such  as  the  new  biotechnology, 
cannot  be  stopped  or  prevented.  These  should  be  monitored 
and controlled, but they cannot be banished.

Public  acceptance  of  the  molecular  techniques,  both  GM 
and others, calls for their safe and transparent use. Therefore, 
further distribution of biotechnology products and genetically 
engineered  plants  is  concerned  with  five  major  safety  issues 
and  precautionary  principles  that  should  be  scientifically 
based,  actively  followed,  and  fully  transparent:  food  safety; 
preserving the ecological balance and the environment; socio-
economic  considerations;  regulatory  aspects  and  intellectual 
property rights; and finally, ethical concerns.

Food safety

Two  possible  risks  are  involved.  The  first  risk  is  integration 
and  expression  of  genes  from  engineered  crops  in  humans. 
This  concern  is  not  scientifically  supported  since  the  negligi-
ble amount of the consumed recombinant DNA (even when 
assuming that 50% of the diet is from GM foods) is quickly 
degraded  into  short  DNA  or  peptide  fragments  in  the  gas-
trointestinal tract of animals and humans. Recombinant DNA 
was  never  found  intact  in  animal  experiments  (Schubbert 
et al., 1998; European Food Safety Authority, 2007; Lemaux, 
2008).  It  was  claimed,  however,  that  DNA  insertion  in  the 
plant  genome  could  be  highly  mutagenic  (Latham  et  al., 
2005). Scientific evidence shows that gene transfer and inte-
gration  between  distant  genera,  let  alone  kingdoms  (i.e., 
plants  and  humans),  are  extremely  rare  and  unlikely  (see 
Chapter 32). Another risk is penetration of new toxic or aller-
genic products, which may be present in the consumed GM 
food, into the food chain. Even though harmful consequences 
from such residues have been rare, this issue is continuously 
monitored and assessed at all production stages and is strictly 
regulated by the USDA, EPA, FDA, and NIH (see Chapters 
33, 34, and 36). In view of this, regulated and certified trans-
genic food, both fresh and processed, is safer for human con-
sumption than many non-transgenic products found regularly 
in the markets.

Ecological balance and the environment

Detrimental  effects  of  recombinant  DNA/gene  flow  from  a 
transgenic plant to other plants, as well as to other organisms 
inhabiting  the  same  ecosystems,  might  potentially  disturb 
the  ecological  balance.  We  should  be  aware,  however,  that 
the establishment of an ecological balance is a very long-term 
process  and  short-term  laboratory/field  experiments  are  not 
always efficient enough to predict results. Thus it is necessary 
to  rely  on  a  combination  of  historical  evidence  and  scientifi-
cally based analysis.

Archaeological  and  historical  evidence  suggests  that  rapid 
plant  and  animal  domestication  for  agricultural  use  occurred 
about 10,000–14,000 years ago (Pringle, 1988; Gupta, 2004). 
Early domestication eventually led to migration of plants from 
their  natural  habitat  of  origin  to  other  regions,  resulting  in 
natural (pre-Mendelian) crossing between adjacent plants, and 
the production of new agricultural plants. Thus, gene flow is a 
natural process that usually benefits society. Controlled breed-
ing of new crops occurred in post-Mendelian years, resulting 
in many new varieties of economic importance, including the 
new varieties of the Green Revolution. However, natural gene 
flow and Mendelian breeding has been overexploited by now.
This  calls  for  risk-free,  rapid,  and  fully  controlled  imple-
mentation  of  the  new  biotechnological/molecular  tools, 
including  genetic  engineering  and  marker-assisted  selec-
tion.  Gene  flow  among  plant  species  and  to  the  ecosystem, 
whether  vertical  or  horizontal  or  between  genera,  is  very 
rare  (see  Chapter  32).  However,  while  there  is  little  risk  of 
transgene flow from an engineered crop to wild/relative spe-
cies, cases of transgene flow to weeds in agricultural fields and 
roadsides have been reported, for example, for herbicide tol-
erance related genes (see Chapter 32; Gressel, 2008; Warwick 
et al., 2009).

There  are  some  potential  risks  of  introgression  of  trans-
genes  for  “new  traits”  that  do  not  exist  in  nature  (e.g.,  pro-
duction  of  pharmaceuticals  and  novel  biomaterials  in  GM 
plants),  which  may  have  unknown  advantages  and  disadvan-
tages to the engineered plant and its neighbors. In such cases, 
field  plots  of  these  plants  should  be  carefully  monitored  to 
avoid introgression into related species and varieties.

As discussed earlier, detrimental effects of gene flow from 
transgenic plants are very rare and do not seem to affect the 
environment.  In  addition,  technologies  for  restricting  gene 
flow  to  other  plants,  such  as  transgene  containment  and 
transgene  mitigation,  are  available  and  are  being  continu-
ously  developed.  Transgene  containment  inherently  prevents 
transgene  flow  to  occur,  such  as  targeting  genes  to  the  cyto-
plasmic  genome,  male  sterility,  rendering  crops  asexual,  and 
creating seed sterility by genetic use restriction technologies. 
Transgene mitigation prevents the transgene — if flow eventu-
ally  happened  —  from  establishing  and  spreading  within  the 
population, such as several strategies for rendering the result-
ing  hybrids  hypersensitive  to  chemicals  or  by  suppressing 
weedy  traits  like  seed  shattering  and  dwarfing  (see  Chapter 
32; Oliver and Li, 2011).

Another  potential  risk  that  may  affect  ecosystems  is  the 
biosynthesis  of  toxic  gene  products  in  GM  plants,  such  as  is 

xxxv

Plant biotechnology and agriculture

the case with Bt crops. The Bt endotoxin is digested by insects 
and  other  living  organisms,  thus  potentially  affecting  ecosys-
tem biotic balance on one side, and development of resistant 
insect populations on the other. It was claimed that the mor-
tality rate of the monarch butterfly was significantly increased 
following feeding on Bt-engineered crops. Carefully controlled 
studies indicated that it could occur only in very specific, arti-
ficial conditions and not in the open environment. A compre-
hensive two-year study suggested that the impact of Bt corn 
pollen  on  monarch  butterfly  populations  is  negligible  (Sears 
et al., 2001).

In a recent extensive review the authors of the study con-
cluded that despite some reports of negative effects on bene-
ficial arthropods, insecticidal biotech crops have the potential 
to be much more environmentally benign in this respect than 
insecticide-based  pest  management  approaches  (Gatehouse 
et  al.,  2011).  Such  events,  if  they  occur  at  all,  seem  very 
rare, and it is unlikely that they will affect natural established 
ecosystems.

Socioeconomic considerations

Some  of  the  socioeconomic  aspects  of  plant  biotechnology 
for  sustainable  agricultural  development  have  been  recently 
discussed  (D.  Yuan  et  al.,  2011).  A  few  key  issues  such  as 
technical improvements in the use of agricultural inputs (e.g., 
irrigation,  soil  management,  balanced  mineral  nutrition)  are 
beneficial  to  society.  However,  controlled  employment  of 
plant  biotechnologies  has  the  greatest  potential  to  improve 
socioeconomic factors and eradicate hunger and malnutrition-
associated  diseases  and  poverty  —  especially  in  developing 
and poorer countries — by contributing to sustainable agricul-
ture. Examples, in an increasing number of cases, include high 
yielding  and  biofortified  genetically  engineered  crop  plants 
that  produce  under  conditions  afflicted  by  abiotic  (drought, 
salinity, high temperatures, pollution) and biotic (insects, dis-
ease, and other pests) stresses. The latter occurs with reduced 
inputs of costly and polluting pesticides, herbicides, and other 
chemicals.

Hunger and malnutrition is a complex socioeconomic issue 
related to lack of resources of poor people to buy agricultural 
inputs for growing their own crops or to buy food from other 
sources. It is clear that unequal food distribution among coun-
tries  is  the  major  problem,  not  existing  global  food  supplies 
that  could  otherwise  adequately  feed  the  world  population 
(see  Chapter  35;  FAO,  2009;  DFID,  2010).  Since  the  com-
plex  political  and  economic  situation  is  not  likely  to  change, 
it  is  essential  that  developing  and  poorer  countries  employ 
novel  biotechnologies  to  be  self-sufficient  by  growing  their 
own improved crops with less costly inputs and in a sustain-
able way. Several major factors hinder the use of GM crops in 
developing countries, including limited capacity and resources 
for public research institution, low level of awareness of GM 
food by farmers and consumers, and an expensive regulatory 
process  that  keeps  this  technology  out  of  the  reach  of  small 
countries,  especially  with  respect  to  minor  local  crops  (see 
Chapter 36).

xxxvi

Regulation, legal aspects, and intellectual 
property rights

One  of  the  prime  examples  of  regulatory  and  intellectual 
property (IP) rights aspects of genetically engineered crops is 
the  case  of  “Golden  Rice”  for  the  vitamin  A  precursor  beta 
carotene  enhancement,  which  was  first  developed  by  Ingo 
Potrykus (Ye et al., 2000). It was ready in the lab by 1999, IP 
rights granted in 2000, regulatory-clean rice line with enough 
vitamin A precursor approved in 2004, and introgression into 
target  varieties  achieved  in  2007.  It  is  currently  under  field 
experiments  with  local  varieties  in  Bangladesh,  India,  the 
Philippines,  and  other  countries,  and  is  likely  to  pass  regula-
tion  and  transfer  to  farmers  in  2012.  As  stated  by  Potrykus 
(2010),  “Genetically-engineered  crops  could  save  many  mil-
lions from starvation and malnutrition — if they can be freed 
from excessive regulation.”

It is substantial that formal protocols should be developed 
to  release  new  plant  varieties  derived  through  gene  transfer 
and related molecular biotechnologies to the farmers, benefit-
ing both consumers and farmers. These varieties need to be: 
(1)  subjected  to  high  levels  of  regulation  and  IP  protection 
(see Chapters 33 and 34; Lemaux, 2009); and (2) evaluated 
and  regulated  according  to  their  novelty  and  putative  risks, 
and not according to the breeding technique used to produce 
them (“conventional,” molecular marker-assisted selection, or 
recombinant DNA technology).

As  stated  by  Hood  et  al.  (Chapter  34),  Harfouche  et  al. 
(Chapter  33),  and  others  (e.g.,  Pretty,  2008;  Fedoroff  et  al., 
2010),  regulation  should  preferably  reflect  the  measured 
rather  than  the  perceived  risks.  To  allow  the  benefits  of 
plant biotechnology to be realized, scientific evidence should 
underline  each  GE  event.  Protecting  IP  rights  helps  acceler-
ate  economic,  social,  and  agricultural  development  for  the 
benefit  of  humanity,  and  improvements  in  patent  laws  and 
licensing agreements should reflect the ongoing need for public– 
private sector partnership for continuing and intensifying the 
successful  contribution  of  plant  biotechnology  to  sustainable 
agriculture.

Ethical aspects

Critics  of  plant  and  agricultural  biotechnology  maintain  that 
biotechnological  science  is  value-free,  posing  the  following 
questions:  Are  we  allowed  to  alter  the  genetic  structure  of 
plants and animals in the name of utility and profit? Is there 
something  sacred  about  life  and  do  biotechnologists  assume 
to  be  masters  of  nature?  Is  the  genetic  makeup  of  all  living 
organisms the heritage of all humanity, or it can be appropri-
ated by corporations?

The subject of ethics, which is concerned with the question 
of virtue, was coined and discussed first by Aristotle (384–322 
BC)  whose  starting  point  was  that  “everything  humans  do  is 
aimed  at  some  good,  with  some  good  higher  than  others  … 
the  highest  human  good  that  people  aim  at  is  referred  to  as 
happiness  or  living  well.”  John  Stuart  Mill  (1806–1873)  fol-
lowed  Aristotle,  and  established  in  his  utilitarian  theory  the 

Introduction to plant biotechnology 2011: Basic aspects and agricultural implications

“greatest-happiness  principle,”  which  deals  with  “doing  the 
greatest good for the most amount of people….” Agricultural 
and  plant  biotechnology,  and  in  fact  all  biotechnologies,  are 
based  on  his  utilitarian  and  ethical  philosophy.  As  discussed 
earlier and by others (Meiri and Altman, 1998; Chrispeels and 
Sadava, 2003), it has to be performed in a responsible way, be 
regulated, and be transparent to the public.

At  the  very  heart  of  the  extreme  religious  critique  is  the 
notion that scientists are “playing God.” Religious beliefs are 
beyond the present discussion and are difficult to argue. One 
can  only  mention  that  man  intervened  in  breeding  for  time 
immemorial, and that Noah’s Ark (Genesis 6:18–20) was per-
haps  the  first  documented  “breeding  institution,”  on  which 
males and females of all living creatures were given the chance 
to  survive,  breed,  and  produce  offspring  for  selection  of 
future generations. One last comment on the issue of ethics: 
millions  of  diabetic  people  around  the  world  consume  insu-
lin, which is exclusively produced now by recombinant DNA 
technologies. Should we deprive a patient of a GM drug that 
can cure him and save his life? Nevertheless, some opponents 
of  biotechnology  want  to  deprive  other  groups  of  people  of 
food because it is genetically modified. Ethical moralists will 
agree that having GM food is as good as a GM drug.

Concluding Remarks: Where Do We 
Go from Here?

Agriculture  is  fundamental  to  the  economies  and  environ-
ments  of  the  entire  world,  and  to  the  well-being  of  all  its 
inhabitants. More than 300 years ago Jonathan Swift (1667–
1745) wrote, “Whoever could make two ears of corn or two 
blades of grass to grow upon a spot of ground where only one 
grew before, would deserve better of mankind, and do more 
essential service to his country, than the whole race of politi-
cians put together.” Indeed, achievements today in plant bio-
technology  have  already  surpassed  all  previous  expectations 
and  the  future  is  even  more  promising.  Moreover,  a  better 
understanding  of  plant  biology  using  novel  molecular  genetic 
resources,  omics  technologies,  and  data  analysis  platforms 
have been successfully translated to practical agriculture. The 
advanced technologies that are continuously implemented for 
improving  crop  plants  resulted  in  better  growth  and  devel-
opment  control  (both  vegetative  and  reproductive)  achiev-
ing  increases  in  yields  and  quality  of  the  crop,  resulted  in 

improved  plant  protection  against  the  ever-increasing  threats 
of  abiotic  and  biotic  stress,  and  supported  classical  breed-
ing  by  increasingly  applying  marker-assisted  selection  tools. 
Moreover, the advanced biotechnological tools resulted in the 
generation  of  engineered  crop  plants  with  improved  agricul-
tural benefits, and expanded the use of plants and agricultural 
crops for the production of specialty biofortified foods, a vari-
ety of novel biomaterials, and for bioenergy generation.

It  is  clear,  however,  that,  in  view  of  some  claimed  poten-
tial risks of biotechnology and GM crops, the full realization 
of the plant and agricultural biotechnology revolution depends 
on  both  continued  successful  and  innovative  research  and 
development activities, and on a favorable regulatory climate 
and public acceptance. Indeed, some of the tools of biotech-
nology  are  different  from  traditional  breeding  techniques. 
However,  tools  can  and  should  be  carefully  assessed  —  like 
any new technique — in order to avoid or, more practically, to 
minimize risks. Many of the biosafety-associated solutions for 
the  envisaged  risks  of  GM  food  and  effects  on  the  environ-
ment  are  already  available  and  additional  solutions  are  being 
developed,  and  other  claimed  risks  are  not  supported  scien-
tifically.  Thus,  we  should  continuously  take  care  of  societal 
factors  such  as  public  acceptance  of  transgenic  plants,  the 
regulatory framework for their commercialization, and a long-
term  political  commitment  to  provide  impetus  into  research 
and commercialization.

We  believe  that  full-scale  and  immediate  implementation 
of plant and agricultural biotechnologies, especially the use of 
recombinant DNA technology and molecular-marker assisted 
selection,  is  as  crucial  as  that  of  medical  biotechnology  — 
sometimes  even  more  so  —  since  more  people  worldwide 
die from famine and malnutrition-related diseases than from 
“modern,” western-world diseases. The intensification of agri-
culture thus requires enhanced and more efficient novel plant 
breeding biotechnologies for the release of economical, high-
return, and patentable plants and plant-derived products. This 
cannot  be  achieved  without  advanced  research  and  develop-
ment  in  biochemistry,  physiology,  genomics,  and  practical 
biotechnology of agricultural plants. By doing so, biotechnol-
ogy  will  revolutionize  agriculture,  which  is  required  to  meet 
food  production  (quantitative  and  qualitative)  demands  and 
to develop uses for novel plant-based metabolites and biopoly-
mers.  In  the  near  term,  biotechnology  will  have  the  greatest 
impact on developing countries, and these countries should be 
involved in developing guidelines for use of engineered crops.

References

Altman, A. (1999). Plant biotechnology in 
the 21st century: The challenges ahead. 
Electronic Journal of Biotechnology, 2, 
52–55. http://www.ejb.org/content/vol2/
issue2/full/1/

Barton, K. A., Binns, A. N., Matzke, A. J. M., 
& Chilton, M.-D. (1983). Regeneration of 
intact tobacco plants containing full length 
copies of genetically engineered T-DNA, and 
transmission of T-DNA to R1 progeny. Cell, 
32, 1033–1043.

Beckles and Roessner. (2011). this book
Ben-Ari and Lavi. (2011). this book
Bischof et al. (2011). this book
Boernke, F., & Broer, I. (2010). Tailoring plant 

metabolism for the production of novel 
polymers and platform chemicals. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 13, 353–361.

Brouder, S. M., & Volenec, J. J. (2008). 

Impact of climate change on crop nutrient 
and water use efficiencies. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 133, 705–724.

Catala et al. (2011). this book
 Chrispeels, M. J., & Sadava,  D. E. (Eds.). 

(2003). Plants, Genes, and Crop 
Biotechnology (2nd ed.). Jones and Bartlett/
American Society of Plant Biologists. ISBN 
0-7637-1586-7.

De Groote. (2011). this book
DFID,  The politics of poverty: Elites, citizens 
and states. Findings from 10 years DFID-
funded research on governance and fragile 
states 2001–2010. London, UK: DFID.

xxxvii

Plant biotechnology and agriculture

Dhankher et al. (2011). this book
Doebley, J., Gaut, B. S., & Smith, B. D. (2006). 

The molecular genetics of domestication. 
Cell, 127, 1309–1321.

Englemann. (2011). this book
European Food Safety Authority. (2007). EFSA 
statement of the fate of recombinant DNA 
or proteins in meat, milk and eggs from 
animals, http://www.efsa.europa.eu/
EFSA/Statement/gmo_EFSA_statement_
DNA_proteins_gastroint,0.pdf/

FAO,  The state of food security in the world 

2009. Economic crises, impacts and lessons 
learned. Rome: FAO.

Fedoroff, N. V., Battisti, D. S., Beachy, R. N., 
Cooper, P. J. M., & Fischhoff, D. A., et al. 
(2010). Radically rethinking agriculture for 
the 21st century. Science, 327, 833–834.
Feeding the Future – Special issue,  Science, 

327, 797–834.

Fluery et al. (2011). this book
Gatehouse, A. M. R., Ferry, N., Edwards, M. 
G., & Bell, H. A. (2011). Insect-resistant 
biotech crops and their impacts on beneficial 
arthropods. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B, 366, 1438–1452.

Gleba. (2011). this book
GLP, Global Land Project—Science Plan and 

Implementation Strategy. 2005. [IGBP 
(International Geosphere Biosphere 
Program) Report No. 53/International 
Human Dimensions Programme Report No. 
19, IGBP Secretariat, Stockholm, www.
globallandproject.org/documents.shtml/

Gressel, J. (2008). Genetic glass ceiling: 
Transgenic for crop biodiversity. John 
Hopkins University Press.

Gressel. (2011). this book
Gupta, A. K. (2004). Origin and domestication 

of plants and animals linked to early 
Holocene climate amelioration. Current 
Science, 87, 54–59.

Handa. et al. (2011). this book
Hardtke and Nieminen. (2011). this book
Harfouche, A. (2011). this book
Heslop-Harrison and Schwarzacher. (2011). 

this book

Hood. (2011). this book
James, C. (2010). ISAAA Brief 42-2010: 

Executive summary, global status of 
commercialized Biotech/GM Crops: 
2010. http://www.isaaa.org/resources/
publications/briefs/42/executivesummary/
default.asp/

Khayat. (2011). this book
Kumar and Loh. (2011). this book
Latham, J. R., Wilson, A. K., & Steinbrecher, R. 
A. (2005). Mutational consequences of plant 
transformation. Journal of Biomedicine & 
Biotechnology, 2006, 1–7.

Le Qeure, C., Raupach, M. R, Canadell, J. 

G., Marland, G., & Bopp, L., et al. (2009). 
Trends in the sources and sinks of carbon 
dioxide. Nature Geoscience, 2, 831–836.

Lemaux, P. G. (2008). Genetically engineered 
plants and foods: A scientist analysis of the 

issue I. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 59, 
771–812.

Lemaux, P. G. (2009). Genetically engineered 
plants and foods: A scientist analysis of the 
issue II. Annual Review of Plant Physiology, 
60, 511–559.

Lers. (2011). this book
Ma, J. K.-C., Barros, E., Bock, R., Christou, 

P., & Dale, P. J. (2005). Molecular farming 
for new drugs and vaccines: Current 
perspectives on the production of 
pharmaceuticals in transgenic plants. EMBO 
Reports, 6, 593–599.

Mackenzie. (2011). this book
Maheshi et al. (2011). this book
Mason, H. S., & Arntzen, C. J. (1995). 

Transgene plants as vaccine production 
systems. Trends in Biotechnology, 13, 
388–392.

Matsumoto and Gonzalves. (2011). this book
Mawassi and Gera. (2011). this book
MEA, Millennium Ecosystem Assessment,  

Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: 
Desertification Synthesis. Washington, DC: 
World Resources Institute.

Meiri, H., & Altman, A. (1998). Agriculture 

and agricultural biotechnology: Development 
trends toward the 21st century. In A. 
Altman (Ed.), Agricultural Biotechnology. 
New York: Marcel Dekker Inc.

Newell McGloughlin. (2011). this book
Oliver, M. J., & Li,  Y. (Eds.). (2011). Gene 

containment. Ames: Wiley.

Otten, L. A., De Greve., H., Hernalsteens, J. P., 
Van Montagu, M., Scheider, O., Straub., J., 
& Schell, J. (1981). Mendelian transmission 
of genes introduced into plants by the Ti 
plasmids of Agrobacterium tumefaciens. 
Molecular & General Genetics, 783, 209–213.

Ozias-Akins and Conner. (2011). this book
Paleg et al. (2011). this book
Poirier. (2011). this book
Potrykus, I. (2010). Regulation must be 

revolutionized. Nature, 466, 561.

Pretty, J. (2008). Agricultural sustainability: 

Concepts, principles and evidence. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B, 363, 447–466.

Pringle, H. (1998). The slow birth of 

agriculture. Science, 282, 1446.

Raven, J. A., & Karley, A. J. (2006). Carbon 

sequestration: Photosynthesis and 
subsequent processes. Current Biology, 16, 
R165–67.

Reynolds, J. F., Stafford Smith, D. M., Lambin, 
E. F., Turner, B. L., II, & Mortimore, M., et 
al. (2007). Global desertification: Building 
a science for dryland development. Science, 
316, 847–851.

Salomon and Sessa. (2011). this book
Samach. (2011). this book
Sati abd Matsyu. (2011). this book
Schubbert, R., Hohlweg, U., Renz, D., & 

Doerfler, W. (1998). On the fate of 
orally ingested foreign DNA in mice: 
Chromosomal association and placental 

transmission in the fetus. Molecular & 
General Genetics, 259, 569–576.

Sears, M. K., Hellmich, R. L., Stanley-Horn, D. 

E., Oberhauser, K. S., & Pleasants, J. M.  
(2001). Impact of Bt corn pollen on 
monarch butterfly populations: A risk 
assessment. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 98, 11937–11942.

Shiboleth and Tzfira. (2011). this book
Simmons. (2011). this book
Simmons, B. A., Loque, D., & Blanch, H. W. 

(2008). Next-generation biomass feedstocks 
for biofuel. Genome Biology, 9, 242.

Singer, A. C., Crawley, D. E., & Thompson, I. 
P. (2003). Secondary plant metabolites in 
phytoremediation and biotransformation. 
Trends in Biotechnology, 21, 123–129.

Solomon, S., Qin, D., Manning, M., Chen, Z., 
& Arguis,  M. M. (Eds.), (2007). Intergov. 
Panel Clim. Change. Climate Change 2007: 
The Physical Science Basis. Contrib. Work. 
Group I to the Fourth Assess. Rep. Intergov. 
Panel Clim. Change, ed. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge Univ. Press.

Tapingkae. (2011). this book
Topp and Benfy. (2011). this book
Tsaftaris et al. (2011). this book
Twyman, R. M., Stoger, E., Schillberg, 

S., Christou, P., & Fischer, R. (2003). 
Molecular farming in plants: Host systems 
and expression technology. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 21, 570–578.

UNCCD. 1994. United Nations Convention 
to Combat Desertification, Elaboration of 
an International Convention to Combat 
Desertification in Countries Experiencing 
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, 
Particularly in Africa” (U.N. Doc. A/
AC.241/27, 33 I.L.M. 1328, United Nations)

Verpoorte, R., & Memelink, J. (2002). 
Engineering secondary metabolite 
production in plants. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 13, 181–187.

Warwick, S. I., Beckie, H. J., & Hall, L. M. 

(2009). Gene flow, invasiveness, and 
ecological impact of genetically modified 
crops. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, 1168, 72–99.

Watkins et al. (2011). this book
Ye, X., Al-Babili, S., Klöti, A., Zhang, J., 
& Lucca, P., et al. (2000). Engineering 
provitamin A (b-carotene) biosynthetic 
pathway into (carotenoid-free) rice 
endosperm. Science, 287, 303–305.

Yoo, C. Y., Pence, H. E, Hasegawa, P. M., & 
Mickelbart, M. V. (2009). Regulation of 
transpiration to improve crop water use. 
Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences, 28, 
410–431.

Yuan, D., et al. (2011). The potential impact 
of plant biotechnology on the Millennium 
Development Goals. Plant Cell Reports, 30, 
249–265.

Yuan, J. S., Tiller, K. H., Al-Ahmad, H., 

Stewart, N. R., & Stewart, C. N, Jr. (2008). 
Plants to power: Bioenergy to fuel the 
future. Trends in Plant Science, 13, 421–429.

xxxviii

Biolistic and other non-Agrobacterium 
technologies of plant transformation

8

Tracie K. Matsumoto  Dennis Gonsalves 
USDA, ARS, Pacific Basin Agricultural Research Center, Hilo, Hawaii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 117
Other Non-Agrobacterium Transformation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 117
Electrophoretic transfection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  117
Electroporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  118
Bioactive-beads-mediated gene transfer  . . . . . . . . .  118
Microinjection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  118
Pollen-tube pathway  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  119
Silica carbide whisker-mediated transformation . . . .  119
Biolistic Transformation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 120
The invention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  120
Electric discharge particle acceleration . . . . . . . . . . .  120
Current status of the “invention” hardware . . . . . . . .  121
Advantages of Biolistic Transformation   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 121
Implications of Biolistics in Agricultural Biotechnology  .  . 122
Application of biolistics in agriculture crops  . . . . . . .  122
Papaya: A case study of biolistic transformation . . . .  122

Introduction

The ability to insert foreign DNA into plants is viewed as one 
of the major advances in modern agriculture. The elegant and 
classical  studies  on  Agrobacterium  tumefaciens  provided  the 
foundation that has made Agrobacterium the dominant man-
ner  by  which  plants  are  transformed.  However,  due  to  the 
initial  restrictions  of  host  specificity  and  other  restraints  of 
Agrobacterium-mediated  transformation,  other  methods  for 
transforming  plants  have  been  developed  and  have  proven 
useful  for  fundamental  and  practical  purposes.  Although 
recently  reclassified  as  Rhizobium  radiobacter  (Young, 
2001),  due  to  the  history  and  universal  use  of  the  term 
Agrobacterium,  we  will  continue  to  refer  to  this  method  of 
transformation  as  Agrobacterium-mediated.  Transformation 
via  Agrobacterium  has  been  reviewed  in  Chapter  7  by  Dr. 

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00008-0

Tzvi  Tzfira.  This  chapter  deals  with  an  overview  of  the  non- 
Agrobacterium transformation approaches.

Many  methods  have  been  described  to  introduce  for-
eign  DNA  into  plant  cells.  Here  we  will  cover  some  of  the 
methods  that  have  been  successfully  used  to  create  trans-
genic  plants.  Methods  such  as  electrophoretic  transfection, 
electroporation  of  intact  plant  cells  and  tissues,  bioactive- 
bead-mediated gene transfer, microinjection, pollen-tube path-
way, and silica carbide-mediated transformation will briefly be 
discussed first. These methods have been successful in the labo-
ratory, but there are very few examples where these techniques 
have been applied on a commercial basis. Biolistics has served 
as an excellent approach for transforming monocots and recal-
citrant agronomic crops such as soybeans. Indeed, a number of 
the high acreage transgenic crops grown in the world has been 
transformed by biolistics (James, 2009). Since biolistics is the 
most dominant non-Agrobacterium alternative approach, it will 
be the primary focus of this chapter.

Other Non-Agrobacterium 
Transformation

Transformation  of  plants  by  A.  tumefaciens  and  biolis-
tics  are,  by  far,  the  most  widely  used  methods.  However,  a 
number  of  novel  transformation  approaches  that  do  not  use 
Agrobacterium  or  biolistics  have  been  developed.  Some  of 
them are useful in specific cases. These alternative approaches 
have been nicely summarized in a recent review by Rao et al. 
(2009).

Electrophoretic transfection

Theoretically, stable integration of foreign DNA into the mer-
istematic tissue of plants could be a very easy and inexpensive 
way  to  transform  plants.  Indeed,  Ahokas  (1989)  described 
a  process,  which  he  coined  electrophoretic  transfection,  to 
electrophoretically  introduce  foreign  DNA  into  germinating 

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology 

barley  seeds.  They  showed  transient  expression  of  the  GUS 
gene  in  the  seeds,  but  stable  expression  was  not  demon-
strated.  Perhaps  the  only  successful  case  for  this  approach 
has  been  with  transformation  of  protocorms  of  the  orchid 
Calanthe sedenii (Griesbach, 1994). This method was repro-
duced  largely  as  described  by  Griesbach  (1994).  The  details 
provide the rationale for the approach and at the same time 
reveal what makes this approach successful. To prepare mate-
rial, immature ovules are excised and placed in tissue culture 
media  to  develop  into  protocorms,  which  contain  the  apical 
meristem that eventually will develop into plants. Protocorms 
approximately  2 mm  in  diameter  were  subjected  to  electro-
phoresis  with  plasmid  DNA  containing  the  GUS  gene  and 
control elements. The DNA is dissolved in agarose and filled 
in the tip of a 1 ml plastic pipette. The tip of a second pipette 
is  filled  with  agarose  without  DNA.  The  pipettes  are  then 
filled  with  conductivity  buffer.  The  DNA  pipette  is  placed 
over  the  apical  meristem  of  the  protocorm  and  the  buffer 
pipette  is  placed  on  the  base  of  the  protocorm.  Throughout 
the procedure a constant electrical current was applied. After 
treatment, the protocorms were replated in fresh media and 
subsequently raised to plants growing under greenhouse con-
ditions.  In  their  study,  they  achieved  a  transformation  fre-
quency  of  about  50%,  and  transformed  plants  did  not  show 
chimeric  patterns.  Despite  these  early  breakthroughs,  other 
successful efforts have not been reported (Rao, 2009).

Electroporation

Electroporation involves the use of an electrical pulse to cre-
ate  pores  in  cells  through  which  DNA  can  enter  the  cell. 
Tissues to be electroporated are suspended in a cuvette con-
taining  DNA  and  subjected  to  an  electrical  pulse.  The  steps 
after  this  procedure  are  similar  to  other  transformation  pro-
cedures:  selection,  regeneration,  and  analysis  of  putative 
transgenic  plants.  This  approach  is  widely  used  to  introduce 
DNA  into  protoplasts,  since  these  cells  do  not  have  walls. 
Importantly,  this  approach  has  been  applied  for  successful 
transformation  via  electroporation  of  calli,  which  are  gener-
ally much easier to regenerate than protoplast. In this section, 
we  briefly  describe  the  transfer  of  DNA  into  embryogenic 
calli of maize and the subsequent development of transgenic 
plants  that  expressed  the  introduced  gene  (D’Halluin  et  al., 
1992).  Unlike  protoplasts,  initial  work  showed  that  electro-
poration of embryogenic calli in the absence of wounding was 
not successful. Embryogenic calli were wounded by enzymatic 
(Macrozyme)  treatment  to  partially  degrade  cell  wall  or  by 
finely  chopping  the  calli  tissue  prior  to  electroporation  with 
DNA  containing  the  octopine  synthase  gene.  Electroporated 
calli  were  selected  in  kanamycin-containing  medium,  and 
plants were subsequently regenerated from kanamycin-resist-
ant calli. Over a 4 month period 148 R0 plants were regener-
ated  from  31  kanamycin-resistant  calli.  The  transgenes  were 
stably  expressed  through  three  generations,  which  conclu-
sively  showed  the  stability  of  the  inserted  gene.  Moreover, 
these  experiments  were  done  with  type  I  calli  or  those 
derived  from  preconditioned  immature  zygotic  embryos. 

This  procedure  removed  the  prerequisite  of  only  being  able 
to use embryogenic, friable type II cell cultures for transfor-
mation via biolistic transformation. A later work showed that 
maize  type  II  calli  could  be  transformed  via  electroporation 
(Pescitelli and Sukhapinda, 1995).

Bioactive-beads-mediated gene transfer

This approach focuses on using bioactive beads (calcium algi-
nate microbeads) to entrap and thus protect the foreign DNA 
which is then introduced into protoplasts (Sone et al., 2008). 
The  entrapped  DNA  can  be  introduced  into  protoplasts  via 
electroporation (Murakawa et al., 2008a) or polyethylene gly-
col (PEG). A major advantage is that very large DNA can be 
introduced  into  cells  without  shearing.  The  bioactive  beads 
are  prepared  mixing  sodium  alginate  with  isoamyl  alcohol 
and the solution emulsified by sonication. The resulting beads 
are about 1.6 μm in diameter. The DNA is then added to the 
emulsion, which results in the entrapment of the DNA by the 
bioactive  beads.  This  method  has  been  improved  by  linking 
the DNA with liposomes derived from synthetic cationic lipid 
(Murakawa et al., 2008b). The resulting DNA–liposome com-
plex  is  then  entrapped  by  the  bioactive  beads.  Introduction 
of  the  bioactive  beads  into  the  protoplasts  was  done  via  the 
PEG method. This approach resulted in a fourfold increase in 
transformation efficiency of protoplasts. The maximum trans-
formation  efficiency  (the  number  of  GFP  expressing  proto-
plasts divided by the total number of protoplasts) was 0.75%. 
This approach provides a way to introduce DNA protoplasts, 
but the protoplasts have not been regenerated into plants to 
evaluate  the  stability  of  gene  expression  in  whole  plants  and 
subsequent generations. Thus, its use for the development of 
transgenics remains to be demonstrated.

Microinjection

Transformation  of  plants  via  microinjection  of  foreign  DNA 
has  been  successful  in  only  a  few  cases.  In  this  section  we 
briefly mention two reports that successfully introduced for-
eign  DNA  by  microinjecting  the  DNA  into  young  floral  till-
ers of rye plants (De La Pena, 1987), and into isolated zygote 
protoplasts  of  barley  (Holm  et  al.,  2000).  De  La  Pena  et  al. 
(1987)  introduced  Agrobacterium  or  DNA  containing  the 
aminoglycoside  II  gene  (confers  kanamycin  resistance)  into 
the  target  plants  that  were  at  a  stage  that  is  most  receptive 
for DNA. In their case, injection was made into young floral 
tillers. They postulated that the DNA is transported through 
the vascular system to germ cells, which can take up the DNA 
only when they are in a competent stage, such as two weeks 
after  meiosis  when  the  germ  cells  are  not  surrounded  by  a 
callose wall that presumably allows the DNA to be taken up 
by  the  germ  cell.  Although  the  transformation  rate  was  very 
low (e.g., in a DNA injection procedure), in one experiment 3 
seeds out of 1000 from 37 plants expressed the target DNA. 
The  great  advantage  of  this  approach  is  that  tissue  culture 
techniques are not necessary to obtain transformed plants.

Direct injection of protoplast is another approach that has 
shown  marginal  success.  This  approach  requires  technical 

118

Biolistic and other non-Agrobacterium technologies of plant transformation

C H A P T E R   8

skills  for  isolation  of  protoplasts,  injection  of  protoplast,  and 
then  subsequent  regeneration  of  the  protoplast  into  plants. 
With barley, Holm et al. (2000) showed that 62% of the cells 
injected  with  the  GUS  gene  survived  and  55%  of  the  survi-
vors developed into plants with 21% of the plants expressing 
the gene of interest. However, only two plants had significant 
GUS expression. Their conclusions were that transformation 
can  be  achieved  by  introducing  the  DNA  into  protoplast  via 
microinjection, but that gene expression was rare. The latter 
observation was surmised to be due to gene shearing.

Microinjection has also been used to achieve “chromosome-
mediated”  transformation  of  petunia  hybrids  (Griesbach, 
1987). Although success with this approach has been reported 
in only this case, it is briefly described because it shows that 
chromosomal  fragments  can  be  introduced  into  plants  and 
be  stably  integrated,  although  at  a  very  low  frequency.  The 
rationale  for  this  approach  was  to  introduce  properties  (i.e., 
genes  that  govern  the  flavonoid  biosynthesis  pathways)  that 
require the expression of multiple genes or polygenes, which 
might be clustered in segments of the chromosome. The fla-
vonoid  biosynthetic  pathway  was  chosen  because  it  is  well 
characterized, and the author had developed a rapid high-per-
formance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method to assay for 
the  intermediates  in  this  pathway.  Another  requirement  was 
to microinject evacuolated protoplasts to avoid interference of 
toxic  substances  that  might  be  released  from  vacuoles  when 
protoplasts are injected. Isolated chromosomes were injected 
(0.1 pL)  into  evacuolated  protoplasts  that  were  obtained  fol-
lowing  centrifugation  in  Percoll™  gradients.  The  injected 
protoplasts were cultured on feeder plants, and subsequently 
grew into small calli. Samples of microcalli were analyzed for 
protein  differences  in  polyacrylamide  gels,  and  those  show-
ing differences were regenerated into plants and subsequently 
subjected  to  flavanol  analysis.  Out  of  the  500  injected  pro-
toplasts,  23%  divided.  Further  analysis  showed  that  plants 
regenerated  from  2  of  60  calli  showed  properties  that  were 
different  from  the  non-transformed  plants.  One  was  sterile 
and the other only slightly fertile. The properties of the single 
plant that was obtained between the cross of the slightly fer-
tile transformant and a non-transformed plant suggested that 
genes from the introduced chromosome segments were being 
expressed. Other successes have not been reported using this 
technique (Rao et al., 2009).

Pollen-tube pathway

The  pollen-tube  pathway  transformation  approach  is  ingen-
ious  in  the  way  that  transformation  is  effected  by  inserting 
foreign  DNA  in  the  pathway  of  a  naturally  occurring  physi-
cal phenomenon of pollination. During the pollination process 
of higher plants, after the pollen germinates on the stigmatic 
surface, a pollen tube is formed from the pollen and extends 
down the style into the ovule; nuclei from the pollen travels 
through the pollen tube to fertilize the ovule. The pollen-tube 
transformation approach takes advantage of this natural phe-
nomenon  by  introducing  DNA  into  the  pollen  tube  channel. 
A  few  hours  after  pollination,  the  style  is  cut  and  the  DNA 

is placed on the cut surface. The DNA then enters the pollen 
tube and moves in the tube into the ovary, and subsequently 
is incorporated into the nuclei of the receiving ovary. In other 
words, the foreign DNA “fertilizes” the ovule analogously like 
the  pollen  grain  DNA  would.  The  obvious  advantage  of  this 
approach  is  that  in  successful  integration  cases  some  of  the 
harvested  seeds  would  have  the  foreign  DNA  incorporated 
into  its  genome,  and  the  plants  from  the  germinated  seed 
would  be  transgenic.  Furthermore,  this  approach  eliminates 
tissue culture steps and is not limited by the ability to regen-
erate plants from transformed protoplast, calli, or leaf pieces. 
Some  shortcomings  are  that  this  approach  would  work  only 
with plants that flower and readily produce seeds, and that it 
can be done only during the blooming period of the plant.

Apparently,  the  method  was  first  reported  by  Duan  and 
Chen (1985) who transformed rice. A later report by Luo and 
Wu (1989)provided the first detailed molecular data that crit-
ically established this approach for transforming rice. In their 
case,  20%  of  the  recovered  seeds  expressed  the  introduced 
foreign  DNA.  These  authors  suggested  that  the  two  critical 
points  in  this  procedure  were:  (1)  to  determine  the  optimal 
time after pollination for the application of the foreign DNA 
to the excised florets, and (2) to cut the upper part of the flo-
ret so that the ovary is not damaged. This approach has been 
used in crops such as cotton (Zhang et al., 2009), corn (Yang 
et al., 2009), soybean (Liu et al., 2009), wheat, and petunia as 
cited in Rao (2009). With soybean, Liu et al. (2009), investi-
gated the various parameters of the method and found their 
best results were obtained when the whole style was removed 
6–8  hours  after  pollination  and  by  incorporating  a  surfactant 
into the DNA solution.

Silica carbide whisker-mediated 
transformation

The silica carbide whisker-mediated transformation approach 
(Kaeppler et al., 1990) is arguably the simplest, most direct, 
and  economical  way  to  introduce  foreign  DNA  into  cells 
that  results  in  stable  transgenic  plants  that  express  the  for-
eign  DNA.  Silica  carbide  whiskers  are  needle-like  micro-
fibers  about  0.5 μm  in  diameter  and  10–80 μm  long  that 
puncture  the  plant  cells  to  form  an  entrance  portal  for  the 
foreign  DNA.  Regeneration  and  selection  of  cells  can  then 
result  in  transgenic  plants  that  express  the  foreign  DNA. 
This  approach  is  briefly  described  for  cotton  (Asad  et  al., 
2008). Embryogenic calli are produced in tissue culture from 
embryos  of  cotton  seeds;  sterile  silica  carbide  whiskers  are 
mixed with a solution of plasmid DNA in a tube and the tube 
is vortexed to create wounds in the cell walls of the callus tis-
sue through which the plasmid DNA can enter the cells. The 
treated  calli  are  placed  on  selection  media  and  transformed 
cells  regenerated  into  plants.  Extensive  characterization  of 
the transformed cotton plants over three generations showed 
that transformation was stable and the salt-tolerant property 
was expressed. Simplicity is the elegance of this approach and 
it has been successfully used for other crops such as rice and 
maize (Thompson et al., 1995; Mizuno et al., 2005).

119

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology 

Biolistic Transformation

The history of biolistic transformation and the different biol-
istic  approaches  are  discussed  in  this  section,  along  with  the 
current  state  of  the  invention.  We  look  into  the  impact  this 
technology has had on agricultural plants and provide a back-
ground on the development of a commercial crop using biolis-
tics as the transformation method.

John  Sanford  was  investigating  DNA  transfer  through 
the use of microlasers to cut holes in living pollen tubes as a 
method  to  introduce  foreign  DNA  into  embryos  (Sanford, 
2000).  While  looking  into  the  feasibility  of  using  ion  and 
electron  beams  to  cut  holes  in  plant  cell  walls,  the  concept 
of  biolistics  or  microprojectile  bombardment  was  first  con-
ceived by John Sanford and Ed Wolf. The term biolistics was 
derived from the words biology and ballistics and has become 
a  prevalent  method  of  plant  transformation,  second  only  to 
Agrobacterium-mediated  transformation.  Although  multi-
ple  reviews  have  been  published  on  this  technique,  our  goal 
here  is  to  present  a  general  background  of  this  concept  and 
describe cases of the impact it has had on modern agriculture.

The invention

What  began  as  a  meeting  between  Cornell  scientists  looking 
into  the  feasibility  of  using  microbeams  to  cut  holes  in  cell 
walls  to  transfer  DNA  into  a  plant  cell  eventually  became 
the  origin  of  the  modern  biolistic  microprojectile  bombard-
ment system (Sanford et al., 1987; Sanford, 2000). This sys-
tem revolutionized the field of genetic engineering by allowing 
gene transfer to Agrobacterium recalcitrant crops such as corn 
(Klein et al., 1987, 1988), as well as reliable organelle trans-
formation such as chloroplast in algae (Boynton et al., 1988) 
and tobacco (Daniell et al., 1990), and mitochondria in yeast 
(Johnston et al., 1988).

The  origin  of  the  modern  biolistic  microprojectile  bom-
bardment  system  started  from  humble  beginnings  as  a  BB 
gun (a store-bought air gun that propels spherical shaped pel-
lets)  with  a  modified  barrel  to  facilitate  loading  of  the  tung-
sten  powder  to  accelerate  DNA  into  onion  epidermal  cells 
(Sanford et al., 1987; Sanford, 2000). Gas-generated devices 
were found to be too destructive when used in close proxim-
ity  to  the  plant  material,  and  could  not  propel  the  particles 
with a high enough velocity at longer distances. Thus, modi-
fications of this initial model relied upon a gunpowder-driven 
nylon  projectile  (Sanford  et  al.,  1987).  This  nylon  projectile 
carried the RNA- and DNA-coated tungsten particles until it 
reached a steel stopping plate. The particles were allowed to 
pass through a small aperture in the steel plate and penetrate 
the plant tissue. Using this apparatus, the expression of both a 
plasmid containing a 35s promoter driving the chlorampheni-
col acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene and RNA from the 
tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) were expressed in onion epider-
mal cells (Klein et al., 1987), demonstrating the first biolistic 
transformation of plant cells.

The  next  version  of  the  gene  gun  consisted  of  an  airtight 
vacuum chamber to house the gun and target tissue to reduce 

air  resistance  that  slows  the  velocity  of  the  particles  and  sub-
sequently  penetration  of  the  particles  into  the  plant  tissue 
(Sanford,  2000).  With  this  innovative  gun  system  the  first  sta-
bly transformed plants were produced by insertion of the neo-
mycin  phosphotransferase  (NPTII)  gene  into  tobacco  leaves 
and  suspension  cells  (Klein  et  al.,  1988b).  This  system  pro-
duced  the  first  transformation  of  chloroplasts  (Boynton  et  al., 
1988), the first transformation of mitochondria (Johnston et al., 
1988), and the first transformation of corn (Klein et al., 1988a). 
In addition, this system was also used for the stable transforma-
tion  of  papaya  for  papaya  ringspot  virus  (PRSV)  resistance, 
which resulted in the first commercial transgenic fruit crop in 
the United States (Fitch et al., 1990; Gonsalves et al., 2004).

Although the technology rights of Biolistics Inc. were sold 
to  DuPont  in  1989,  with  the  exception  of  the  ornamental 
rights,  research  was  conducted  to  improve  the  biolistic  gene 
gun  system  (Sanford,  2000).  High  pressure  helium  replaced 
the gunpowder-driven systems and generated pressure to pro-
duce  an  instantaneous  burst  or  gas  shock  from  membranes 
designed to rupture at specific pressures (Sanford, 1991). This 
gas shock was enclosed under partial or full vacuum to protect 
the operator’s hearing and allowed to vent the expanding gas 
to prevent back pressure that can slow the gas shock. The gas 
shock accelerates the microprojectiles and deflects the remain-
ing gas through the “throat” of the system, which is made of 
interchangeable  inserts  to  allow  flexibility  in  transforming 
different  tissues  including  yeast,  bacteria,  plants,  cultured 
animal cells, and the skin of live mice. This helium-driven sys-
tem  increased  transformation  efficiency  by  a  4-  to  331-fold 
increase over the gunpowder-driven system (Sanford, 1991).

Electric discharge particle acceleration

An  alternative  method  to  the  biolistic  system  developed  by 
Sanford and colleagues was developed by Christou (1988) and 
colleagues  at  Agracetus.  Using  a  similar  concept  to  the  biolis-
tic system of propelling DNA-coated heavy metal particles into 
the  plant  cell  for  transformation,  this  system  uses  electrical 
discharge as the method for particle acceleration (McCabe and 
Christou,  1993).  This  system  consists  of  two  chambers  sepa-
rated by a 10 μL drop of water, and the initial electrical shock 
wave is generated in the spark chamber. This wave is prevented 
from directly interacting with the carrier sheet, instead second-
ary  waves  produced  by  reflection  off  the  chamber  floor  and 
walls provide a uniform force across the carrier sheet contain-
ing  the  DNA-coated  gold  particles.  The  accelerated  carrier  is 
stopped  by  a  retaining  screen,  but  the  gold  particles  continue 
to travel toward the target tissue (McCabe and Christou et al., 
1993). Similar to the biolistic system, this entire assembly may 
be placed under vacuum to reduce the air resistance that slows 
the particles.

Using  this  ACCELL™  technology,  Agracetus  was  able  to 
develop  genotype-independent  transformation  of  soybeans 
while  Agrobacterium-mediated  transformation  was  limited 
to  one  non-commercial  variety  (Christou  et  al.,  1988,  1989; 
Christou,  1990).  Although  the  heritability  of  the  transgene 
was limited to a few transformed lines, using GUS expression 

120

Biolistic and other non-Agrobacterium technologies of plant transformation

C H A P T E R   8

in  stem,  leaf,  and  petiole/midrib  of  the  initial  transform-
ants,  plants  with  transformed  germlines  could  be  identified 
(Christou  et  al.,  1989).  In  addition,  the  ACCELL™  gene 
gun was used to transform cotton lines that were difficult to 
regenerate in tissue culture by using meristematic tissue from 
excised  embryonic  axes  of  cotton  (McCabe  and  Martinelli, 
1993).  This  technology  was  not  marketed  commercially  as  a 
transformation unit; instead Agracetus offered this technology 
as in “in house” service (Batty and Evans, 1992). In 1996, the 
plant transformation technology was purchased by Monsanto, 
while  the  mammalian  DNA  gene  delivery  technology  was 
retained as Auragen Inc.

Current status of the “invention” hardware

Currently,  the  biolistic  technology  is  exclusively  licensed  by 
DuPont  to  Bio-Rad  Laboratories  (Hercules,  California)  and 
is available in two devices: the PDS-1000/He and the Helios 
gene gun. Based upon the helium-driven device described by 
Sanford  (1991),  the  PDS-1000/He  consists  of  an  accelera-
tion mechanism and a main chamber (Kikkert, 1993). Helium 
gas  fills  the  acceleration  tube  to  pressures  between  450  and 
2200 psi,  and  the  bursting  pressure  is  determined  by  a  user-
selected Kapton membrane (rupture disk) laminated to burst 
at the desired pressure. When the critical pressure is reached 
in  the  acceleration  chamber,  the  rupture  disk  bursts  and 
releases  a  gas  shock  wave  that  propels  the  macrocarrier  that 
holds  the  microscopic  gold  or  tungsten  particles  (microcar-
rier)  toward  the  target  tissue.  The  macrocarrier  impacts  the 
stopping  screen,  which  allows  passage  of  the  microcarriers 
to  proceed  downward  toward  the  target  tissue  that  is  held 
under vacuum in the main chamber. Transformation efficiency 
is  determined  by  changing  several  parameters  including  the: 
(1) helium pressure by using different rupture disks, (2) dis-
tance between the rupture disk and macrocarrier, (3) distance 
between the macrocarrier and stopping screen, (4) position of 
the target tissue from the stopping screen, and (5) the level of 
vacuum used in the main chamber (Kikkert, 1993).

The Helios gene gun is a handheld device that can be used 
to transform larger target tissues that may not fit in the main 
chamber of the PDS-1000/He, such as epidermal cells of the 
skin for vaccination studies (Tang et al., 1992). Similar to the 
PDS-1000/He system, the Helios uses pressurized helium to 
accelerate the microcarriers coated with the nucleic acid from 
the  cartridge  through  the  acceleration  channel.  The  micro-
carriers  spread  while  traveling  down  the  barrel  and  reduce 
the shock wave to the target tissue (Bio-Rad, Bulletin 9541) 
In addition, this technology has been used for inoculation of 
leaves for virus infection (Yamagishi et al., 2006) and transient 
gene expression (Ueki et al., 2009).

Advantages of Biolistic 
Transformation

Biolistics, as mentioned earlier, is a physical method of accel-
erating  DNA  into  the  plant  tissue  that  is  not  dependent 

on  host  specificity  or  species 
limitation  such  as  with 
Agrobacterium-mediated  transformation.  Until  the  advent  of 
biolistic technologies, transformation of important agronomic 
crops such as maize (Klein et al., 1988a), soybean (Christou 
et al., 1988, 1989; Christou, 1990), and cotton (McCabe and 
Christou, 1993) were not attainable.

Diverse  cell  types  can  be  transformed  with  biolistics, 
whereas  embryogenic  callus  is  often  preferable,  and  organ-
ized  tissues  such  as  embryos  or  meristems  can  successfully 
be  transformed  (Christou,  1996).  This  reduces  the  poten-
tial  somaclonal  variation  that  arises  during  tissue  culture. 
Transformation of organized tissue also allows regeneration of 
genotypes that may be recalcitrant to plant regeneration from 
callus, such as in the case of cotton (McCabe and Martinell, 
1993). In addition to being used as a sole transformation pro-
tocol  for  some  plant  species,  biolistics  has  also  been  used  to 
wound sunflower meristems prior to Agrobacterium infection 
to improve transformation efficiency (Bidney et al., 1992).

A  perceived  disadvantage  of  biolistic  transformation  is  that 
the  resulting  plants  contain  multiple  highly  complex  inserts 
prone  to  recombination  and  silencing.  Comparison  of  rice 
and  barley  plants  transformed  with  Agrobacterium  and  biolis-
tics revealed that particle bombardment results in plants with 
a  greater  number  of  inserts:  2.7  versus  1.8  in  rice,  and  8 
versus  1–3  in  barley  (Dai  et  al.,  2001;  Travella  et  al.,  2005). 
All  Agrobacterium  transformed  barley  lines  resulted  in  the 
co-expression  of  the  two  transformed  genes,  however,  only 
70% of those transformed with biolistics contained intact cop-
ies  (Travella  et  al.,  2005).  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  rice,  GUS 
activity  was  more  stable  in  Agrobacterium-transformed  lines 
versus  those  transformed  with  biolistics  (Dai  et  al.,  2001). 
Although  some  instability  was  observed  in  the  inheritance  of 
Agrobacterium-transformed  traits  in  barley,  only  3  or  9  plants 
followed  an  expected  Mendelian  segregation  ratio  (Travella 
et al., 2005). In contrast, inheritance in rice followed expected 
Mendelian segregation ratios. Multiple copies of the transgene 
in  Agrobacterium-transformed  lines  were  located  in  different 
loci  compared  to  co-integration  of  multiple  transgenes  in  the 
same loci in the biolistic-derived lines (Dai et al., 2001).

However, as reviewed by Altpeter et al. (2005), the inte-
gration  of  multiple  genes  into  a  common  loci  with  biolistics 
may  be  advantageous  when  multiple  gene  transformation 
or  transformation  of  high  molecular  weight  DNA  is  desired. 
Multiple gene transformation is often limited by the amount 
of DNA that can be cloned within the border regions of the 
T-DNA during Agrobacterium transformation. As many as 14 
different  transgenes  have  been  co-bombarded  into  rice  and 
resulted  in  125  independent  lines  of  which  3  contained  11, 
10, and 9 transgenes at one or two genetic loci (Chen et al., 
1998).  Multiple  gene  transformation  has  been  used  for  virus 
resistance,  metabolic  pathway  engineering,  and  multimeric 
protein production (Altpeter et al., 2005).

In a survey of gene expression in rice, ryegrass, fescue, rye, 
and  wheat,  the  transgene  copy  number  was  a  critical  factor 
effecting expression, as long as the integration of the transgene 
was  intact  and  did  not  contain  deleterious  rearrangements 
(Altpeter et al., 2005). Often the undesirable effects, such as 
transgene  rearrangements  and  adverse  effects  on  endogenous 

121

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology 

gene  expression,  are  often  associated  with  the  vector  back-
bone. Linearization of the transformation vector to exclude the 
unnecessary  vector  sequences  resulted  in  low-copy-number 
transgene  integrations  with  low  frequency  of  transgene  rear-
rangements  relative  to  supercoiled  or  linear  plasmids  (Fu  et 
al., 2000). Lowering the amount of DNA used for each bom-
bardment  also  decreased  the  number  of  insertions.  In  corn, 
46% of 1600 transformation events contained single insertions 
when 2.5 ng of DNA was used per bombardment versus 25% 
single insertion events observed when 25 ng of DNA was used 
over 18 independent experiments with the helium gun (Lowe 
et al., 2009).

A  key  advantage  to  biolistic  transformation  has  been  in 
the  area  of  organelle  transformation.  The  gunpowder-driven 
microprojectile  system  developed  by  Sanford  produced  the 
first  transformed  mitochondria  in  the  yeast  Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae  (Johnston  et  al.,  1988),  and  currently  is  the 
only  method  for  reliable  transformation  of  mitochondria 
(Bonnefoy  and  Fox,  2007).  In  addition,  this  device  was 
able  to  produce  the  first  transformation  of  chloroplasts  in 
Chamydomonas  (Boynton  et  al.,  1988)  and  the  first  stable 
transformation  of  tobacco  chloroplast  (Daniell  et  al.,  1990). 
Currently, biolistics is still the preferred method to transform 
chloroplast  due  to  the  high  transformation  efficiency  (Wang 
et al., 2009). Chloroplast transformation offers the advantages 
of  high  expression  level,  uniparental  transgene  inheritance, 
which can be used in homologous recombination for transgene 
targeting  and  is  not  limited  by  gene  silencing  and  position 
effects (reviewed in Altpeter et al., 2005). Chloroplast trans-
formed  plants  have  been  produced  to  improve  disease  and 
insect resistance, increased salt tolerance, production of biop-
harmaceuticals  and  edible  vaccines,  metabolic  pathway  engi-
neering, and research on RNA editing (Altpeter et al., 2005; 
Wang et al., 2009).

Implications of Biolistics in 
Agricultural Biotechnology

As  the  predominant  alternative  to  Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation,  biolistics  was  a  contemporary  transformation 
method during the initial push to deregulate genetically engi-
neered crops. Here we will use the current deregulated crops 
as  a  gauge  to  measure  the  impact  biolistics  has  on  agricul-
ture. In addition, we will provide a background and rationale 
behind a commercial crop (papaya) that was developed using 
the biolistic transformation method.

Application of biolistics in agriculture crops

transformation designation includes microprojectile bombard-
ment or particle acceleration method and particle gun process.
This  table  is  not  an  accurate  depiction  of  the  exact  com-
mercial status of transgenic crops in the United States, since 
many  of  the  institutions  filing  the  petitions  no  longer  exist 
or  not  all  crops  were  commercialized.  However,  it  does  give 
a general idea on the history and relative importance of each 
transformation  technique  for  each  crop.  From  this  table  it 
is  evident  that  Agrobacterium-mediated  transformation  is 
the  predominant  method  for  gene  transfer  for  most  crops. 
Biolistics  transformation  was  used  to  produce  transgenic 
lines  of  monocot  crops;  corn  and  rice  and  dicot  crops;  and 
cotton,  papaya,  and  soybean.  Two  petitions  included  direct 
gene  uptake  and  protoplast  direct  uptake,  and  one  petition 
listed  immature  embryo  electroporation  as  the  transforma-
tion  method  and  another  Confidential  Business  Information 
(CBI).  Interestingly,  while  early  releases  (year  of  petition 
filed  is  indicated  by  the  first  two  digits  of  petition  number) 
of  the  monocot  corn  were  largely  dependent  on  micro-
projectile  bombardment,  newer  releases  are  reliant  upon 
Agrobacterium-mediated  transformation;  the  dicot  crop  soy-
bean  is  predominantly  transformed  with  biolistics  and  not 
Agrobacterium-mediated  transformation.  As  the  number  of 
transformed  crops  increases  and  more  research  is  conducted 
to refine the insertion events, it will be interesting to see what 
new innovations will be developed in the transformation field.
The  majority  of  the  applicant  institutions  are  large  agricul-
tural  companies,  but  four  of  the  applicants  are  public  sector 
institutions, including the sulfonyl urea herbicide resistant flax 
from the University of Saskatchewan, plum pox virus resistant 
plum  from  the  USDA,  and  ARS-  and  PRSV-resistant  papaya 
from  Cornell  University  and  the  University  of  Florida.  The 
PRSV  papaya  from  Cornell  University  was  the  first  of  these 
institutions to achieve non-regulated status in the United States. 
In the next section we provide the reader with a first-hand per-
spective  on  the  development  of  papaya  as  a  commercial  crop 
using biolistics as the transformation method.

Papaya: A case study of biolistic 
transformation

The  papaya  (Carica  papaya)  serves  as  a  good  case  to  exam-
ine  the  biolistic  process  and  impact  of  the  procedure  in  a 
transgenic dicot plant, because it provides intriguing molecu-
lar  biology  and  a  commercial  application.  In  this  section,  we 
describe the Hawaiian papaya case as an interrelated series of 
events, of which the transformation of papaya via the biolistic 
approach played a crucial role.

Table  8.1  contains  a  list  of  the  petitions  for  non-regulated 
status  that  were  granted  by  USDA  APHIS  in  the  United 
States  as  of  July  29,  2011,  for  dicotyledonous  plants  and 
Table  8.2  for  monocotyledonous  plants.  These  tables  consist 
of  the  transformed  crop,  the  APHIS  petition  number,  insti-
tution  applying  for  the  petition,  transgenic  phenotype,  and 
transformation  event  or  line.  The  transformation  method 
was  obtained  from  the  individual  petitions.  The  biolistic 

Papaya and papaya ringspot virus
Papaya  is  a  large  herbaceous  plant  with  a  single  stem  that 
grows in tropical and subtropical lowland regions. In Hawaii, 
the dominate papaya is the small Hawaiian solo type papaya 
that  weighs  an  average  of  1–2.5  pounds.  Although  papaya  is 
polygamous,  with  male,  female,  and  hermaphrodite  plants, 
only  the  hermaphrodite  is  grown  commercially  (Gonsalves 
et al., 2008) in Hawaii.

122

Biolistic and other non-Agrobacterium technologies of plant transformation

C H A P T E R   8

Table 8.1  USDA, APHIS non regulated dicot crops as of July 29, 2011

Regulated article

APHIS petition #

Applicant institution

Cichorium intybus

97-148-01p

Bejo

Transgenic 
phenotype

Male sterile

Transformation 
event or line

Transformation 
method

RM3-3, RM3-4, RM3-6

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Biolistic transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Biolistic transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

(Continued )

123

Cotton

93-196-01p

94-308-01p

95-045-01p

95-256-01p

97-013-01p

00-342-01p
02-042-01p

Calgene

Monsanto

Monsanto

DuPont

Calgene

Monsanto
Aventis

03-036-01p

Mycogen/Dow

Bromoxynil tolerant

BXN

Lepidopteran resistant

531, 757, 1076

Glyphosate tolerant

1445, 1698

Sulfonylurea tolerant

19-51a

Bromoxynil tolerant and 
Lepidopteran resistant
Lepidopteran resistant
Phosphinothericin 
tolerant
Lepidopteran resistant

Events 31807 and 
31808
Cotton Event 15985
LLCotton25

281-24-236

03-036-02p

Mycogen/Dow

Lepidopteran resistant

3006-210-23

03-155-01p

04-086-01p

Syngenta

Monsanto

Lepidopteran resistant

COT 102

Glyphosate tolerant

MON 88913

06-332-01p

Bayer CropScience

Glyphosate tolerant

GHB614

Flax

98-335-01p

University of 
Saskatchewan

96-051-01p
04-337-01p

Cornell University
University of Florida

04-264-01p

ARS

Papaya

Plum

Potato

Tolerant to soil residues 
of sulfonyl urea 
herbicide

PRSV resistant
Papaya ringspot virus 
resistant

CDC Triffid

55-1, 63-1
X17-2

Plum pox virus 
resistant

C5

94-257-01p

Monsanto

Coleopteran resistant

95-338-01p

Monsanto

CPB resistant

97-204-01p

97-339-01p

Monsanto

Monsanto

CPB and PLRV resistant

CPB and PVY resistant

99-173-01p/97-204-
01p

Monsanto

PLRV and CPB resistant

BT6, BT10, BT12, 
BT16, BT17, BT18, 
BT23
SBT02-5 and -7, 
ATBT04-6 and -27, 
-30, -31, -36
RBMT21-129 & 
RBMT21-350
RBMT15-101, 
SEMT15-02,  
SEMT15-15
RBMT22-82

Rapeseed

94-090-01p

97-205-01p

Calgene

AgrEvo

Oil profile altered

Phosphinothricin 
tolerant

pCGN3828-212/86-18 
and -23
T45

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology 

Table 8.1  (Continued )

Regulated article

APHIS petition #

Applicant institution

Transgenic 
phenotype

Transformation 
event or line

Transformation 
method

98-216-01p

Monsanto

Glyphosate tolerant

RT73

Phosphinothricin 
tolerant and pollination 
control

MS8 and RF3

Glyphosate tolerant

RT200

Phosphinothricin 
tolerant and pollination 
control
Phosphinothricin 
tolerant
Glyphosate tolerant
Phosphinothricin 
tolerant
Oil profile altered
Phosphinothricin 
tolerant
Phosphinothricin 
tolerant
Glyphosate and 
acetolactate synthase 
tolerant
Glyphosate tolerant

MS1 and RF1/RF2

Topas 19/2

40-3-2
W62, W98, A2704-12, 
A2704-21, A5547-35
G94-1, G94-19, G-168
A5547-127

GU262

356043

MON 89788

WMV2 and ZYMV 
resistant
CMV, ZYMV, WMV2 
resistant

Phosphinothricin 
tolerant
Glyphosate tolerant

ZW-20

CZW-3

T-120-7

GTSB77

Glyphosate tolerant

H7-1

High oleic acid

DP-3054

Biolistic transformation

Soybean

98-278-01p

AgrEvo

01-324v01p/98- 
216-01p
01-206-01p/98- 
278-01p

01-206-02p/97- 
205-01p
93-258-01p
96-068-01p

97-008-01p
98-014-01p/96- 
068-01p
98-238-01p

06-271-01p

Monsanto

Aventis

Aventis

Monsanto
AgrEvo

DuPont
AgrEvo

AgrEvo

Pioneer

06-178-01p

Monsanto

Squash

06-354-01p

92-204-01p

95-352-01p

Sugar beet

97-336-01p

Pioneer

Upjohn

Asgrow

AgrEvo

98-173-01p

03-323-01p

Novartis Seeds and 
Monsanto
Monsanto

Tobacco

01-121-01p

Vector

Reduced nicotine

Vector 21-41

Tomato

92-196-01p

94-227-01p/92- 
196-01p
94-228-01p

94-230-01p/92- 
196-01p
94-290-01p

95-030-01p/92- 
196-01p

124

Calgene

Calgene

Fruit ripening altered

FLAVR SAVR

Fruit ripening altered

Line N73 1436-111

DNA Plant Tech

Fruit ripening altered

1345-4

Calgene

Fruit ripening altered

Zeneca and Petoseed 
Fruit
Calgene

Polygalacturonase level 
decreased
Fruit ripening altered

9 additional 
FLAVRSAVR lines
B, Da, F

20 additional 
FLAVRSAVR lines

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Biolistic transformation
Biolistic transformation

Biolistic transformation
Biolistic transformation

Biolistic transformation

Biolistic transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

(Continued )

Biolistic and other non-Agrobacterium technologies of plant transformation

C H A P T E R   8

Table 8.1  (Continued )

Regulated article

APHIS petition #

Applicant institution

Transgenic 
phenotype

Transformation 
event or line

Transformation 
method

95-053-01p

Monsanto

Fruit ripening altered

8338

95-179-01p/92- 
196-01p
95-324-01p

96-248-01p/92- 
196-01p
97-287-01p

Calgene

Agritope

Calgene

Fruit ripening altered

Fruit ripening altered

Fruit ripening altered

Monsanto

Lepidopteran resistant

2 additional 
FLAVRSAVR lines
35 1 N

1 additional 
FLAVRSAVR line
5345

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Papaya  ringspot  virus  (PRSV)  is  the  most  important  virus 
affecting papaya worldwide. The virus belongs to the potyvi-
rus  genus,  a  very  large  and  economically  important  group  of 
plant viruses (Gonsalves et al., 2008). These viruses are vec-
tored by aphids in a non-persistent manner; that is, the aphids 
can acquire the virus quickly and transmit it quickly, but the 
virus  is  not  retained  by  the  aphid  vector  for  long  periods  of 
time. The severity of PRSV infection on papaya is manifested 
by the stunting of the papaya plant, mosaic and distortion of 
leaves, and loss of crop productivity. Unfortunately, resistance 
to  PRSV  has  not  been  found  in  C.  papaya  so  conventional 
breeding  has  not  been  successful  in  developing  resistance 
(Gonsalves et al., 2006).

Genes that confer resistance to PRSV have been identified 
in the genus Vasconcellea (Gonsalves et al., 2006). However, 
crosses between C. papaya and Vasconcellea species are ster-
ile.  Progress  is  being  made,  however,  in  rescuing  embryos 
of  these  crosses  and  using  various  approaches  to  bridge  C. 
papaya and these other plants so that later generations would 
be  more  fertile  when  crossed  to  C.  papaya  and  also  contain 
the  resistant  gene  (Gonsalves  et  al.,  2006).  However,  com-
mercial lines have not yet been obtained.

Tolerance  to  PRSV  has  been  identified  in  C.  papaya  and 
the  process  of  recurrent  selection  has  been  used  to  inte-
grate  tolerance  into  selected  lines,  some  of  which  have  been 
sold  commercially,  and  others  that  have  been  released  by  the 
government  for  use  by  homeowners  and  farmers.  The  lat-
ter  includes  the  release  of  Tha  Pra  2  (Prasartsee  et  al.,  1998; 
Gonsalves  et  al.,  2006).  Although  these  lines  get  infected  by 
PRSV, they continue to produce marketable fruit. Nevertheless, 
tolerant cultivars of papaya are not commonly grown.

Papaya and PRSV in Hawaii
The  entire  papaya  story  has  been  summarized  in  a  number 
of  reviews  (Gonsalves,  1998,  2004;  Gonsalves  et  al.,  1998, 
2004).  The  Hawaiian  solo  papaya  has  been  grown  in  Hawaii 
for  over  a  hundred  years,  but  was  free  of  PRSV  until  the 
1940s  when  Jensen  observed  the  disease  and  actually  coined 
the  term  papaya  ringspot  virus  (Gonsalves,  1998).  The  virus 

became  especially  severe  in  the  1950s  and  virtually  deci-
mated  papaya  production  on  Oahu  island,  which  forced  the 
papaya industry to be relocated in the Puna district of Hawaii 
island.  Puna  was  an  ideal  region  because  an  excellent  variety 
“Kapoho”  had  been  selected  and  was  very  adaptable  to  the 
Puna area where there was well-drained lava rock type soil and 
lots  of  rainfall  and  sunshine.  Most  important,  PRSV  was  not 
present  in  Puna.  By  1978,  however,  PRSV  was  in  Hilo,  only 
19 miles away and thus the potential danger of PRSV causing 
large-scale damage in Puna was real (Gonsalves, 1998).

Biolistic approach to transform papaya for 
resistance to PRSV
With  the  potential  danger  of  PRSV  to  the  papaya  in  Puna,  a 
proactive  research  program  was  started  in  1985  to  use  the 
“parasite-derived  resistance”  approach  to  develop  transgenic 
papaya with resistance to PRSV. Parasite-derived resistance is a 
phenomenon where transgenic plants containing a gene of the 
parasite, or pathogen, are protected against detrimental effects 
of  the  same  pathogen  (Sanford  and  Johnston,  1985).  A  case 
for  this  approach  was  made  in  1986  when  transgenic  tobacco 
and tomato expressing the coat protein gene of tobacco mosaic 
virus showed resistance or tolerance to the virus (Powell-Abel 
et  al.,  1986).  We  followed  the  same  lead  and  embarked  on 
transforming papaya such that it would express the coat protein 
gene  of  PRSV  and  hopefully  be  resistant  to  PRSV.  There  are 
many aspects to the effort, but for this purpose we will focus 
on the transgenic effort and the rationale on how we came to 
use  the  biolistic  approach.  Details  on  the  complete  story  are 
given  in  a  number  of  reviews  (Gonsalves,  1998;  Gonsalves 
et al., 2006).

Agrobacterium  transformation  of  papaya  leaf  pieces  was 
initially  tried.  Numerous  efforts  to  transform  papaya  via 
Agrobacterium  failed  and  the  project  was  at  standstill.  Two 
factors helped to move the project forward. The first was the 
report that embryogenic calli of walnut could be transformed 
by Agrobacterium, which provided a somatic embryogenic calli 
approach rather than organogensis (McGranahan et al., 1988). 
The  second  factor  was  that  the  gene  gun  had  been  recently 

125

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology 

Table 8.2  USDA, APHIS non-regulated monocot crops as of July 29, 2011

APHIS petition #

Applicant institution

Transgenic phenotype

Transformation 
event or line

Transformation 
method

Crop

Corn

94-319-01p
94-357-01p
95-093-01p
95-145-01p
95-195-01p
95-228-01p

Ciba Seeds
AgrEvo
Monsanto
DeKalb
Northrup King
Plant Genetic Systems

Lepidopteran resistant
Phosphinothricin tolerant
Lepidopteran resistant
Phosphinothricin tolerant
European Corn Borer resistant
Male sterile

Event 176
T14, T25
MON 80100
B16
Bt11
MS3

MON809 and MON810
DBT418
MON802

GA21
CBH‐351

676, 678, 680

Biolistic transformation

96-017-01p/95-093-01p
96-291-01p
96-317-01p

97-099-01p
97-265-01p

97-342-01p

Monsanto
DeKalb
Monsanto

Monsanto
AgrEvo

Pioneer

98-349-01p/95-228-01p

AgrEvo

00-011-01p/97-099-01p
00-136-01p

01-137-01p
03-181-01p/00-136-01p

Monsanto
Mycogen c/o Dow and 
Pioneer
Monsanto
Dow

03-353-01p

04-125-01p

04-229-01p
04-362-01p

05-280-01p

06-298-01p

07-152-01p

07-253-01p

Dow

Monsanto

Monsanto
Syngenta

Syngenta

Monsanto

Pioneer

Syngenta

European Corn Borer resistant
European Corn Borer resistant
Glyphosate tolerant and ECB 
resistant
Glyphosate tolerant
Phosphinothricin tolerant and 
lepidopteran resistant
Male sterile and 
phosphinothricin tolerant
Phosphinothricin tolerant and 
male sterile
Glyphosate tolerant
Lepidopteran resistant and 
phosphinothricin tolerant
Corn rootworm resistant
Lepidopteran resistant and 
phosphinothricin tolerant
Corn rootworm resistant

Corn rootworm resistant

High lysine
Corn rootworm protected

MS6

NK603
Line 1507

MON 863
TC-6275

59122

88017

LY038
MIR604

Thermostable alpha-amylase

3272

European Corn Borer resistant

MON 89034

Glyphosate and imidazolinone 
tolerant
Lepidopteran resistant

DP-098140-6

MIR-162 Maize

Biolistic transformation
Protoplast direct uptake
Biolistic transformation
Biolistic transformation
CBI
Immature embryo 
electroporation
Biolistic transformation
Biolistic transformation
Biolistic transformation

Biolistic transformation
Biolistic transformation

Biolistic transformation

Biolistic transformation
Biolistic transformation

Biolistic transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Biolistic transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

Direct gene transfer
Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation

08-338-01p

Pioneer

Male sterility fertility restored, 
visual marker

OP-32138-1

Rice

98-329-01p
06-234-01p/98-329-01p

AgrEvo
Bayer CropScience

Phosphinothricin tolerant
Phosphinothricin tolerant

LLRICE06, LLRICE62
LLRICE601

invented  by  John  Sanford  who  was  a  colleague  of  Gonsalves 
at  Cornell  University,  which  gave  him  timely  access  to  the 
gene  gun  equipment  and  expertise  of  John  Sanford  (Klein 
et  al.,  1987;  Sanford  et  al.,  1992).  Maureen  Fitch  success-
fully  developed  an  embryogenic  calli  system  for  papaya,  and 

transformation was initiated with the gene gun from 1988 to 
1989 (Fitch et al., 1990; Fitch and Manshardt, 1990, 1992). 
By 1991, genetically engineered transgenic papaya with resist-
ance to PRSV had been developed and tests in the greenhouse 
showed that it was resistant to PRSV (Fitch et al., 1992).

126

Biolistic and other non-Agrobacterium technologies of plant transformation

C H A P T E R   8

Testing, deregulation, commercialization, and 
impact of the transgenic papaya in Hawaii
As might be expected, initial efforts at transforming embryo-
genic calli via the biolistic approach were not highly efficient, 
but  they  did  result  in  a  transgenic  line  that  showed  resist-
ance  to  PRSV  (Gonsalves,  1998).  Fifteen  lines  of  transgenic 
Sunset  and  Kapoho  papaya  were  tested  for  resistance,  and 
one  of  them,  designated  line  55-1,  showed  resistance  under 
greenhouse  conditions.  Clones  of  line  55-1  also  showed 
excellent  resistance  in  a  1992  field  trial  on  Oahu  island  in 
Hawaii.  Ironically,  in  1992  PRSV  was  discovered  in  Puna 
on  Hawaii  island  where  95%  of  Hawaii’s  papaya  was  grown. 
As  expected,  PRSV  moved  rapidly  throughout  Puna  and  by 
October 1994, efforts to suppress PRSV in Puna were aban-
doned. By 1995, PRSV was widespread in Puna and severely 
reduced  papaya  production.  Fortunately,  efforts  to  develop 
a  control  method  had  been  undertaken  proactively  and,  as 
noted earlier, by 1992 a PRSV-resistant papaya had been iden-
tified. Efforts were focused on testing the papaya under field 
conditions  in  Puna  and  on  moving  toward  deregulation  and 
commercialization of the transgenic papaya.

The Puna field trial was started in 1995 and resulted in a 
transgenic  papaya  that  was  resistant  under  field  conditions 
(Ferreira  et  al.,  2002).  Using  plants  in  the  1992  field  trial 
on  Oahu  island  as  a  source  for  improving  line  55-1,  Richard 
Manshardt  (1998)  successfully  developed  two  commer-
cial  quality  transgenic  cultivars  called  SunUp  and  Rainbow. 
Rainbow  would  go  on  to  be  the  most  popular  transgenic 
papaya cultivar in Hawaii. Line 55-1 was deregulated by the 
Animal  Plant  Health  Inspection  Service  (APHIS)  and  the 
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA),  and  consultation 
with  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  was  com-
pleted by the end of 1997. The transgenic papaya was com-
mercialized  in  May  1998  and  seeds  were  released  to  the 
growers starting that same month (Gonsalves et al., 2004).

The  impact  of  the  transgenic  papaya  transformed  via 
the  biolistic  approach  has  been  documented  elsewhere 
(Gonsalves, 2006). In summary, since its release in 1998 the 
resistance of the transgenic papaya has been highly effective, 
and  the  transgenic  papaya  currently  accounts  for  about  80% 

of the papaya production. One could safely say that without 
the  PRSV-resistant  transgenic  papaya,  the  papaya  industry 
in  Puna  would  not  have  survived  the  PRSV.  Efforts  are  now 
focused on obtaining regulatory approval of the Hawaii trans-
genic  papaya  (line  55-1  and  its  derivatives)  in  Japan,  and  to 
thus  expand  Hawaii’s  papaya  market.  In  1992,  when  PRSV 
was  first  discovered  in  Puna,  Hawaii  exported  about  25%  of 
its papaya to Japan, but the amount being exported to Japan is 
currently less than 10% of Hawaii’s production. The latter is 
due to the low production of non-transgenic papaya in Hawaii 
and the current prohibition of the transgenic papaya in Japan. 
Progress  has  been  made  in  this  effort  and  we  are  hopeful  to 
have regulatory approval in 2011.

Characteristics of transgene inserts in biolistically 
transformed line 55-1 and its derivatives
Unlike  Agrobacterium  transformation,  the  biolistic  approach 
for DNA insertion is expected to be a rather random process 
that  could  result  in  numerous  inserts  of  DNA.  Interestingly,  
a  thorough  study  of  the  transgenic  line  55-1  revealed  only 
three inserts (Suzuki et al., 2008). The inserts included a sin-
gle  contiguous  9789  bp  fragment  encoding  the  coat  protein, 
uida  and  nptII  genes,  a  290 bp  fragment  of  the  822 bp  nptII 
gene, and a 222 bp tetA gene fragment with flanking plasmid 
vector  DNA  1533 bp  in  length.  Furthermore,  genetic  studies 
also showed that these inserts segregate as a unit, suggesting 
that they are at the same loci. Lastly, five of the six flanking 
genomic  DNA  sequences  are  nuclear  plastid  sequences.  We 
have  no  evidence  that  these  nuclear  plastid  sequences  are  
preferred integration sites.

The  biolistically  transgenic  papaya  line  55-1,  which  was 
first tested for resistance in 1991 and has been commercially 
planted since 1998, has been remarkably stable, and its resist-
ance to PRSV has held up under a variety of field conditions 
and  virus  pressure.  Studies  have  shown  that  the  mechanism 
of resistance is via post-transcriptional gene silencing (Tennant 
et  al.,  2001).  These  observations  under  long-term  field  con-
ditions  reinforce  the  value  and  impact  of  the  biolistic  trans-
formation  approach  for  developing  effective  transgenic 
virus-resistant crops using the “pathogen-derived concept.”

References

Ahokas, H. (1989). Transfection of germinating 

barley seed electrophoretically with 
exogenous DNA. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 77, 469–472.

Altpeter, F., Baisakh, N., Beachy, R., Bock, R., 

Capell, T., & Christou, P., et al. (2005). 
Particle bombardment and the genetic 
enhancement of crops: Myths and realities. 
Molecular Breeding, 15, 305–327.

Asad, S., Mukhtar, Z., Nazir, F., Hashmi, 

J. A., Mansoor, S., & Zafar, Y., et al. 
(2008). Silicon carbide whisker-mediated 
embryogenic callus transformation of cotton 
(Gossypium hirsutum L.) and regeneration of 
salt tolerant plants. Molecular Biotechnology, 
40, 161–169.

Batty, N., & Evans, J. (1992). Biological 

ballistics–no longer a shot in the dark. 
Transgenic Research, 1, 107–113.

Bidney, D., Scelonge, C., Martich, J., Burrus, 

M., Sims, L., & Huffman, G. (1992). 
Microprojectile bombardment of plant 
tissues increases transformation frequency 
by Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 18, 301–313.
Bonnefoy, N., & Fox, T. D. (2007). 

Directed alteration of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae mitochondrial DNA by 
biolistic transformation and homologous 
recombination. Methods in Molecular 
Biology (Clifton, N.J.), 372, 153–166.

Boynton, J., Gillham, N., Harris, E.,  

Hosler, J., Johnson, A., & Jones, A.,  
et al. (1988). Chloroplast transformation 
in Chlamydomonas with high velocity 
microprojectiles. Science, 240, 
1534–1538.

Chen, L., Marmey, P., Taylor, N. J., Brizard, 

J. -P., Espinoza, C., & D'Cruz, P., et al. 
(1998). Expression and inheritance of 
multiple transgenes in rice plants. Nature 
Biotechnology, 16, 1060–1064.

Christou, P. (1990). Morphological description 
of transgenic soybean chimeras created by 
the delivery, integration and expression of 
foreign DNA using electric discharge particle 
acceleration. Annals of Botany, 66, 379–386.

127

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology 

Christou, P. (1996). Transformation technology. 

Trends in Plant Science, 1, 423–431.

Christou, P., McCabe, D. E., & Swain, W. F. 
(1988). Stable transformation of soybean 
callus by DNA-coated gold particles. Plant 
Physiology, 87, 671–674.

Christou, P., Swain, W. F., Yang, N. -S., & 

McCabe, D. E. (1989). Inheritance and 
expression of foreign genes in transgenic 
soybean plants. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 86, 7500–7504.

Dai, S., Zheng, P., Marmey, P., Zhang, S., Tian, 
W., & Chen, S., et al. (2001). Comparative 
analysis of transgenic rice plants obtained by 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation and 
particle bombardment. Molecular Breeding, 
7, 25–33.

Daniell, H., Vivekananda, J., Nielsen, B. L., 
Ye, G. N., Tewari, K. K., & Sanford, J. C. 
(1990). Transient foreign gene expression in 
chloroplasts of cultured tobacco cells after 
biolistic delivery of chloroplast vectors. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 87, 
88–92.

De La Pena, A., Loerz, H., & Schell, J. (1987). 
Transgenic rye plants obtained by injecting 
DNA into young floral tillers. Nature 
(London), 325, 274–276.

Duan, X., & Chen, S. (1985). Variation of the 
characters of rice (Oryza sativa) induced 
by foreign DNA uptake. China Agricultural 
Science, 3, 6–9.

D’Halluin, K., Bonne, E., Bossut, M., De 
Beuckeleer, M., & Leemans, J. (1992). 
Transgenic maize plants by tissue 
electroporation. Plant Cell, 4, 1495–1505.
Ferreira, S. A., Pitz, K. Y., Manshardt, R., Zee, 
F., Fitch, M., & Gonsalves, D. (2002). Virus 
coat protein transgenic papaya provides 
practical control of papaya ringspot virus in 
Hawaii. Plant Disease, 86, 101–105.

Fitch, M., & Manshardt, R. (1990). Somatic 

embryogenesis and plant regeneration from 
immature zygotic embryos of papaya (Carica 
papaya L.). Plant Cell Reports, 9, 320–324.

Fitch, M. M. M., Manshardt, R. M., Gonsalves, 

D., Slightom, J. L., & Sanford, J. C. 
(1990). Stable transformation of papaya via 
microprojectile bombardment. Plant Cell 
Reports, 9, 189–194.

Fitch, M. M. M., Manshardt, R. M., Gonsalves, 
D., Slightom, J. L., & Sanford, J. C. (1992). 
Virus resistant papaya derived from tissues 
bombarded with the coat protein gene of 
papaya ringspot virus. BioTechnology, 10, 
1466–1472.

Fu, X., Duc, L. T., Fontana, S., Bong, B. B., 

Tinjuangjun, P., & Sudhakar, D., et al. 
(2000). Linear transgene constructs lacking 
vector backbone sequences generate low-
copy-number transgenic plants with simple 
integration patterns. Transgenic Research, 9, 
11–19.

Gonsalves, C., Lee, D. & Gonsalves, D. (2004). 

Transgenic virus resistant papaya: The 
Hawaiian “Rainbow” was rapidly adopted 
by farmers and is of major importance in 
Hawaii today. Online. APSnet Feature, 
American Phytopathological Society, August-
September  http://www.apsnet.org/online/
feature/rainbow/

128

Gonsalves, D. (1998). Control of papaya 
ringspot virus in papaya: A case study. 
Annual Review of Phytopathology, 36, 
415–437.

Gonsalves, D., Ed. (2004). Virus Resistant 
Transgenic Papaya in Hawaii: A Case for 
Technology Transfer to Lesser Developed 
Countries. OECD/USAID/ARS Conference 
on Virus Resistant Transgenic Papaya in 
Hawaii: A Case for Technology Transfer 
to Lesser Developed Countries, held in 
Hilo, HI October 22–24, 2003. Edited by 
Gonsalves, D. Hilo, Hawaii: Petroglyph 
Press, LTD, Hilo, Hawaii 96720.

Gonsalves, D. (2006). Transgenic papaya: 

Development, release, impact, and 
challenges. Advances in Virus Research, 67, 
317–354.

Gonsalves, D., Ferreira, S., Manshardt, R., 

Fitch, M. & Slightom, J. (1998). Transgenic 
virus resistant papaya: New hope for control 
of papaya ringspot virus in Hawaii. APSnet 
feature story for September 1998 on world 
wide web. Address is:  http://www.apsnet.
org/education/feature/papaya/Top.htm/.

Gonsalves, D., Gonsalves, C., Ferreira, S., Pitz, 
K., Fitch, M., Manshardt, R. & et al. (2004). 
Transgenic virus resistant papaya: From hope 
to reality for controlling of papaya ringspot 
virus in Hawaii. Online. APSnet Feature, 
American Phytopathological Society, August-
September,  http://www.apsnet.org/online/
feature/ringspot/ July 2004.

Gonsalves, D., Suzuki, J., Tripathi, S. & 
Ferreira, S. (2008). Papaya ringspot 
virus (Potyviridae). In Mahy, B. & Van 
Regenmortel, M., (eds.), Encyclopedia of 
virology (5 vols, 3rd Edition Vol. 4, pp. vol. 
4, pp. 1–8. 5 vols). Elsevier, Oxford.
Gonsalves, D., Vegas, A., Prasartsee, V., 

Drew, R., Suzuki, J., & Tripathi, S. (2006). 
Developing papaya to control papaya 
ringspot virus by transgenic resistance, 
intergeneric hybridization, and tolerance 
breeding. Plant Breeding Reviews, 26, 
35–78.

Griesbach, R. J. (1987). Chromosome-

mediated transformation via microinjection. 
Plant Science (Shannon), 50, 69–78.
Griesbach, R. J. (1994). An improved 

method for transforming plants through 
electrophoresis. Plant Science (Limerick), 
102, 81–89.

Holm, P. B., Olsen, O., Schnorf, M., Brinch-

Pedersen, H., & Knudsen, S. (2000). 
Transformation of barley by microinjection 
into isolated zygote protoplasts. Transgenic 
Research, 9, 21–32.

James, C. (2009). Global status of 

commercialized biotech/GM crops: 2009. 
ISAAA Brief 41-2009: Executive 
Summary.

Johnston, S., Anziano, P., Shark, K., Sanford, 

J., & Butow, R. (1988). Mitochondrial 
transformation in yeast by bombardment with 
microprojectiles. Science, 240, 1538–1541.

Kaeppler, H. E., Gu, W., Somers, D. A., Rines, 

H. W., & Cockburn, A. E. (1990). Silicon 
carbide fiber-mediated DNA delivery into 
plant cells. Plant Cell Reports, 9, 415–418.
Kikkert, J. (1993). The Biolistic® PDS-1000/

He device. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 33, 221–226.

Klein, T., Wolf, E., Wu, R., & Sanford, J. 

(1987). High-velocity microprojectiles 
for delivery of nucleic acids in living cells. 
Nature, 326, 70–73.

Klein, T. M., Fromm, M., Weissinger, A., Tomes, 

D., Schaaf, S., & Sletten, M., et al. (1988). 
Transfer of foreign genes into intact maize 
cells with high-velocity microprojectiles. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 85, 
4305–4309.

Klein, T. M., Harper, E. C., Svab, Z., Sanford, 
J. C., Fromm, M. E., & Maliga, P. (1988). 
Stable genetic transformation of intact 
Nicotiana cells by the particle bombardment 
process. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 85, 8502–8505.

Klein, T. M., Wolf, E. D., Wu, R., & Sanford, J. 

C. (1987). High-velocity microprojectiles 
for delivering nucleic acids into living cells. 
Nature, 327, 70–73.

Liu, J., Su, Q., Au, L., & Yang, A. (2009). 

Transfer of a minimal linear marker-free and 
vector-free smGFP cassette into soybean 
via ovary-drip transformation. Biotechnology 
Letters, 31, 295–303.

Lowe, B., Shiva Prakash, N., Way, M., Mann, 
M., Spencer, T., & Boddupalli, R. (2009). 
Enhanced single copy integration events in 
corn via particle bombardment using low 
quantities of DNA. Transgenic Research, 18, 
831–840.

Luo, Z. -x., & Wu, R. (1989). A simple method 
for the transformation of rice via the pollen-
tube pathway. Plant Molecular Biology 
Reporter, 7, 69–77.

Manshardt, R. M. (1998). “UH Rainbow” 

papaya. University of Hawaii College of 
Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources 
New Plants for Hawaii-1. (2pp).

McCabe, D., & Christou, P. (1993). Direct 

DNA transfer using electric discharge 
particle acceleration (ACCELL™ 
technology). Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 33, 227–236.

McCabe, D. E., & Martinell, B. J. (1993). 

Transformation of elite cotton cultivars via 
particle bombardment of meristems. Nat. 
Biotech., 11, 596–598.

McGranahan, G. H., Leslie, C. A., Uratsu, S. 

L., Martin, L. A., & Dandekar, A. M. (1988). 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of 
walnut somatic embryos and regeneration 
of transgenic plants. BioTechnology, 6, 
800–804.

Mizuno, K., Takahashi, W., Beppu, T., Shimada, 

T., & Tanaka, O. (2005). Aluminum borate 
whisker-mediated production of transgenic 
tobacco plants. Plant Cell Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 80, 163–169.

Murakawa, T., Kajiyama, S.  i., & Fukui, K. 
(2008). Improvement of bioactive bead-
mediated transformation by concomitant 
application of electroporation. Plant 
Biotechnology, 25, 387–390.

Murakawa, T., Kajiyama, S.  i., Ikeuchi, 

T., Kawakami, S., & Fukui, K. (2008). 
Improvement of transformation efficiency 
by bioactive-beads-mediated gene transfer 
using DNA-lipofectin complex as entrapped 
genetic material. Journal of Bioscience and 
Bioengineering, 105, 77–80.

Biolistic and other non-Agrobacterium technologies of plant transformation

C H A P T E R   8

Pescitelli, S. M., & Sukhapinda, K. (1995). 

Stable transformation via electroporation 
into maize type-II callus AND regeneration 
of fertile transgenic plants. Plant Cell 
Reports, 14, 712–716.

Powell-Abel, P., Nelson, R. S., De, B., 

Hoffmann, N., Rogers, S. G., & Fraley, R. T., 
et al. (1986). Delay of disease development 
in transgenic plants that express the tobacco 
mosaic virus coat protein gene. Science, 232, 
738–743.

Prasartsee, V., Chikiatiyos, S., Palakorn, 
K., Chaeuychoom, P., Kongpolprom, 
W., Wichainum, S., et al. (1998). The 
New Technologies for the Development 
of Sustainable Farming in Northeast. 
Proceedings of JIRCAS-ITCAD Seminar, 
March 24, 1998, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
Rao, A. Q., Bakhsh, A., Kiani, S., Shahzad, 
K., Shahid, A. A., & Husnain, T., et al. 
(2009). The myth of plant transformation. 
Biotechnology Advances, 27, 753–763.

Sanford, J. (1991). An improved, helium-driven 

biolistic device. Technique, 3, 3–16.

Sanford, J. C. (2000). Turning point article: 

The development of the biolistic process. In 
Vitro Cellular and Developmental Biology-
Plant, 36, 303–308.

Sanford, J. C., & Johnston, S. A. (1985). The 

concept of parasite-derived resistance– 
Deriving resistance genes from the parasite's 
own genome. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 
113, 395–405.

Sanford, J. C., Klein, T. M., Wolf, E. D., & 
Allen, N. (1987). Delivery of substances 
into cells and tissues using a particle 
bombardment process. Particulate Science 
and Technology, 5, 27–37.

Sanford, J. C., Smith, F. D., & Russell, J. A. 

(1992). Optimizing the biolistic process for 
different biological applications. Methods in 
Enzymology, 217, 483–509.

Sone, T., Nagamori, E., Ikeuchi, T., Mizukami, 

A., Takakura, Y., & Kajiyama, S. I., et al. 
(2008). A novel gene delivery system in 
plants with calcium alginate micro-beads. 
Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, 94, 
87–91.

Suzuki, J. Y., Tripathi, S., Fermin, G. A., Jan, 
F. -J., Hou, S., & Saw, J. H., et al. (2008). 
Characterization of insertion sites in rainbow 
papaya, the first commercialized transgenic 
papaya fruit crop. Tropical Plant Biology, 1, 
293–309.

Tang, D. -c., DeVit, M., & Johnston, S. A. 

(1992). Genetic immunization is a simple 
method for eliciting an immune response. 
Nature, 356, 152–154.

Tennant, P., Fermin, G., Fitch, M. M., 

Manshardt, R. M., Slightom, J. L., & 
Gonsalves, D. (2001). Papaya ringspot virus 
resistance of transgenic rainbow and sunup is 
affected by gene dosage, plant development, 
and coat protein homology. European Journal 
of Plant Pathology, 107, 645–653.

Thompson, J. A., Drayton, P. R., Frame, B. R., 
Wang, K., & Dunwell, J. M. (1995). Maize 
transformation utilizing silicon carbide 
whiskers: A review. Euphytica, 85, 75–80.
Travella, S., Ross, S. M., Harden, J., Everett, 

C., Snape, J. W., & Harwood, W. A. (2005). 
A comparison of transgenic barley lines 
produced by particle bombardment and 
Agrobacterium-mediated techniques. Plant 
Cell Reports, 23, 780–789.

Ueki, S., Lacroix, B., Krichevsky, A., 

Lazarowitz, S. G., & Citovsky, V. (2009). 
Functional transient genetic transformation 
of Arabidopsis leaves by biolistic 
bombardment. Nature Protocols, 4, 71–77.

Wang, H. -H., Yin, W. -B., & Hu, Z. -M. (2009). 
Advances in chloroplast engineering. Journal 
of Genetics and Genomics, 36, 387–398.
Yamagishi, N., Terauchi, H., Kanematsu, S., 
& Hidaka, S. (2006). Biolistic inoculation 
of soybean plants with soybean dwarf 
virus. Journal of Virological Methods, 137, 
164–167.

Yang, A., Su, Q., & An, L. (2009). Ovary-

drip transformation: a simple method for 
directly generating vector- and marker-free 
transgenic maize (Zea mays L.) with a 
linear GFP cassette transformation. Planta 
(Berlin), 229, 793–801.

Young, J., Kuykendall, L., Martinez-Romero, E., 

Kerr, A., & Sawada, H. (2001). A revision 
of Rhizobium Frank 1889, with an amended 
description of the genus, and the inclusion 
of all species of Agrobacterium Conn 1942 
and Allorhizobium undicola de Lajudie et 
al. 1998 as new combinations: Rhizobium 
radiobacter, R. rhizogenes, R. rubi, R. 
undicola and R. vitis. International Journal of 
Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, 
51, 89–103.

Zhang, H., Zhao, F., Zhao, Y., Guo, C., Li, 
C., & Xiao, K. (2009). Establishment of 
transgenic cotton lines with high efficiency 
via pollen-tube pathway. Frontiers of 
Agriculture in China, 3, 359–365.

129

Plant genome sequencing: Models for 
developing synteny maps and association 
mapping

6

Delphine Fleury  Ute Baumann  Peter Langridge
Australian Centre for Plant Functional Genomics, University of Adelaide Glen Osmond, 
Australia

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 83
Genome Sequencing  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 84
Strategies for plant genome sequencing . . . . . . . . . . .  84
High-throughput sequencing technologies . . . . . . . . .  86
Single molecule and real-time sequencing  . . . . . . . . .  86
Assembly and alignment programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  86
Genome browsers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  87
Models for Developing Syntenic Maps  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 88
Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  88
Intraspecies comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  88
Cytogenetics for interspecies comparison  . . . . . . . . .  89
Sequence comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  89
Macro- versus micro-synteny  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  89
Nature of the differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  89
Applications of syntenic maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  91
Tools and limitations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  91
Association Mapping  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   91
Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  91
Population size and structure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  92
Markers and marker density  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  93
Implications   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 94

Introduction

Plant  genomes  are  characterized  by 
large  variations  of 
genome  size  and  level  of  ploidy.  C-value  is  the  amount  of 
nuclear  DNA  in  the  unreplicated  gametic  nucleus,  irrespec-
tive  of  the  ploidy  level  of  the  species.  The  genome  size  of 
flowering  plants  varies  almost  2000-fold  from  small  genome 
plants such as Genlisea margaretae (a carnivorous herb) with 
2C  0.129 pg (63 Mbp) to the monocot Trillium hagae with 
2C    264.9 pg  (for  comparison  Arabidopsis  thaliana  has 

2C   0.321 pg;  Bennett  and  Leitch,  2005;  Zonneveld  et  al., 
2005;  Greilhuber  et  al.,  2006).  C-value  information  on  over 
5000 plant species are found in the plant C-values Database 
(http://data.kew.org/cvalues/introduction.html;  Greilhuber 
et al., 2006; Swift 1950).

Intriguingly  large  genome  size  is  not  associated  with  evo-
lutionary  advancement  or  ecological  competitiveness.  Quite 
the  contrary,  plants  with  large  genomes  appear  to  have 
reduced  photosynthetic  efficiency  and  are  underrepresented 
in  extreme  environments.  Furthermore  genera  with  large 
genomes  show  low  species  diversity,  indicating  that  they 
evolve  more  slowly  (Gaut  and  Ross-Ibarra,  2008).  However, 
there  are  some  interesting  correlations  between  genome 
size  and  plant  characteristics.  For  example,  guard  cell  length 
appears  to  positively  correlate  with  genome  size  across  a 
wide  range  of  major  taxa  with  the  exception  of  the  Poeae 
(Hodgson  et  al.,  2010).  Other  phenotypical  characteristics 
of large genomes, are an increased cell size and slow mitotic 
activity relative to small genome species. Variation in genome 
size  is  found  not  only  within  genera,  but  also  within  a  spe-
cies. For instance, variation within the nuclear DNA content 
were found in F1 hybrids of maize (Rayburn et al., 1993) and 
among  different  accessions  of  A.  thaliana  (Schmuths  et  al., 
2004).

Major  contributors  to  plant  genome  size  are  repeti-
tive  sequences,  which  may  be  located  at  a  few  defined 
chromosomal  sites  or  widely  dispersed.  Among  the  repet-
itive  sequences  of  well-defined  functions  are  the  telo-
meric  sequences  at  the  ends  of  the  chromosomes,  the 
centromeric  sequences,  and  the  ribosomal  RNA  encoding 
regions.  Telomeres  are  composed  of  simple  G-rich  repeats, 
which  can  reach  lengths  of  up  to  160 kbp  (Richards  and 
Ausubel, 1988; Adams et al., 2001). The centromeric region 
of  a  chromosome  is  usually  associated  with  blocks  of  highly 
repetitive  tandemly  repeated  DNA  (also  called  satellite 
DNA)  and  retroelements.  The  highest  proportion  of  repeti-
tive  DNA  consists  of  mobile  elements,  the  transposons  and 
retrotransposons,  which  can  make  up  to  50%  of  a  genome 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00006-7

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

(San  Miguel  et  al.,  1996).  In  addition  to  the  various  blocks 
of  repetitive  DNA,  many  plant  genomes  contain  accessory 
chromosomes,  so-called  B-chromosomes.  These  are  highly 
condensed  chromosomes  usually  devoid  of  genes  and  have 
non-Mendelian modes of inheritance (Puertas, 2002).

Whole  genome  duplication  events  provide  another  means 
for increasing genome size leading to a change in ploidy level 
of the plant. There are different types of polyploidy in plants. 
Autopolyploidy  can  result  from  a  fusion  of  two  unreduced 
gametes, i.e., gametes that show non-disjunction of all homol-
ogous chromosomes during meiosis I. Combining two or more 
genomes from different plants leads to allopolyploidy (Chen, 
2007).  Whole  genome  duplication  events  are  often  followed 
by chromosomal rearrangements and extensive gene loss lead-
ing to a quasi re-diploidization. Interestingly there appears to 
be  a  pattern  to  the  loss  of  genes  following  the  polyploidiza-
tion events, and among the retained gene pairs more than half 
showed significant differences in gene expression. 

Several  studies  have  provided  evidence  for  widespread 
occurrence of paleopolyploidy in the angiosperms (Masterson, 
1994;  Blanc  and  Wolfe,  2004;  Cui  et  al.,  2006),  and  thus 
polyploidy  seems  to  have  been  a  major  force  in  plant  evolu-
tion.  Most  crop  species  appear  to  be  polyploid,  either  due 
to  ancient  or  relatively  recent  duplication  events.  For  exam-
ple,  wheat,  cotton,  tobacco,  coffee,  sugarcane,  peanut,  oat, 
and  canola  are  allopolyploids,  whereas  potato,  watermelon, 
banana,  and  alfalfa  are  autopolyploids.  There  are  also  exam-
ples,  such  as  soybean,  where  research  indicates  that  the 
genome  has  both  allo-  and  autopolyploid  origins  (Udall  and 
Wendel,  2006).  The  preponderance  of  polyploidization  in 
crop  plants  is  thought  to  be  associated  with  the  increased 
vigor and larger organ size in polyploids relative to their dip-
loid  progenitors  (Gepts,  2003).  The  interactions  between 
the genomes may also result in essentially fixing hybrid vigor 
(Hilu, 1993). The polyploidy nature of many crop species has 
provided an important tool for plant breeders since it allows 
exploration  of  wild,  diploid  progenitors  as  sources  of  novel 
genes or alleles for crop improvement. For example, the dip-
loid and tetraploid progenitors of hexaploid bread wheat have 
provided a critical source for disease, abiotic stress, and even 
quality genes (Feuillet et al., 2008).

Diversity of plant genome size and the complex nature of 
crop  genome  due  to  polyploidy  and  repetitive  sequences  are 
problematic  in  gene  identification  and  understanding  gene 
function for their application in plant breeding. In this chap-
ter,  we  will  cover  three  aspects  of  plant  genomics  that  help 
tackle these issues.

Genome Sequencing

Strategies for plant genome sequencing

Since  the  1970s,  the  chain  termination  method  (also  called 
the Sanger method) has been the most broadly used sequenc-
ing  technology.  This  technique  is  based  on  the  neo-synthesis 
of  the  target  fragment  using  DNA  polymerase,  radioactively 
labeled  nucleotides,  and  dideoxynucleotide  triphosphates 

(ddNTPs),  which  terminate  the  reaction.  Since  its  early 
application  the  method  has  been  improved  with  the  use  of 
fluorescent  labels  and  capillary  electrophoresis,  which  allow 
automation  and  sequence  reads  of  700–1000 bp.  This  tech-
nology has been used for the first plant genomes sequenced,  
A. thaliana (2000), rice (2005), and poplar (2006).

The  first  strategy  for  plant  genome  sequencing  used  a 
map-based  approach,  also  referred  to  as  the  hierarchical 
clone-by-clone  method  (Figure  6.1).  The  genomic  DNA  was 
fragmented  and  isolated  by  cloning  into  large-insert  vectors 
such  as  bacterial  artificial  chromosomes  (BACs;  Figure  6.2). 
The  BAC  clones  are  50–200 kbp  long  and  highly  redundant 
to cover six- to ten-fold of the entire genome. The clones are 
fingerprinted  based  on  their  restriction  sites  and  assembled 
into  physical  contigs.  The  contigs  are  ordered  in  a  physical 
map  by  anchoring  them  onto  a  genetic  map.  The  BACs  are 
either randomly chosen or selected based on their position on 
the physical map or their gene content for sequencing. Large-
insert clones, such as BACs, are then fragmented into smaller 
pieces, which are cloned into plasmids. These small fragments 
are  Sanger  sequenced  and  the  original  BAC  DNA  sequence 
is  deduced  from  them.  For  the  Arabidopsis  project,  clones 
showing  minimum  overlap  at  their  ends  were  selected  for 
sequencing. The first map of the Columbia accession covered 
115 Mbp of the 125 Mbp genome (The Arabidopsis Genome 
Initiative,  2000).  A  similar  strategy  was  used  for  maize  (Zea 
mays  cv.  B73).  The  minimal  tiling  path  (MTP)  is  the  mini-
mum number of clones covering the maximum length of the 
genome.  An  MTP  set  of  19,000  BAC  clones  was  selected 
from  the  physical  map  and  Sanger  sequenced  to  approxi-
mately six-fold coverage.

Rice  was  the  first  crop  species  to  have  its  genome 
sequenced. The method employed was a combination of hier-
archical  clone-by-clone  and  whole  genome  shotgun  sequenc-
ing  (WGS;  Figure  6.1).  For  WGS  sequencing,  genomic 
DNA  is  sheared  into  small  fragments,  cloned  into  plasmids, 
and  sequenced  (Figure  6.2).  The  construction  of  large-insert 
libraries  is  not  necessary.  Overlapping  sequences  are  merged 
by  computer  algorithms,  which  assemble  the  millions  of 
sequenced  fragments  into  contiguous  stretches  of  DNA. 
Two  subspecies  of  rice  were  sequenced,  Oryza  sativa  L. 
ssp.  japonica  by  the  International  Rice  Genome  Sequencing 
project  (2005)  and  Syngenta  (Goff  et  al.,  2002),  while  the 
spp. indica was sequenced by the Beijing Genomics Institute 
(Yu et al., 2002). Since then, WGS sequencing has been suc-
cessfully used for bigger genomes, such as Populus trichocarpa 
(485 Mbp;  Tuskan  et  al.,  2006)  and  soybean  (1.1 Gbp; 
Schmutz et al., 2010).

Because  the  assembly  of  large  and  polyploid  genomes 
would  be  difficult  without  a  framework  sequence  or  process 
for deconvoluting the contributions for the different genomes, 
an  intermediate  approach  has  been  chosen  for  the  bread 
wheat genome (Figure 6.1). Initially, individual chromosomes 
or  chromosome  arms  were  isolated  by  flow  cytometry  and 
used for constructing chromosome-specific BAC libraries. The 
approach was validated with the physical map of chromosome 
3B.  An  MTP  of  7440  chromosome  3B-specific  BAC  clones 
was assembled in 1036 contigs covering 82% of the 811 Mbp 
of the chromosome (Paux et al., 2008). This methodology was 

84

Plant genome sequencing: Models for developing synteny maps and association mapping

C H A P T E R   6

Figure 6.1 l  Strategies used for plant genome sequencing l Depending on the genome size, different strategies have been deployed in 
plants, using long-insert clones such as bacterial artificial chromosomes (BAC) and shotgun sequencing of the whole genome or of specific 
chromosomes. Sanger sequencing technology, high-throughput sequencing (or next-generation sequencing), and combinations of both 
technologies were utilized. 

BAC-by-BAC

tiling path

WGS

shear

NGST

fragment

sequence BACs

sequence

sequence

assemble

assemble

map to
reference

Figure 6.2 l Principles of BAC-by-BAC, whole genome sequencing (WGS), and next-generation sequencing technologies (NGST) 
approaches of genome sequencing. The BAC-by-BAC approach starts by creating a tilling path of overlapping BACs followed by shotgun 
sequencing and assembly of the BACs. For WGS, genomic DNA is sheared into random fragments that are cloned into a plasmid vector 
and sequenced from both ends. Cloning is not necessary for NGST: genomic DNA is fragmented and sequenced, and sequence reads are 
eventually mapped to a reference genome. 

also employed for the sorting of each of the 42 wheat chromo-
some  arms  from  a  collection  of  aneuploid  wheat  lines  (Safar 
et  al.,  2010).  This  strategy  greatly  reduces  the  complexity 
by  decreasing  the  work  unit  from  17 Gbp  to  224–580 Mbp, 

depending  on  the  considered  chromosome  arm.  The  chro-
mosome-specific  BAC  libraries  for  wheat  are  now  under 
construction  under  the  auspices  of  the  International  Wheat 
Genome Sequencing Consortium (www.wheatgenome.org).

85

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

High-throughput sequencing technologies

Recent progress in micro-fluidics and nanotechnology is revolu-
tionizing DNA sequencing by enabling millions of parallel reac-
tions  in  miniature  space.  Since  the  release  of  the  Roche  454 
GS20 sequencer in 2006, different high-throughput sequenc-
ers  (HTS)  using  massively  parallel  sequencing  technologies 
(also  called  next-generation  sequencing,  NGS)  appeared  on 
the  market. A  characteristic  of  the  first  HTS  is  the  template 
preparation:  each  single-molecule  DNA  is  clonally  amplified 
without  vector  cloning  (Figure  6.2).  Because  the  expensive 
(~1%  of  the  total  cost  of  sequencing;  Scheibye-Alsing  et  al., 
2009)  and  time-consuming  step  of  vector  cloning  is  circum-
vented, the NGS technologies are particularly attractive for de 
novo genome sequencing and genome re-sequencing.

The  current  market-dominant  platforms  among  the  
NGS — the Solexa Genome Analyzer (Illumina), the SOLiD 
technology  (Applied  Biosystems),  and  the  454  FLXsystem 
(Roche) — all perform sequencing by synthesis using a DNA 
polymerase or a ligase as the core biochemistry. Incorporated 
nucleotides  or  oligonucleotides,  in  the  case  of  SoLiD,  are 
detected  as  fluorescent  or  chemiluminescent  signals.  The 
HTS  generates  large  amounts  of  sequence  data  in  one  run 
(e.g.,  ~50 Gbp  for  Illumina  GAIIx;  Simpson  et  al.,  2009), 
which  greatly  reduces  the  cost  per  base.  The  current  read 
lengths of SOLiD (50 bp) and 454 GSFLX (400 bp) are much 
shorter than those generated by the Sanger method. However, 
the sequencing length is compensated for by the large number 
of sequenced fragments and the consequent high redundancy 
of reads per fragment. Moreover, the technologies are improv-
ing for increasing read length.

The  genome  sequence  of  the  cucumber  (Cucumis  sativus 
var. sativus) was obtained by combining data from Sanger and 
Illumina GA sequencing runs, generating a 72.2-fold genome 
coverage  (Figure  6.1;  Huang  et  al.,  2009).  Combinations  of 
traditional and NGS technologies are also used for investigat-
ing the genomes of cacao, tomato, apple, and banana, among 
others (Edwards and Batley, 2010). With the decreasing cost 
of sequencing and improvement of the technologies leading to 
longer sequence read lengths and throughput, we can expect 
that small genome crops will soon be entirely sequenced, and 
orphan crops will also become amenable to sequencing.

Although short-read technologies can be applied to de novo 
sequencing,  they  are  not  yet  suitable  for  complex  genomes 
with  a  high  content  of  repeat  sequences,  duplicated  regions, 
and  homologous  chromosomes.  Therefore,  a  physical  map-
based  strategy  in  combination  with  whole  genome  shotgun 
NGS  has  been  chosen  for  barley  (Schulte  et  al.,  2009)  and 
wheat  (www.wheatgenome.org)  projects.  Both  chromosome 
and  BAC-based  approaches  considerably  reduce  the  size  and 
the  complexity  of  the  sequencing  unit  enabling  the  use  of 
HTS. However, even at the BAC scale, a comparison of clone 
sequences generated by 454 GS20 and Sanger technologies in 
barley showed that high-quality assemblies could be generated 
from 454 GS20 sequences for genic region but not for repeti-
tive DNA (Wicker et al., 2006). Complex genomes with 80% 
of  repeat  elements  like  barley  and  wheat  still  require  longer 
reads or read-pairs longer than the longest repeat sequence in 
the target DNA.

On the other hand, short-read technologies allow rapid and 
cost-effective  re-sequencing  of  genomes  from  diverse  germ-
plasm, thus enabling the detection of sequence variants (single 
nucleotide polymorphisms, copy number variation, insertion/
deletions)  by  comparison  with  a  reference  genome.  These 
data  can  be  used  to  generate  high-resolution  genetic  maps 
(i.e.,  for  association  studies),  or  to  map  the  introgression  of 
chromosome regions from one germplasm into another one in 
a breeding scheme. Technical improvement such as bar-coding 
of the DNA samples allows multiplexing of different genetic 
material in a single sequencing run, opening the area of geno-
typing by sequencing. This concept already has been applied 
to 238 rice recombinant inbred lines (RILs; Xie et al., 2010). 
Despite the low coverage per line (0.05), Illumina GA reads 
enable  single  nucleotide  polymorphism  (SNP)  genotyping 
of  the  population.  In  the  rice  example,  the  high-resolution 
genetic map was used to map a quantitative trait locus (QTL) 
for grain width in a region of 200 kbp.

Single molecule and real-time sequencing

The  weaknesses  of  the  NGS  technologies  may  be  overcome 
by  the  so-called  third  generation  of  sequencers.  These  plat-
forms  work  on  a  single  molecule  DNA  template,  avoid-
ing  the  DNA  amplification  step,  which  introduces  base 
errors in NGS. Instruments have been developed by Helicos 
Biosciences (Harris et al., 2008), Pacific Bioscience (Eid et al., 
2009), and Oxford Nanopore. However, many other compa-
nies have also joined the race to develop fast, cheap, and reli-
able sequencing technologies (Gupta, 2008; Pettersson et al., 
2009; Ansorge, 2009).

The  Helicos  system  performs  sequencing  by  synthesis 
of  bound  DNA  molecules  at  the  nanoscale  level  and  pres-
ently achieves a read length of up to 30 bp. At the core of the 
technology  developed  by  Pacific  Bioscience  are  zero-mode 
waveguides  containing  a  single  immobilized  DNA  polymer-
ase,  fluorescently  labeled  dNTPs,  and  a  DNA  template. 
Sequencing  occurs  in  real  time  because  no  interruptions 
are  required  in  the  synthesis  process  for  imaging.  This  fea-
ture  greatly  increases  the  speed  of  sequencing.  Read  lengths 
of  around  1500 bp  have  been  achieved.  The  concept  behind 
Oxford  Nanopore  Technology  is  to  use  α-hemolysin  nano-
pores  to  immobilize  single  DNA  strands,  which  are  then 
sequentially  cleaved  by  an  exonuclease.  The  bases  are  iden-
tified  as  they  pass  through  the  nanopore  (Deamer,  2010). 
The  technology  has  the  potential  of  sequencing  long  strands 
of DNA. Single molecule sequencing could greatly help with 
the  completion  of  genome  sequences  by  filling  gaps  in  draft 
sequences and correcting ambiguous reads. Because the prep-
aration of single molecule templates is much simpler than for 
the first generation of HTS and requires less DNA, it is likely 
to  become  the  method  of  choice  for  sequencing  rare  DNA, 
such as fossil DNA in paleogenomics studies.

Assembly and alignment programs

The emergence of the NGS has obvious implications for the 
way  sequences  are  assembled.  Traditional  assembly  programs 

86

Plant genome sequencing: Models for developing synteny maps and association mapping

C H A P T E R   6

designed for long-read Sanger derived sequences are not suit-
able  for  the  large  number  of  short-read  sequences  produced 
by  the  NGS.  Generally  speaking  the  choice  of  sequence 
assemblers  is  dependent  on  the  strategy  chosen  for  genome 
sequencing,  as  well  as  the  sequencing  platform  used  for  the 
task.

For  plant  genome  sequencing,  particularly  for  the  large 
genome species, the key issues are related to de novo sequenc-
ing  where  no  framework  is  available.  Sequence  data  from 
any  of  the  platforms  come  with  quality  scores  that  describe 
the probability that a base call is incorrect. For Sanger reads 
the  base-calling  program  PHRED  (Ewing  and  Green,  1998) 
assigns  a  quality  value  to  each  base  from  the  trace  data, 
that  is,  q    10 log10(pe),  with  pe  being  the  error  probabil-
ity  of  a  particular  base.  Similarly,  quality  scores  also  come 
with  Illumina  (Cock  et  al.,  2010),  SoLiD,  and  Roche  data. 
However, they are only partially convertible (Brockman et al., 
2008).

These  quality  scores  are  also  used  to  identify  sequence 
overlap.  Sequence  assembly  is  based  on  the  assumption  that 
two reads that share a same string of nucleotides are derived 
from  the  same  region  in  the  genome.  Assemblers  use  such 
overlaps  between  sequences  to  generate  larger  contiguous 
pieces of DNA. If the genome being sequenced is very large, 
then the number of overlaps is also very large and the analy-
sis problem becomes complex. Furthermore, genomic regions 
that  share  perfect  repeats  can  be  indistinguishable  and  eas-
ily  cause  misassembly  or  even  repeat  collapse,  especially  if 
the  sequence  reads  are  shorter  than  the  repeats.  Clearly  the 
otherwise  labor-intensive  hierarchical  (BAC  by  BAC)  Sanger 
sequencing approach avoids many of the complexity problems 
compared to other approaches, especially for large genomes.

In  WGS  projects  genomic  DNA  is  randomly  sheared  and 
subcloned,  in  the  case  of  the  Sanger  method,  for  sequenc-
ing  (Figure  6.2).  Therefore,  for  full  coverage  and  success-
ful  assembly  there  is  a  necessity  to  over  sample  the  genome 
(Lander  and  Waterman,  1988).  It  is  therefore  not  sur-
prising  that,  for  instance,  the  draft  genome  sequence  for  
O.  sativa  ssp.  indica  was  derived  from  a  4.2-fold  coverage 
(Yu et al., 2002), which represents about 92% of the genome. 
The genome of poplar had a 7.5-fold coverage (Tuskan et al., 
2006) and that of Brachypodium was obtained from a 9.4-fold 
genome coverage (The International Brachypodium Initiative, 
2010).  In  a  typical  WGS  approach,  the  sheared  DNA  is 
sequenced from both ends (double-barreled sequencing step). 
The resulting read pairs, also called mate pairs, are separated 
by a known distance.

The  first  step  in  any  assembly  pipeline  is  the  removal  of 
vector  or  adapter  sequences  and  the  removal  of  low-quality 
sequences  based  on  quality  scores.  In  the  next  step,  overlap 
computation is performed. In other words, all pair-wise align-
ments  between  the  reads  are  computed.  Assemblers  assess 
the  quality  of  an  overlap  by  measures  such  as  length  of  the 
overlap  and  sequence  identity.  PHRED  scores  can  also  be 
taken  into  account  at  this  step.  During  this  process,  assem-
blers  may  also  take  note  of  potential  repeat  fragments;  for 
instance, the TIGR assembler algorithm uses the distribution 
of  potential  overlaps  for  each  fragment  to  identify  and  label 
a  fragment  as  repetitive  (Sutton  et  al.,  1995).  Clusters  of 

fragments that consistently align with one another are merged 
into  contiguous  sequences  (contigs).  In  the  final  step,  using 
information  from  mate  pairs,  the  contigs  are  ordered,  ori-
ented, and assembled into super-contigs, also called scaffolds. 
During  a  process  of  refinement  that  can  take  several  years 
and  includes  validation  of  the  assembly,  closing  gaps  and  re-
sequencing of controversial regions, the scaffolds will become 
the actual chromosome sequences.

In  addition  to  the  TIGR  assembler  mentioned  earlier, 
several  algorithms,  including  ARACHNE  (Batzoglou  et  al., 
2002),  Celera  (Myers  et  al.,  2000),  CAP3  (Huang  and 
Madan,  1999),  Phrap  (www.phrap.org),  Phusion  (Mullikin 
and  Ning,  2003),  and  Atlas  (Havlak  et  al.,  2004)  have  been 
employed  for  WGS  read  assembly  from  Sanger  reads. 
Common  to  these  programs  is  the  overlap-layout-consensus 
approach  (Pevzner  et  al.,  2001);  this  involves  starting  with 
a  pairwise  comparison  of  all  reads  and  then  using  an  over-
lap graph for the assembly (Pop, 2009). For de novo genome 
assembly  from  454  data  there  is  software  such  as  Newbler 
(Roche);  CABOG,  which  is  a  revised  version  of  the  Celera 
Assembler (Miller et al., 2008); and MIRA (Chevreux et al., 
2004).  Chaisson  et  al.  (2009)  recently  benchmarked  five  de 
novo  short-read  assembly  algorithms  and  found  that  Velvet 
(Zerbino  and  Birney,  2008)  performed  best.  However,  none 
of the benchmarked algorithms have been able to successfully 
assemble  anything  longer  than  a  bacterial  or  fungal  genome. 
On the other hand, SOAPdenovo used for Illumina data has 
been successfully used for the de novo assembly of the human 
and panda genomes (Miller et al., 2010). A mixed strategy for 
de  novo  genome  sequencing  would  combine  long-  and  short-
read data, which can be assembled using MIRA, for instance. 
Because different types of errors are produced by the differ-
ent platforms, this strategy would alleviate the weaknesses of 
both technologies. At last, genome assemblies are validated in 
conjunction  with  genome  finishing  efforts  aimed  at  generat-
ing  the  complete  sequence  of  organisms.  Validation  is  either 
manually  or  by  using  software  like  Consed  (Gordon  et  al., 
1998), Staden package (Staden et al., 2000), or TIGR Editor 
(Phillippy et al., 2008).

Genome browsers

Once a genome is assembled, genome browsers provide a graphi-
cal user interface to access and view the sequence data together 
with  the  genome  annotation.  There  are  a  number  of  software 
products  available  for  browsing  genomes,  including  stand-alone 
tools,  such  as  Artemis  (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/soft-
ware/artemis/;  Carver  et  al.,  2008)  and  Apollo  (http://apollo.
berkeleybop.org/current/index.html;  Lewis  et  al.,  2002).  The 
most  common  web-based  browsers  are  EnsEMBL,  GBrowse, 
the  University  of  California  at  Santa  Cruz  Genome  Browser, 
and  the  NCBI  Map  Viewer.  Typically  the  genome  sequence  is 
organized into chromosomes or scaffolds and displayed diagram-
matically in a chromosome overview panel. Below the diagram, 
genome annotation tracks that contain information on genes and 
gene  models,  repetitive  regions,  mRNA  and  EST  data,  expres-
sion  data,  and  comparative  genomic  and  other  information  are 
displayed.  The  Phytozome  Web  site  (http://www.phytozome.
net)  currently  provides  an  access  point  to  25  plant  genomes 

87

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

(v.7.0) and employs GBrowse to present the genome annotation. 
Sequence similarity searches (Basic Local Alignment Search tool 
for  Nucleotides,  BLASTN)  can  be  performed  and  information 
about gene homologs and gene ancestry can be accessed.

Comparative  genomics  information  for  the  major  grass 
crops  species  and  also  Arabidopsis,  poplar,  and  grape  can  be 
obtained at the Gramene Web site (http://www.gramene.org; 
Liang  et  al.,  2008).  Gramene  uses  EnsEMBL  as  its  genome 
viewer and allows the user to configure the display to switch 
between  chromosomal  and  gene-based  views,  transcript  and 
protein  sequence  information  and  domain  annotation,  single 
and  multiple  species  view,  and  a  graphical  synteny  display. 
Gramene also provides information about genetic and physical 
maps, QTLs and markers, germplasm resources, SNPs, pheno-
types, pathways, and evolutionary information.

NCBI Map Viewer displays genome information quite dif-
ferently from other genome browsers. The display is vertically 
oriented  and  different  maps,  typically  BAC  or  chromosome 
contigs, genetic markers, and genes are displayed side by side. 
The user can choose which map feature to see and can zoom 
in and out of a genomic region for more or less detailed views. 
The  map  viewer  is  closely  integrated  with  NCBI’s  other 
resources,  such  as  UniGene,  RefSeq,  and  LocusLink  (see 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/PLANTS/PlantList.
html for information on plant genomes). Other Web sites that 
provide access to a range of plant genomes and their annota-
tions  are  the  PlantGDB  (www.plantgdb.org)  and  the  MIPS 
plant  group’s  sites  (http://mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/
plant/genomes.jsp).  PlantGDB  employs  the  xGDB  (eXten-
sible  Genome  Data  Broker;  Schlueter  et  al.,  2006)  genome 
browser,  which  allows  customization  of  views,  includes  a 
range of tools for sequence retrieval and downloads, and links 
to other online databases and tools.

Several Web sites have been established that are specific to 
one plant family; for example, the genomes of Glycine max, 
Medicago truncatula, and Lotus japonicus can be browsed via 
the  Legume  Information  System  (http://www.comparative-
legumes.org/index.php/Home),  whereas  the  peach  genome 
is  accessible  at  the  Genome  Database  for  Rosaceae  (http://
www.rosaceae.org/).

A  range  of  Web  sites  are  dedicated  to  individual  spe-
cies,  their  genomes,  and  related  resources.  For  instance,  the 
Arabidopsis  Information  Resource  (TAIR;  www.arabidopsis.
org)  provides  a  comprehensive  resource  for  plant  scientists 
working  with  Arabidopsis.  It  includes  the  genome  sequence, 
data  on  gene  structure,  gene  expression  and  product  infor-
mation,  metabolism,  DNA  and  seed  stocks,  genetic  maps, 
and  molecular  markers  for  the  research  community.  Much 
less centralized are the resources for the crop model species, 
such  as  rice.  Four  independent  annotated  genome  assem-
blies  are  available,  three  for  the  O.  japonica  (rice.plantbi-
ology.msu.edu,  Ouyang  et  al.,  2007;  rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp, 
Tanaka,  2008;  rice.genomics.org.cn/rice/index2.jsp,  Zhao 
et  al.,  2004)  and  one  for  the  O.  indica  genome  (http://rice.
genomics.org.cn/rice/index2.jsp, Zhao et al., 2004). Michigan 
State  University  Rice  Genome  Annotation  Project  (rice. 
plantbiology.msu.edu)  provides  more  extensive  annotation 
and  also  links  to  gene  expression  information.  Further  infor-
mation  on  individual  genome  sequencing  projects,  their 

current  status,  release  date,  and  links  to  the  sequence  data 
can be obtained from the genome project Web sites at NCBI 
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/leuks.cgi).

Models for Developing Syntenic Maps

Definitions

Comparative genomics provides a method to unravel the rela-
tionship between genomes by describing conserved (or homol-
ogous) chromosomes or chromosomal regions between related 
species.  Shared  markers  or  genes  between  chromosomes 
define syntenic regions. If the order of markers is conserved, 
the  region  is  described  as  collinear  or  syntenic  (conserved 
gene  or  marker  order)  between  chromosomes.  Synteny  is 
revealed  by  building  and  comparing  genetic  and  physical 
maps. Genetic maps group and order loci into linkage groups 
based  on  recombination  rates  between  loci,  and  each  group 
represents  a  chromosome.  Genetic  distance  is  the  recombi-
nation  rate  between  loci  in  centimorgan  (cM).  Two  loci  are 
linked if the recombination frequency is lower than expected 
(50%).  A  physical  map  assembles  genomic  fragments  into 
contigs  measured  in  base  pairs  (bp).  The  identification  of 
common  loci  between  related  species  enables  comparison  of 
genome  structure  and  the  definition  of  genome  changes  or 
evolution from ancestor genomes. Organisms that are closely 
related show a higher number of syntenic blocks than geneti-
cally distant species.

Intraspecies comparison

Genetic  maps  are  constructed  using  populations  that  segre-
gate for variants between loci. Consequently, the marker den-
sity of genetic maps is limited by the level of polymorphism 
measurable  in  each  considered  population.  Whenever  shared 
markers  are  identified,  genetic  maps  can  be  compared  and 
potentially merged into a consensus map. The CMap program 
enables  common  molecular  markers  between  genetic  maps 
to  be  readily  identified  and  linked  (Fang  et  al.,  2003;  Duran 
et al., 2010). JoinMap has been developed to construct con-
sensus maps from multiple genetic maps (Stam, 1993). Both 
programs  were  successfully  used  for  the  construction  of  the 
first consensus maps of wheat (Somers et al., 2004) and bar-
ley  (Varshney  et  al.,  2007).  By  bringing  together  collections 
of  molecular  markers,  consensus  maps  increase  the  over-
all  number  of  markers  available  for  molecular  breeding  and 
genetic  analysis.  These  maps  also  linked  the  first  Restriction 
Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) genetic maps to the 
more  recent  PCR  marker  maps,  which  are  more  suitable  for 
high-throughput  screening  of  germplasm  in  breeding  pro-
grams.  Consensus  maps  can  also  be  used  for  the  analysis  of 
QTL. The MetaQTL method uses consensus models to merge 
distinct  genetic  maps  and  QTL  datasets  (Veyrieras  et  al., 
2007).  The  intraspecies  synteny  increases  the  probability  of 
identifying true QTL by integrating information from various 
genetic sources and multiple sets of phenotypic data.

88

Plant genome sequencing: Models for developing synteny maps and association mapping

C H A P T E R   6

Cytogenetics for interspecies comparison

Prior  to  the  development  of  molecular  markers  and  genetic 
maps,  cytogenetics  was  the  method  of  choice  for  compar-
ing closely related species, such as species of the same tribe. 
Using  the  ability  of  some  plant  species  to  cross-hybridize, 
synteny was studied by the observation of chromosome pair-
ing  during  meiosis  in  interspecific  hybrids.  Chromosome 
painting  by  means  of  N/C  banding  enables  identification  of 
each chromosome at metaphase I. For example, the chromo-
some pairing of ph1a mutant wheat  rye hybrids revealed a 
homologous  relationship  between  the  two  species  (Naranjo 
et  al.,  1991).  Fluorescent/genomic  in  situ  hybridization 
(FISH/GISH) using DNA from different but related species 
as  a  probe  reveals  chromosomal  rearrangements  at  somatic 
metaphase. The combination of N/C banding with the GISH 
method  in  different  wheat  species  showed  specific  cyclic 
translocations  between  hexaploid  wheat  and  its  ancestral 
genomes  (Naranjo  et  al.,  1987;  Jiang  and  Gill,  1994).  These 
types of observations provided insights into the phylogeny and 
evolution of related species.

Sequence comparison

A  common  way  to  generate  comparative  maps  between 
related  species  is  using  probes,  which  can  cross-hybridize 
across  species  such  as  cDNA-based  probes.  Massive  projects 
of  EST  sequencing  and  mapping  have  considerably  increased 
the  amount  of  data  for  comparative  mapping.  For  exam-
ple,  over  1  million  ESTs  have  been  produced  in  wheat  and 
over  7000  have  been  physically  mapped  by  hybridization 
onto  lines  carrying  deletions  in  specific  chromosomal  regions 
(Qi  et  al.,  2004).  With  the  development  of  a  full  genome 
sequence,  extensive  EST  maps,  and  computational  methods 
for  sequence  comparison,  genome  comparison  can  now  be 
extended to evolutionary distant species.

Because  large  chromosomal  blocks  are  collinear  between 
genomes of the same family, species of small size genomes have 
been selected as models for particular families of plants. To be 
relevant  for  agriculture,  model  species  should  be  selected  for 
each key node of phylogenetic trees of crop species. The gene 
order along a chromosomal region in a model species is indica-
tive  of  the  gene  order  and  content  along  the  syntenic  region 
of  a  related  species.  Extensive  synteny  has  been  described 
between model species and crop families such as Arabidopsis 
and  Brassicaceae  (Schranz  et  al.,  2007),  Brachypodium,  rice, 
and  Triticeae  (The  International  Brachypodium  Initiative, 
2010),  M.  truncatula  and  Fabaceae  (Young  and  Udvardi, 
2009),  and  tomato  and  Solanaceae  (Mueller  et  al.,  2005). 
Despite  the  large  genome  size  difference  between  rice  and 
bread  wheat  (330 Mbp  and  16 Gbp,  respectively),  13  blocks 
of collinearity have been identified (Salse et al., 2008), which 
makes  the  rice  genome  a  good  model  for  wheat.  Fewer  rear-
rangements and duplications were observed in the Solanaceae 
genomes  compared  to  other  crops.  Comparative  maps  show 
that relative positions of QTLs and major genes are often also 
conserved, which increases the value of comparative resources 
such as the SOL Genomics Network (Mueller et al., 2005).

One  of  the  most  comprehensive  comparative  maps  cov-
ers  the  Poaceae  family  in  which  the  level  of  gene  synteny  is 
high.  Relationships  between  the  genomes  of  eight  grass  spe-
cies have been described in a consensus map called the “Crop 
Circle”  (Devos,  2005).  This  map  shows  the  gradual  increase 
in genome size represented by the concentric circles from the 
smallest genome at the center (rice) to the largest genome on 
the outside (Triticeae).

Macro- versus micro-synteny

The  scale  of  synteny  depends  upon  the  tools  that  are  used 
to  describe  it.  Chromosome  painting  (with  FISH/GISH), 
pairing  analysis,  and  non-sequence-based  genetic  maps  limit 
the  analysis  to  the  macro  level  where  only  major  structural 
changes are revealed. Genomic sequence provides the resolu-
tion for a wide range of comparisons, from the whole genome 
to  specific  genes.  Although  macrosynteny  can  be  very  high 
between related species, the accumulation of mutations such 
as  base  changes,  insertions,  deletions,  duplications,  and  local 
rearrangements may break the micro-synteny at the sequence 
level.

In  general,  microcollinearity  is  greater  in  euchromatic 
(mostly constituted of genes or coding sequences) than in het-
erochromatic  regions,  which  is  illustrated  by  the  comparison 
of the two sequenced genomes of rice and sorghum (Bowers 
et  al.,  2005).  However,  evolution  of  certain  gene  families  is 
lineage  specific.  Extensive  study  of  the  Ha  locus  control-
ling  grain  hardness  showed  significant  loss  of  micro-synteny 
between  highly  collinear  genomes  of  the  Triticeae.  Although 
the  three  genes  composing  the  locus  were  present  in  dip-
loid  wheat,  the  tetraploid  wheat  Triticum  turgidum  lost  two 
genes,  which  were  subsequently  recovered  by  acquisition  of 
the  D  genome  in  hexaploid  wheat  (Chantret  et  al.,  2005). 
Comparison  of  intron  composition  between  several  wheat 
genomes, barley, and rice also revealed that sequence conser-
vation  of  the  plastic  region  such  as  Ha  is  not  always  linked 
to the evolutionary distance between species (Chantret et al., 
2008).

Nature of the differences

Disruption  of  synteny  is  due  to  chromosomal  rearrange-
ment processes such as translocation, inversion, chromosome 
fusion, and breakage; gene, segment, and chromosomal dupli-
cation and loss; polyploidization and return to diploidy; prolif-
eration of repetitive sequences; sequence conversion; unequal 
homologous  recombination;  and  illegitimate  recombination 
(Figure 6.3).

As  noted  earlier,  polyploidy  has  been  a  major  mechanism 
of  generating  variation  and  supporting  evolutionary  change. 
Intraspecific synteny reveals that some species have been sub-
ject to several rounds of duplication with gradual return to a 
diploid  state.  For  instance,  there  is  strong  evidence  that  the 
Arabidopsis  genome  has  undergone  several  rounds  of  poly-
ploidization: the first event predates the monocot-dicot split, 
the  second  event  took  place  before  Arabidopsis  diverged 
from the other dicots studied, and the third event took place 

89

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Inversion

Translocation

chromosome fusion
and breakage

gene, segment or
chromosomal duplication
and loss

2n

2n

4n

2n

polyploidization and
return to diploidy

proliferation of repetitive
sequences

cross-over

sequence conversion

unequal homologous
recombination

Figure 6.3 l Chromosomal rearrangement processes leading to disruption of synteny l Disruptions of synteny commonly observed 
involve translocation, inversion, duplication, and loss of DNA segments. A change of chromosome number between species might be due 
to chromosome fusion and breakage. A common phenomenon in plant evolution involves an increase of ploidy level followed by gradual loss 
of DNA and return to diploidy. Some rearrangements involve proliferation of repetitive elements such as transposons. Sequence conversion, 
unequal homologous recombination, and illegitimate recombination might also modify the synteny between homologous chromosomes. 

sometime  after  the  divergence  of  Arabidopsis  and  Brassica 
from  the  Malvaceae,  represented  by  cotton  (Bowers  et  al., 
2003).

Polyploidization increases the number of genes available for 
change and selection, and induces transposable element activ-
ity. A study of newly synthesized allopolyploid wheat showed 
that the polyploidization event is rapidly followed by genome 
downsizing  through  elimination  of  DNA  sequences  (Eilam 
et al., 2008). After duplication events, gene copies might be 
relocated  or  deleted,  leading  to  disruption  of  synteny.  Some 
families of genes and some specific chromosomal regions are 
subject  to  rapid  structural  change  in  the  frequency  of  gene 
duplication  and  DNA  deletion.  The  analysis  of  the  genome 

duplication  event  in  Arabidopsis  revealed  signs  of  differen-
tial retention of duplicated genes, with conservation of genes 
involved  in  transcription  and  signal  transduction,  and  prefer-
ential loss of those involved in DNA repair and those encod-
ing organellar proteins (Blanc and Wolfe, 2004a, b). Moreover, 
as  shown  in  Arabidopsis  (Thomas  et  al.,  2006)  and  maize 
(Woodhouse  et  al.,  2010),  the  choice  of  which  homolog  is 
removed after polyploidization is also not random. In the case 
of  Arabidopsis  one  homolog  was  preferentially  deleted  for 
85% of the genome. Gene copies might also acquire different 
functions.  For  example,  the  domestication  gene  tb1,  which 
determines the branching of maize, has a minor effect in fox-
tail millet (Doust et al., 2004).

90

Plant genome sequencing: Models for developing synteny maps and association mapping

C H A P T E R   6

Activity of repeat elements such as transposons and retro-
transposons is also a major force for evolutionary change and 
can affect the level of synteny. Although the number of genes 
shared  between  haploid  genomes  of  the  grasses  is  about  the 
same, the genome size difference is mainly due to differences 
in  repetitive  DNA.  Bursts  of  intense  activity  of  retrotrans-
poson  elements  increased  the  genome  size  and  composition 
in  repetitive  DNA  between  close  species  of  the  same  gen-
era,  such  as  Oryza  and  Zea  (Devos,  2010).  Some  transpos-
able elements such as Pack-MULE (Hanada et al., 2009) and 
Helitron  (Yang  and  Bennetzen,  2009)  are  able  to  duplicate 
fragments of DNA and therefore multiply gene copies.

Synteny is also affected by recombination activity. Synteny 
between grass genomes decreases along the chromosome from 
centromere to telomere, and the recombination rate increases 
along  this  axis.  Insertions  and  deletions  were  mainly  located 
in  high  recombinational  regions  of  chromosomes  (Akhunov 
et  al.,  2003).  It  has  been  observed  that  clusters  of  disease 
resistance  genes  were  preferentially  located  in  high  recom-
bination  regions  where  gene  duplication  and  recombination 
may  be  frequent  and  evolutionary  processes  can  be  rapid 
(Friedman and Baker, 2007).

Applications of syntenic maps

Breeding  strategies  are  based  on  the  ability  of  chromosomal 
regions to recombine in the progeny. The efficiency of recom-
bining genes of interest in the same germplasm depends upon 
the  structure  and  behavior  of  the  genome.  Synteny  studies 
provide useful information on genome structure and genome 
evolution.

Identifying  chromosomal  blocks  where  synteny  is  high  is 
very  useful  for  positional  cloning.  Cloning  genes  underlying 
QTL  require  fine  genetic  maps,  which  are  difficult  to  gener-
ate for species with low sequencing resources. Model genomes 
are  used  to  develop  cross-species  molecular  markers;  for 
example,  SSR  markers  were  developed  by  using  M.  trunca-
tula sequences for genetic mapping in alfalfa, pulses, and clo-
ver (Gutierrez et al., 2005; Sledge et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 
2007).  A  QTL  identified  in  one  species  can  be  transposed 
onto the syntenic region of model species. The model genomic 
sequence  is  then  used  to  identify  a  candidate  gene  that  may 
underlie  the  trait,  which  can  then  be  isolated  from  the  large 
and more complex genome (Figure 6.4). For example, loci of 
flowering time genes in canola have been located to a syntenic 
region  containing  major  flowering  time  genes  in  Arabidopsis 
(Okazaki  et  al.,  2007).  Microsynteny  between  Arabidopsis 
and tomato has been used in fine-mapping the ovate gene and 
Diageotropica loci in tomato (Ku et al., 2001; Oh et al., 2002).
Since gene order is often conserved during evolution, syn-
teny  gives  information  about  the  phylogenetic  relationships 
between  species.  Paleogenomics  describes  the  identifica-
tion  and  characterization  of  the  ancestral  genome  structure 
and  evolutionary  mechanisms  that  have  structured  genome 
species  (Salse  et  al.,  2009).  For  example,  the  Crop  Circle 
has  been  used  to  reconstruct  the  cereals  ancestral  genome, 
with  either  5  or  7  chromosomes.  In  both  hypotheses,  whole 
genome duplications are followed by chromosome fusion and 

diploidization leading to the current rice, sorghum, maize, and 
Triticeae genomes (Devos, 2010; Bolot et al., 2009).

Tools and limitations

A  major  problem  of  syntenic  analysis  is  the  identification  of 
orthologous genes, which have evolved from a common ances-
tor, and paralogous genes, which were duplicated in the same 
genome. Chromosomal homology is difficult to assess in plants 
because  plant  species  evolution  involves  extensive  rearrange-
ments,  particularly  gene  and  genome  duplications.  Gradual 
evolution  to  a  diploid  state  after  genome  duplication  may 
make  the  identification  of  orthologous  genes  more  difficult. 
Misidentification  of  orthologous  sequences  can  lead  to  mis-
interpretation  of  the  synteny.  Therefore,  robust  and  accurate 
sequence  alignment  is  essential.  Several  computational  pro-
grams  have  been  written  for  comparative  mapping:  LineUp 
(Hampson  et  al.,  2003),  CloseUp  (Hampson  et  al.,  2005), 
Compass  (Liu  et  al.,  2004),  and  SyntenyTracker  (Donthu 
et al., 2009). Some of these computer programs use statistical 
tests  to  infer  the  significance  of  the  chromosomal  homology. 
Programs of sequence similarity search use BLASTN. Because 
the BLASTN default parameters do not discriminate between 
paralogs  and  orthologs,  two  parameters  (cumulative  identity 
percentage and cumulative alignment length percentage) have 
been  defined  to  statistically  select  the  sequences  with  the 
highest identity over the longest alignment (Salse et al., 2009).
Disruption  of  the  micro-synteny  is  a  major  limitation  for 
positional  cloning  in  crops  by  using  model  species.  In  some 
cases,  genes  have  been  lost  by  accumulation  of  a  small  dele-
tion  or  relocated  to  another  region.  Comparison  of  wheat 
genomic sequence with Brachypodium and rice shows a high 
number  of  non-collinear  genes  interspersed  in  a  highly  con-
served region (Choulet et al., 2010). For example, the map-
based  approach  to  isolate  the  4H  boron-tolerance  gene  in 
barley identified a syntenic region of 11.2 kb on rice chromo-
some Os3. Despite the high level of barley/rice gene colline-
arity between 4H and Os3, the BOR1 ortholog could not be 
found in rice chromosome 3. The cloning of the barley Bot1 
gene was achieved by a candidate gene approach by mapping 
barley ESTs with homology to boron transporters.

Association Mapping

Definitions

Gene  and  genetic  mapping  of  a  trait  of  interest  is  based  on 
measuring  the  rate  of  meiotic  recombination  between  the 
phenotype  (trait)  and  genes  or  markers.  In  its  simplest  and 
most common form this is achieved through biparental crosses 
where two parents differing for the trait of interest are mated 
and  the  segregation  of  the  trait  and  linked  markers  is  meas-
ured.  For  positional  cloning  of  a  gene  underlying  the  trait 
of  interest,  several  rounds  of  mapping  with  large  segregat-
ing populations may be needed to zero in on the target gene. 
Positional  cloning  usually  requires  analysis  of  several  thou-
sand  lines  to  achieve  sufficient  genetic  resolution  to  identify 
a small number of candidate genes underlying the target trait. 

91

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Boron tolerance xBot1

4HL

4HS

Barley
genetic map
4HL

Rice
physical map
3S

Rice

Barley

xBM181

xBM178

xBM160
xBot1

xBM162

xBM165

Figure 6.4 l Positional cloning of QTL: example of the boron tolerance Bot1 locus in barley (modified from Sutton et al., 2007) l 
Synteny between barley chromosome 4HL and rice chromosome 3S enabled the identification of new molecular markers in barley using rice 
sequences that were collinear to the boron tolerance locus xBot1. 

The key challenges in this process are finding sufficient poly-
morphic  markers  to  allow  the  fine  mapping  and  the  pheno-
typing  of  the  segregating  lines.  For  species  with  a  sequenced 
genome, marker development is relatively straightforward and 
for  easily  measured  traits,  phenotyping  may  not  be  an  issue. 
However, for many traits associated with agronomic perform-
ance, such as yield or stress tolerance, and for species without 
a sequenced genome, positional cloning is problematic.

Although  the  use  of  biparental  crosses  has  been  very  suc-
cessful,  there  are  alternative  population  structures  that  can 
be used to identify marker trait associations and lead to posi-
tional cloning. One of the most important has been association 
mapping.  This  approach  uses  a  series  of  lines,  or  association 
mapping  panels,  that  differ  in  expression  of  the  trait  being 
studied.  All  of  the  lines  expressing  the  trait  are  expected  to 
carry the same or similar gene or gene variant. If the lines in 
the mapping panels are related either through their breeding 
and selection history or due to a common area of origin, then 
one would expect the genomic region surrounding the target 
trait to also be similar between the lines expressing the trait; 
such  regions  are  in  linkage  disequilibrium  (LD).  Molecular 
markers  in  regions  of  the  genome  not  linked  or  associated 
with  the  trait  should  show  completely  random  association 
with the trait or be in linkage equilibrium. A similar approach 
is to track genomic regions through a pedigree. If the breeding 

92

program  has  been  selecting  for  one  or  more  specific  traits, 
regions  of  the  genome  will  be  seen,  identifying  by  common 
molecular marker alleles, maintained in those lines expressing 
the trait (Paull et al., 1998; Jannink et al., 2001).

The  principle  advantage  of  association  mapping  is  that 
it  can  use  existing  phenotypic  data.  For  example,  consider-
able phenotypic data will accumulate on individual lines in a 
breeding  program.  Genotyping  of  these  lines  with  molecular 
markers  allows  the  association  of  particular  genomic  regions 
with trait expression to be identified. The source material for 
an association mapping study can be from independent breed-
ing  programs,  large  international  programs,  wild  species,  or 
landrace  germplasm  collections.  For  example,  the  CIMMYT 
collects  data  for  thousands  of  advanced  lines  that  are  gener-
ated  each  year  and  evaluated  for  phenology  (among  other 
traits) at hundreds of international locations (Reynolds et al., 
2009). Such a database collected by international nursery net-
works are highly valuable for assembling suitable populations 
for association studies.

Population size and structure

A  key  advantage  of  association  mapping  has  been  the  oppor-
tunity  to  investigate  diverse  genetic  material  and  potentially 

Plant genome sequencing: Models for developing synteny maps and association mapping

C H A P T E R   6

identify  multiple  alleles  and  mechanisms  of  underlying  traits. 
Association  mapping  uses  recombination  events  that  have 
occurred  over  an  extended  period  of  time.  The  resolution  of 
the mapping will depend on the extent of LD, or non-random 
association of markers, that has occurred across the genome. If 
association  mapping  is  conducted  within  a  breeding  program, 
the extent of LD will depend on the breeding system and the 
size, structure, and age of the germplasm within the breeding 
program  (Mackay  and  Powell,  2007).  In  a  small  population, 
genetic  drift  leads  to  the  loss  of  rare  combinations  of  alleles, 
which  increases  LD  (Flint-Garcia  et  al.,  2003).  Because  lines 
are more likely to be heterozygous in out-crossing species than 
in selfing species, LD decays more rapidly in out-crossing spe-
cies.  For  inbreeding  species,  LD  can  extend  considerable  dis-
tances and association mapping is unlikely to give high genetic 
resolution  (Caldwell  et  al.,  2006;  Figure  6.5).  This  problem 
can  be  overcome  by  using  different  germplasm  pools.  For 
example, in barley LD extends over long distances within mod-
ern  cultivars  but  is  quite  narrow  in  landraces  and  extremely 
short  in  wild  barley  (Caldwell  et  al.,  2006).  Consequently, 
association  mapping  in  cultivated  barleys  will  only  give  rough 
genetic  positions,  but  positional  cloning  of  genes  underlying 
traits would be feasible for some regions if the trait can be suc-
cessfully phenotyped in landraces or wild barley.

A  further  limitation  of  association  mapping  relates  to  the 
structure  of  mapping  panels  or  germplasm  collections  used. 
The difficulty here is that there may be factors other than the 
trait being assessed that impose a structure on the germplasm 
selected  for  analysis.  LD  between  markers  and  traits  might 
be  due  to  genetic  drift,  selection,  and  admixture.  Selection 
for  a  phenotype  controlled  by  unlinked  loci  in  epistasis  may 
increase LD, although the loci are not physically linked (Flint-
Garcia et al., 2003). For example, LD extent fluctuates from 
1 cM  to  over  20 cM  depending  on  the  considered  region  in 
durum  and  bread  wheat  (Breseghello  and  Sorrells,  2006; 
Maccaferri et al., 2005). Wheat breeding programs often use 
locally adapted elite germplasm into which specific loci/traits 
were  introgressed  from  novel  germplasm  or  other  species  to 
address  specific  problems.  Consequently,  confounding  fac-
tors such as phenology, particularly maturity and plant height, 
make the interpretation of association studies particularly dif-
ficult  for  traits  such  as  yield  or  drought  tolerance  (Reynolds 
et al., 2009). There are now some very useful statistical tools 
to  deal  with  the  problems  of  population  structure  (Yu  and 
Buckler, 2006), but strong underlying structure and multiple 
structures  within  an  association  mapping  panel  can  signifi-
cantly reduce the power of the analysis.

Several  alternative  population  structures  have  been  pro-
posed  and  evaluated  to  overcome  these  limitations.  These 
include  the  development  of  complex  populations  involv-
ing  multiple  parents:  Multiparental  Advanced  Generation 
InterCross (MAGIC) populations (Cavanagh et al., 2008) and 
Nested Association Mapping (NAM) populations (McMullen 
et al., 2009). However, both of these approaches require the 
development  of  new,  large,  and  quite  complex  populations. 
In MAGIC, multiple parental lines are intercrossed and RILs 
are generated for each intercross, while in the NAM scheme, 
parental  lines  are  crossed  with  the  same  reference  line  to 
develop  sets  of  RILs.  For  example,  25  parental  lines  were 
crossed with a tester line of maize to produce 25 populations 

A

B

C

LD

LD

LD

cM

cM

cM

Figure 6.5 l   Decay of linkage disequilibrium (LD) with 
genetic distance along a chromosome l Red arrows represent 
the LD extent in centimorgan (cM) in different species (ex: A: wheat 
and C: maize) and germplasm collections (ex: in barley A: cultivars, 
B: landraces, C: wild). Green bars represent the density of markers 
necessary to detect a peak of LD. 

of ~200 RILs each, generating 136,000 recombination events 
(McMullen et al., 2009). These large populations also need to 
be  phenotyped  for  the  trait(s)  of  interest.  The  NAM  popu-
lations are particularly attractive since they offer the genetic 
power  of  simple  crosses  while  allowing  the  investigation  of 
diverse germplasms.

Markers and marker density

The  advances  in  DNA  sequencing  and  genome  analysis  are 
opening  up  new  opportunities  for  association  mapping.  SNP 
platforms  are  now  being  developed  for  many  crop  species 
including crops that had previously been neglected (Varshney 
et al., 2009). These platforms offer high-density and low-cost 
genotyping. Consequently, it is now becoming feasible to geno-
type very large association mapping panels of several thousand 
lines with several thousand marker loci. Large mapping panels 
increase  the  ability  of  researchers  to  deal  with  complications 

93

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

due to population structure, and the high marker density gives 
good  genetic  resolution.  However,  the  problem  for  inbreed-
ing  species  remains,  due  to  low  levels  of  recombination  seen 
in most modern breeding programs. This is likely to limit the 
applicability  of  association  mapping  for  map-based  cloning 
unless the traits can be tracked in landraces or wild relatives 
where the recombinational resolution is much higher.

The  density  of  markers  needed  in  association  mapping 
is related to the extent of LD in the mapping panel and the 
purpose of the mapping study. If LD is extensive then a high 
marker density is not required, because the marker-trait asso-
ciation  would  be  detected  over  an  extended  region  of  the 
genome  (Figure  6.5A).  Nevertheless,  even  in  species  where 
LD  extends  over  several  centimorgans  at  least  1000  mark-
ers are likely to be required (assuming the genetic size of the 
genome is 1000–2000 cM). This density will provide markers 
sufficiently  close  for  use  in  breeding  and  selection  programs 
but  not  close  enough  for  positional  cloning.  For  species  such 
as maize where LD extends over only short distances, several 
thousand  markers  are  likely  to  be  needed  to  identify  useful 
associations  (Figure  6.5C;  Belo  et  al.,  2008).  Gene  conver-
sion (Figure 6.3) also affects the LD between markers. When 
two nearby markers are in strong LD, it can be assumed that 
all markers in between, defining haplotype blocks, are also in 
strong LD (Wall et al., 2004). However, some loci might not 
be in strong LD with the markers delineating the block if the 
gene conversion is high and the marker density is low. These 
hot spots of recombination would decrease the power of asso-
ciation studies.

Implications

The past few years have seen major changes in DNA sequenc-
ing  and  molecular  marker  technologies.  The  key  impact  of 
these changes has been to shift the bottleneck for gene discov-
ery and analysis away from model species to crops. Access to 
small and fully sequenced genomes was crucial in developing a 
strong base for plant molecular biology. These resources helped 
build  large  research  communities  able  to  tackle  key  questions 
of plant development, disease, and stress tolerance. However, 
it was always clear that many traits critical for agriculture could 
not be effectively addressed through the use of non-crop mod-
els. Our most important crops have been through a long period 
of selection for adaptation to the cropping environment. In this 
environment, plants are grown at high density and in a monoc-
ulture. It is also possible that many of the adaptive traits exam-
ined in non-crop models have already been optimized in crops 
as a result of their long history of selection. Rice has been the 
exception,  and  there  have  been  several  notable  discoveries  in 
key  genes  associated  with  yield,  disease  resistance,  and  crop 
performance (Xing and Zhang, 2010).

For major crops there are extensive germplasm collections 
and  large  phenotypic  datasets  available  to  support  molecular 
biology  research.  However,  these  resources  were  difficult  to 
use  for  gene  discovery  and  analysis.  The  identification  and 
characterization  of  the  syntenic  relationship  between  the 
genomes  of  plants  in  the  same  family  provided  a  tool  for 
translating  research  outcomes  in  models  to  crops  and  was 
also  a  valuable  tool  for  identifying  markers  in  target  regions, 

94

which  is  a  key  step  in  positional  cloning.  These  tools  have 
underpinned  the  discovery  of  important  genes  in  the  com-
plex  genomes  of  many  of  our  crop  species.  The  advances  in 
gene  and  genome  sequencing  are  now  opening  a  new  phase 
in plant molecular biology. The genomes of several crops are 
now  available  and  more  will  follow  over  the  next  few  years. 
Whole  genome  re-sequencing  is  now  feasible  and  is  being 
applied to multiple cultivars, landraces, and wild relatives for 
some crops. This information will help us understand some of 
the selective processes that have operated during crop domes-
tication and cultivation. The new sequencing capabilities also 
mean that SNP discovery is becoming routine for most plant 
species. Consequently, we expect to see high-density marker 
platforms available for most major crops.

Taken  together,  these  developments  provide  a  base  for  a 
revolution in crop breeding and genetics. High-density marker 
platforms open the opportunities for the use of new popula-
tion structures for both gene discovery and for practical plant 
breeding.  Association  mapping  has  been  difficult  and  unreli-
able  while  marker  densities  were  low  and  met  with  limited 
success. However, with high marker densities and the oppor-
tunity  to  screen  large  diversity  panels  of  germplasm  this 
mapping  technique  is  likely  to  be  revitalized.  Importantly, 
association  mapping  has  the  huge  advantage  of  allowing  the 
use  of  existing  phenotypic  datasets.  The  germplasm  collec-
tions  and  associated  phenotypic  data  are  available  for  many 
crop species. Essentially genotyping has ceased to be the limi-
tation,  but  populations  and  phenotypic  datasets  are  limiting, 
which pushes the emphasis back to using existing collections. 
More sophisticated population structures, such as NAM pop-
ulations,  and  germplasm  collections  built  to  help  tackle  spe-
cific  complex  traits,  such  as  wheat  drought  panel  (Salekdeh 
et al., 2009), will become increasingly valuable.

These  developments  support  gene  discovery  and  genetic 
analysis.  What  impact  will  they  have  on  breeding  technolo-
gies?  Detailed  genotypic  datasets  and  haplotype  definition 
around  key  loci  can  lead  to  new  breeding  methodologies. 
The  problems  outlined  earlier  for  genetic  analysis  in  large 
and  complex  genomes  and  the  generally  low  marker  densi-
ties have meant that research has focused on genes or loci of 
major  effect.  This  approach  has  been  highly  successful  and 
many  breeding  programs  include  marker-based  screening  for 
such  loci  in  their  programs.  However,  the  new  marker  plat-
forms have reduced the cost and increased the marker density 
so that strategies based around whole genome marker surveys 
become viable. One such approach, Genome Wide Selection 
(GWS),  requires  no  information  about  marker-trait  associa-
tions,  but  allows  an  estimation  of  breeding  values  associated 
with  each  marker  locus  (Meuwissen  et  al.,  2001;  Bernardo 
and Yu, 2007). In this way multiple genomic regions of small 
genetic effect can be selected for. This type of breeding strat-
egy offers the potential for major changes in population struc-
ture  and  screening,  and  is  expected  to  allow  selection  for 
variation that may have been largely overlooked in the past.

These new approaches are expected to open new paths for 
gene  discovery  and  breeding,  but  there  are  also  several  issues 
likely  to  limit  the  application  of  these  new  methods,  particu-
larly  for  public  sector  breeding  programs.  The  key  limitations 
are the lack of resources, training, and capabilities by most of 
the  world’s  crop  improvement  programs.  Molecular  markers 

Plant genome sequencing: Models for developing synteny maps and association mapping

C H A P T E R   6

have been available for over a decade and are routine in some, 
particularly  private,  breeding  programs  (Eathington  et  al., 
2007).  However,  they  have  only  been  effectively  applied  in  a 
small  number  of  public  sector  breeding  programs.  Most  plant 
breeders have neither the time nor the resources to deploy new 
breeding strategies. These limitations will need to be addressed.

The  concerns  with  food  security  and  likely  impact  of  cli-
mate change on food production have injected a new urgency 
into  accelerating  the  rates  of  genetic  gain  in  breeding  pro-
grams.  The  major  challenge  now  will  be  to  ensure  that  the 
technological advances are effectively deployed.

References

Adams, S. P., Hartman, T. P., Lim, K. Y., 

Chase, M. W., Bennett, M. D., & Leitch, 
I. J., et al. (2001). Loss and recovery of 
Arabidopsis-type telomere repeat sequences 
5-(TTTAGGG)(n)-3 in the evolution 
of a major radiation of flowering plants. 
Proceedings Biological Sciences, 268, 
1541–1546.

Akhunov, E. D., Akhunova, A. R., Linkiewicz,  

A. M., Dubcovsky, J., Hummel, D., &  
Lazo, G., et al. (2003). Synteny perturbations 
between wheat homoeologous chromosomes 
caused by locus duplications and deletions 
correlate with recombination rates. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 100, 
10836–10841.

Ansorge, W. J. (2009). Next-generation DNA 
sequencing techniques. New Biotechnology, 
25, 195–203.

Batzoglou, S., Jaffe, D. B., Stanley, K., Butler, J.,  

Gnerre, S., & Mauceli, E., et al. (2002). 
ARACHNE: A whole-genome shotgun 
assembler. Genome Research, 12, 177–189.

Belo, A., Zheng, P. Z., Luck, S., Shen, B., 
Meyer, D. J., & Li, B. L., et al. (2008). 
Whole genome scan detects an allelic variant 
of fad2 associated with increased oleic acid 
levels in maize. Molecular Genetics and 
Genomics, 279, 1–10.

Bennett, M. & Leitch, I. (2005). Plant DNA 

C-values database.

Bernardo, R., & Yu, J. M. (2007). Prospects for 
genome-wide selection for quantitative traits 
in maize. Crop Science, 47, 1082–1090.

Blanc, G., & Wolfe, K. H. (2004a). Functional 
divergence of duplicated genes formed by 
polyploidy during Arabidopsis evolution. 
Plant Cell, 16, 1679–1691.

Blanc, G., & Wolfe, K. H. (2004b). Widespread 

paleopolyploidy in model plant species 
inferred from age distributions of duplicate 
genes. Plant Cell, 16, 1667–1678.

Bolot, S., Abrouk, M., Masood-Quraishi, U., 

Stein, N., Messing, J., & Feuillet, C.,  
et al. (2009). The “inner circle” of the cereal 
genomes. Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 
12, 119–125.

Bowers, J. E., Arias, M. A., Asher, R., Avise, 
J. A., Ball, R. T., & Brewer, G. A., et al. 
(2005). Comparative physical mapping 
links conservation of microsynteny to 
chromosome structure and recombination 
in grasses. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 102, 13206–13211.

Bowers, J. E., Chapman, B. A., Rong, J., &  

Paterson, A. H. (2003). Unravelling 
angiosperm genome evolution by 

phylogenetic analysis of chromosomal 
duplication events. Nature, 422, 433–438.

Breseghello, F., & Sorrells, M. E. (2006). 

Association mapping of kernel size and milling 
quality in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) 
cultivars. Genetics, 172, 1165–1177.

Brockman, W., Alvarez, P., Young, S., Garber, 

M., Giannoukos, G., & Lee, W. L., et al. 
(2008). Quality scores and SNP detection 
in sequencing-by-synthesis systems. Genome 
Research, 18, 763–770.

Caldwell, K. S., Russell, J., Langridge, P., & 
Powell, W. (2006). Extreme population-
dependent linkage disequilibrium detected 
in an inbreeding plant species, Hordeum 
vulgare. Genetics, 172, 557–567.

Carver, T., Berriman, M., Tivey, A., Patel, C., 
Bohme, U., & Barrell, B. G., et al. (2008). 
Artemis and ACT: Viewing, annotating and 
comparing sequences stored in a relational 
database. Bioinformatics, 24, 2672–2676.

Cavanagh, C., Morell, M., Mackay, I., & Powell, 

W. (2008). From mutations to MAGIC: 
Resources for gene discovery, validation and 
delivery in crop plants. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology, 11, 215–221.

Chaisson, M. J., Brinza, D., & Pevzner, P. A. 
(2009). De novo fragment assembly with 
short mate-paired reads: Does the read 
length matter? Genome Research, 19, 
336–346.

Chantret, N., Salse, J., Sabot, F., Bellec, A., 

Laubin, B., & Dubois, I., et al. (2008). 
Contrasted microcollinearity and gene 
evolution within a homoeologous region 
of wheat and barley species. Journal of 
Molecular Evolution, 66, 138–150.

Chantret, N., Salse, J., Sabot, F., Rahman, 

S., Bellec, A., & Laubin, B., et al. (2005). 
Molecular basis of evolutionary events 
that shaped the hardness locus in diploid 
and polyploid wheat species (Triticum and 
Aegilops). Plant Cell, 17, 1033–1045.

Chen, Z. J. (2007). Genetic and epigenetic 

mechanisms for gene expression and 
phenotypic variation in plant polyploids. 
Annual Review of Plant Biology, 58, 
377–406.

Chevreux, B., Pfisterer, T., Drescher, B., 

Driesel, A. J., Muller, W. E., & Wetter, T., 
et al. (2004). Using the miraEST assembler 
for reliable and automated mRNA transcript 
assembly and SNP detection in sequenced 
ESTs. Genome Research, 14, 1147–1159.

Choulet, F., Wicker, T., Rustenholz, C., 
Paux, E., Salse, J., & Leroy, P., et al. 
(2010). Megabase level sequencing reveals 
contrasted organization and evolution 
patterns of the wheat gene and transposable 
element spaces. Plant Cell, 22, 1686–1701.

Cock, P. J., Fields, C. J., Goto, N., Heuer, M. 

L., & Rice, P. M. (2010). The Sanger FASTQ 
file format for sequences with quality scores, 
and the Solexa/Illumina FASTQ variants. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 38, 1767–1771.

Cui, L., Wall, P. K., Leebens-Mack, J. H., 
Lindsay, B. G., Soltis, D. E., & Doyle, 
J. J., et al. (2006). Widespread genome 
duplications throughout the history of 
flowering plants. Genome Research, 16, 
738–749.

Deamer, D. (2010). Nanopore analysis of 

nucleic acids bound to exonucleases and 
polymerases. Annual Review of Biophysics, 
39, 79–90.

Devos, K. M. (2005). Updating the “crop 

circle”. Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 8, 
155–162.

Devos, K. M. (2010). Grass genome 

organization and evolution. Current Opinion 
in Plant Biology, 13, 139–145.

Donthu, R., Lewin, H. A., & Larkin, D. M. 

(2009). SyntenyTracker: A tool for defining 
homologous synteny blocks using radiation 
hybrid maps and whole-genome sequence. 
BMC Research Notes, 2, 148.

Doust, A. N., Devos, K. M., Gadberry, M. 

D., Gale, M. D., & Kellogg, E. A. (2004). 
Genetic control of branching in foxtail 
millet. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
101, 9045–9050.

Eathington, S. R., Crosbie, T. M., Edwards, 

M. D., Reiter, R., & Bull, J. K. (2007). 
Molecular markers in a commercial breeding 
program. Crop Science, 47, S154–S163.

Edwards, D., & Batley, J. (2010). Plant 

genome sequencing: Applications for crop 
improvement. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 
8, 2–9.

Eid, J., Fehr, A., Gray, J., Luong, K., Lyle, 
J., & Otto, G., et al. (2009). Real-time 
DNA sequencing from single polymerase 
molecules. Science, 323, 133–138.

Eilam, T., Anikster, Y., Millet, E., Manisterski, 

J., & Feldman, M. (2008). Nuclear DNA 
amount and genome downsizing in natural 
and synthetic allopolyploids of the genera 
Aegilops and Triticum. Genome, 51, 
616–627.

Ewing, B., & Green, P. (1998). Base-calling of 

automated sequencer traces using phred. II. 
Error probabilities. Genome Research, 
8, 186–194.

Feuillet, C., Langridge, P., & Waugh, R. (2008). 

Cereal breeding takes a walk on the wild 
side. Trends in Genetics, 24, 24–32.

Flint-Garcia, S. A., Thornsberry, J. M., & 

Buckler, E. S. (2003). Structure of linkage 

95

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

disequilibrium in plants. Annual Review of 
Plant Biology, 54, 357–374.

Friedman, A. R., & Baker, B. J. (2007). The 

evolution of resistance genes in multi-
protein plant resistance systems. Current 
Opinion in Genetics & Development, 17, 
493–499.

Gaut, B. S., & Ross-Ibarra, J. (2008). Selection 

on major components of angiosperm 
genomes. Science, 320, 484–486.

Gepts, P. (2003). Ten thousand years of crop 

evolution. In M. J. C. and D. E. Sadava 
(Eds.), Plants, genes, and crop biotechnology 
(pp. 328–359). Sudbury, MA: Jones and 
Bartlett.

Goff, S. A., Ricke, D., Lan, T. H., Presting, G., 
Wang, R., & Dunn, M., et al. (2002). A draft 
sequence of the rice genome (Oryza sativa 
L. ssp. japonica). Science, 296, 92–100.

Gordon, D., Abajian, C., & Green, P. (1998). 

Consed: A graphical tool for sequence 
finishing. Genome Research, 8, 195–202.

Greilhuber, J., Borsch, T., Muller, K., Worberg, 

A., Porembski, S., & Barthlott, W. (2006). 
Smallest angiosperm genomes found in 
lentibulariaceae, with chromosomes of 
bacterial size. Plant Biology (Stuttgart), 8, 
770–777.

Gupta, P. K. (2008). Single-molecule DNA 

sequencing technologies for future genomics 
research. Trends in Biotechnology, 26, 
602–611.

Gutierrez, M. V., Vaz Patto, M. C., Huguet, T., 

Cubero, J. I., Moreno, M. T., & Torres, A. 
M. (2005). Cross-species amplification of 
Medicago truncatula microsatellites across 
three major pulse crops. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 110, 1210–1217.

Hampson, S. E., Gaut, B. S., & Baldi, P. (2005). 

Statistical detection of chromosomal 
homology using shared-gene density alone. 
Bioinformatics, 21, 1339–1348.

Hampson, S., McLysaght, A., Gaut, B., & Baldi, 

P. (2003). LineUp: Statistical detection of 
chromosomal homology with application 
to plant comparative genomics. Genome 
Research, 13, 999–1010.

Hanada, K., Vallejo, V., Nobuta, K., Slotkin, 
R. K., Lisch, D., & Meyers, B. C., et al. 
(2009). The functional role of pack-MULEs 
in rice inferred from purifying selection and 
expression profile. Plant Cell, 21, 25–38.

Harris, T. D., Buzby, P. R., Babcock, H., Beer, 

E., Bowers, J., & Braslavsky, I., et al. (2008). 
Single-molecule DNA sequencing of a viral 
genome. Science, 320, 106–109.

Havlak, P., Chen, R., Durbin, K. J., Egan, A., 
Ren, Y., & Song, X. Z., et al. (2004). The 
Atlas genome assembly system. Genome 
Research, 14, 721–732.

Hilu, K. W. (1993). Polyploidy and the 

evolution of domesticated plants. American 
Journal of Botany, 80, 1494–1499.

Hodgson, J. G., Sharafi, M., Jalili, A., Diaz, 
S., Montserrat-Marti, G., & Palmer, C., 
et al. (2010). Stomatal vs. genome size 
in angiosperms: The somatic tail wagging 
the genomic dog? Annals of Botany, 105, 
573–584.

Huang, S., Li, R., Zhang, Z., Li, L., Gu, X., 
& Fan, W., et al. (2009). The genome of 
the cucumber, Cucumis sativus L. Nature 
Genetics, 41, 1275–1281.

96

Huang, X., & Madan, A. (1999). CAP3: A 

DNA sequence assembly program. Genome 
Research, 9, 868–877.

International Rice Genome Sequencing Project,  

The map-based sequence of the rice 
genome. Nature, 436, 793–800.

Jannink, J. L., Bink, M. C. A. M., & Jansen, R. 

C. (2001). Using complex plant pedigrees to 
map valuable genes. Trends in Plant Science, 
6, 337–342.

Jiang, J., & Gill, B. S. (1994). Different 

species-specific chromosome translocations 
in Triticum timopheevii and T. turgidum 
support the diphyletic origin of polyploid 
wheats. Chromosome Research, 2, 59–64.
Ku, H. M., Liu, J., Doganlar, S., & Tanksley, 

S. D. (2001). Exploitation of Arabidopsis-
tomato synteny to construct a high-
resolution map of the ovate-containing 
region in tomato chromosome 2. Genome, 
44, 470–475.

Lander, E. S., & Waterman, M. S. (1988). 

Genomic mapping by fingerprinting random 
clones: A mathematical analysis. Genomics, 
2, 231–239.

Lewis, S. E., Searle, S. M., Harris, N., Gibson, 

M., Lyer, V., & Richter, J., et al. (2002). 
Apollo: A sequence annotation editor. 
Genome Biology, 3 (RESEARCH0082).

Liang, C., Jaiswal, P., Hebbard, C., Avraham,  

S., Buckler, E. S., & Casstevens, T.,  
et al. (2008). Gramene: A growing plant 
comparative genomics resource. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 36, D947–953.

Liu, L., Gong, G., Liu, Y., Natarajan, S., Larkin, 

D. M., & Everts-van der Wind, A., et al. 
(2004). Multi-species comparative mapping 
in silico using the COMPASS strategy. 
Bioinformatics, 20, 148–154.

Maccaferri, M., Sanguineti, M. C., Noli, E., & 
Tuberosa, R. (2005). Population structure 
and long-range linkage disequilibrium in a 
durum wheat elite collection. Molecular 
Breeding, 15, 271–289.

Mackay, I., & Powell, W. (2007). Methods for 

linkage disequilibrium mapping in crops. 
Trends in Plant Science, 12, 57–63.

Masterson, J. (1994). Stomatal size in fossil 

plants: Evidence for polyploidy in majority 
of angiosperms. Science, 264, 421–424.

McMullen, M. D., Kresovich, S., Villeda, H. S., 
Bradbury, P., Li, H., & Sun, Q., et al. (2009). 
Genetic properties of the maize nested 
association mapping population. Science, 
325, 737–740.

Meuwissen, T. H., Hayes, B. J., & Goddard, M. 
E. (2001). Prediction of total genetic value 
using genome-wide dense marker maps. 
Genetics, 157, 1819–1829.

Miller, J. R., Delcher, A. L., Koren, S., 

Venter, E., Walenz, B. P., & Brownley, 
A., et al. (2008). Aggressive assembly 
of pyrosequencing reads with mates. 
Bioinformatics, 24, 2818–2824.

Miller, J. R., Koren, S., & Sutton, G. (2010). 
Assembly algorithms for next-generation 
sequencing data. Genomics, 95, 315–327.

Mueller, L. A., Solow, T. H., Taylor, N., 
Skwarecki, B., Buels, R., & Binns, J.,  
et al. (2005). The SOL Genomics Network: 
A comparative resource for Solanaceae 
biology and beyond. Plant Physiology, 138, 
1310–1317.

Mullikin, J. C., & Ning, Z. (2003). The phusion 

assembler. Genome Research, 13, 81–90.
Myers, E. W., Sutton, G. G., Delcher, A. L., 

Dew, I. M., Fasulo, D. P., & Flanigan, M. J., 
et al. (2000). A whole-genome assembly of 
Drosophila. Science, 287, 2196–2204.

Naranjo, T., & Fernandez-Rueda, P. (1991). 
Homeology of rye chromosome arms to 
wheat. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 82, 
577–586.

Naranjo, T., Roca, A., Goicoechea, P. G., & 

Giraldez, R. (1987). Arm homoeology of 
wheat and rye chromosomes. Genome, 29, 
873–882.

Oh, K., Hardeman, K., Ivanchenko, M. G., 
Ellard-Ivey, M., Nebenfuhr, A., & White, 
T. J., et al. (2002). Fine mapping in tomato 
using microsynteny with the Arabidopsis 
genome: The Diageotropica (Dgt) locus. 
Genome Biology, 3 (research0049).

Okazaki, K., Sakamoto, K., Kikuchi, R., Saito, 

A., Togashi, E., & Kuginuki, Y., et al. (2007). 
Mapping and characterization of FLC 
homologs and QTL analysis of flowering 
time in Brassica oleracea. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 114, 595–608.

Ouyang, S., Zhu, W., Hamilton, J., Lin, H., 

Campbell, M., & Childs, K., et al. (2007). 
The TIGR Rice Genome Annotation 
Resource: Improvements and new features. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 35, D883–887.

Paull, J. G., Chalmers, K. J., Karakousis, 
A., Kretschmer, J. M., Manning, S., & 
Langridge, P. (1998). Genetic diversity in 
Australian wheat varieties and breeding 
material based on RFLP data. Theoretical 
and Applied Genetics, 96, 435–446.

Paux, E., Sourdille, P., Salse, J., Saintenac, C., 

Choulet, F., & Leroy, P., et al. (2008). A 
physical map of the 1-gigabase bread wheat 
chromosome 3B. Science, 322, 101–104.
Pettersson, E., Lundeberg, J., & Ahmadian, 

A. (2009). Generations of sequencing 
technologies. Genomics, 93, 105–111.
Pevzner, P. A., Tang, H., & Waterman, M. 

S. (2001). An Eulerian path approach to 
DNA fragment assembly. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 98, 9748–9753.

Phillippy, A. M., Schatz, M. C., & Pop, M. 

(2008). Genome assembly forensics: Finding 
the elusive mis-assembly. Genome Biology, 
9, R55.

Pop, M. (2009). Genome assembly reborn: 

Recent computational challenges. Briefings 
in Bioinformatics, 10, 354–366.

Puertas, M. J. (2002). Nature and evolution 

of B chromosomes in plants: A non-coding 
but information-rich part of plant genomes. 
Cytogenetic and Genome Research, 96, 
198–205.

Qi, L. L., Echalier, B., Chao, S., Lazo, G. R., 

Butler, G. E., & Anderson, O. D., et al. 
(2004). A chromosome bin map of 16,000 
expressed sequence tag loci and distribution 
of genes among the three genomes of 
polyploid wheat. Genetics, 168, 701–712.
Rayburn, A. L., Biradar, D. P., Bullock, D. G., 
& Mcmurphy, L. M. (1993). Nuclear-DNA 
content in F1 hybrids of maize. Hermathena, 
70, 294–300.

Reynolds, M., Manes, Y., Izanloo, A., & 

Langridge, P. (2009). Phenotyping 

Plant genome sequencing: Models for developing synteny maps and association mapping

C H A P T E R   6

approaches for physiological breeding and 
gene discovery in wheat. Annals of Applied 
Biology, 155, 309–320.

Richards, E. J., & Ausubel, F. M. (1988). 

Isolation of a higher eukaryotic telomere 
from Arabidopsis thaliana. Cell, 53, 127–
136.

Safar, J., Simkova, H., Kubalakova, M., 

Cihalikova, J., Suchankova, P., & Bartos, J., 
et al. (2010). Development of chromosome-
specific BAC resources for genomics of 
bread wheat. Cytogenetic and Genome 
Research, 129

Salekdeh, G. H., Reynolds, M., Bennett, J., & 

Boyer, J. (2009). Conceptual framework 
for drought phenotyping during molecular 
breeding. Trends in Plant Science, 14, 
488–496.

Salse, J., Abrouk, M., Murat, F., Quraishi, U. 

M., & Feuillet, C. (2009). Improved criteria 
and comparative genomics tool provide new 
insights into grass paleogenomics. Briefings 
in Bioinformatics, 10, 619–630.

Salse, J., Chague, V., Bolot, S., Magdelenat, G., 
Huneau, C., & Pont, C., et al. (2008). New 
insights into the origin of the B genome of 
hexaploid wheat: Evolutionary relationships 
at the SPA genomic region with the S 
genome of the diploid relative Aegilops 
speltoides. BMC Genomics, 9, 555.
San Miguel, P., Tikhonov, A., Jin, Y. K., 

Motchoulskaia, N., Zakharov, D., & Melake-
Berhan, A (1996). Nested retrotransposons 
in the intergenic regions of the maize 
genome. Science, 274, 765–768.

Scheibye-Alsing, K., Hoffmann, S., Frankel, A., 

Jensen, P., Stadler, P. F., & Mang, Y., et al. 
(2009). Sequence assembly. Computational 
Biology and Chemistry, 33, 121–136.

Schlueter, S. D., Wilkerson, M. D., Dong, 
Q., & Brendel, V. (2006). xGDB: Open-
source computational infrastructure for the 
integrated evaluation and analysis of genome 
features. Genome Biology, 7, R111.

Schmuths, H., Meister, A., Horres, R., & 

Bachmann, K. (2004). Genome size 
variation among accessions of Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Annals of Botany, 93, 
317–321.

Schmutz, J., Cannon, S. B., Schlueter, J., Ma, 
J., Mitros, T., & Nelson, W., et al. (2010). 
Genome sequence of the palaeopolyploid 
soybean. Nature, 463, 178–183.

Schranz, M. E., Song, B. H., Windsor, A. J., 
& Mitchell-Olds, T. (2007). Comparative 
genomics in the Brassicaceae: A family-
wide perspective. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 10, 168–175.

Schulte, D., Close, T. J., Graner, A., Langridge, 

P., Matsumoto, T., & Muehlbauer, G., 
et al. (2009). The International Barley 
Sequencing Consortium - at the threshold of 
efficient access to the barley genome. Plant 
Physiology, 149, 142–147.

Simpson, J. T., Wong, K., Jackman, S. D., 

Schein, J. E., Jones, S. J., & Birol, I. (2009). 
ABySS: A parallel assembler for short 

read sequence data. Genome Research, 19, 
1117–1123.

Sledge, M. K., Ray, I. M., & Jiang, G. (2005). 

An expressed sequence tag SSR map of 
tetraploid alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.). 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 111, 
980–992.

Somers, D., Isaac, P., & Edwards, K. (2004). 

A high-density microsatellite consensus 
map for bread wheat (Triticum aestivum 
L.). Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 109, 
1105–1114.

Staden, R., Beal, K. F., & Bonfield, J. K. (2000). 

The Staden package, 1998. Methods in 
Molecular Biology, 132, 115–130.

Stam, P. (1993). Construction of integrated 
genetic linkage maps by means of a new 
computer package: Join map. The Plant 
Journal, 3, 739–744.

Sutton, G., White, O., Adams, M., & Kerlavage, 

A. (1995). TIGR Assembler: A new tool 
for assembling large shotgun sequencing 
projects. Genome Science & Technology, 1, 
9–19.

Sutton, T., Baumann, U., Hayes, J., Collins, N., 

Shi, B., & Schnurbusch, T., et al. (2007). 
Boron-toxicity tolerance in barley arising 
from efflux transporter amplification. 
Science, 318, 1446–1449.

Swift, H. (1950). The constancy of deoxyribose 

nucleic acid in plant nuclei. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 36, 643–654.

Tanaka, T., Antonio, B. A., Kikuchi, S., 

Matsumoto, T., Nagamura, Y., & Numa, H., 
et al. (2008). The rice annotation project 
database (RAP-DB): 2008 update. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 36, D1028–1033.

The International Brachypodium Initiative,  
Genome sequencing and analysis of the 
model grass Brachypodium distachyon. 
Nature, 463, 763–768.

Thomas, B. C., Pedersen, B., & Freeling, 

M. (2006). Following tetraploidy in an 
Arabidopsis ancestor, genes were removed 
preferentially from one homeolog leaving 
clusters enriched in dose-sensitive genes. 
Genome Research, 16, 934–946.

Tuskan, G. A., Difazio, S., Jansson, S., 

Bohlmann, J., Grigoriev, I., & Hellsten, 
U., et al. (2006). The genome of black 
cottonwood, populus trichocarpa (Torr. & 
Gray). Science, 313, 1596–1604.

Udall, J. A., & Wendel, J. F. (2006). Polyploidy 

and crop improvement. Crop Science, 46, 
S3–S14.

Varshney, R. K., Close, T. J., Singh, N. K., 

Hoisington, D. A., & Cook, D. R. (2009). 
Orphan legume crops enter the genomics 
era! Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 12, 
202–210.

Varshney, R. K., Marcel, T. C., Ramsay, L., 

Russell, J., Roder, M. S., & Stein, N., et al. 
(2007). A high density barley microsatellite 
consensus map with 775 SSR loci. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 114, 
1091–1103.

Veyrieras, J. B., Goffinet, B., & Charcosset, 
A. (2007). MetaQTL: A package of new 
computational methods for the meta-
analysis of QTL mapping experiments. BMC 
Bioinformatics, 8, 49.

Wall, J. D. (2004). Close look at gene 

conversion hot spots. Nature Genetics, 36, 
114–115.

Wicker, T., Schlagenhauf, E., Graner, A., Close, 

T. J., Keller, B., & Stein, N. (2006). 454 
sequencing put to the test using the complex 
genome of barley. BMC Genomics, 7, 275.
Woodhouse, M. R., Schnable, J. C., Pedersen, 
B. S., Lyons, E., Lisch, D., & Subramaniam, 
S., et al. (2010). Following tetraploidy in 
maize, a short deletion mechanism removed 
genes preferentially from one of the two 
homologs. PLoS Biology, 8, e1000409.

Xie, W., Feng, Q., Yu, H., Huang, X., Zhao, 

Q., & Xing, Y., et al. (2010). Parent-
independent genotyping for constructing 
an ultrahigh-density linkage map based on 
population sequencing. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 107, 10578–10583.

Xing, Y., & Zhang, Q. (2010). Genetic and 

molecular bases of rice yield. Annual Review 
of Plant Biology, 61, 421–442.

Yang, L., & Bennetzen, J. L. (2009). 

Distribution, diversity, evolution, and 
survival of Helitrons in the maize genome. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
106, 19922–19927.

Young, N. D., & Udvardi, M. (2009). 

Translating Medicago truncatula genomics 
to crop legumes. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 12, 193–201.

Yu, J., & Buckler, E. S. (2006). Genetic 

association mapping and genome 
organization of maize. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 17, 155–160.

Yu, J., Hu, S., Wang, J., Wong, G. K., Li, S., 
& Liu, B., et al. (2002). A draft sequence 
of the rice genome (Oryza sativa L. ssp. 
indica). Science, 296, 79–92.

Zerbino, D. R., & Birney, E. (2008). Velvet: 

Algorithms for de novo short read assembly 
using de Bruijn graphs. Genome Research, 
18, 821–829.

Zhang, Y., Sledge, M. K., & Bouton, J. H. 

(2007). Genome mapping of white clover 
(Trifolium repens L.) and comparative 
analysis within the Trifolieae using cross-
species SSR markers. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 114, 1367–1378.

Zhao, W., Wang, J., He, X., Huang, X., Jiao, 

Y., & Dai, M., et al. (2004). BGI-RIS: 
An integrated information resource and 
comparative analysis workbench for rice 
genomics. Nucleic Acids Research, 32, 
D377–382.

Zonneveld, B. J., Leitch, I. J., & Bennett, M. D. 
(2005). First nuclear DNA amounts in more 
than 300 angiosperms. Annals of Botany, 96, 
229–244.

97

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic 
transformation

7

Yoel Shiboleth 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan

 Tzvi Tzfira

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 99
The Genetic Transformation Process   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 99
Agrobacterium as a Tool for Plant Transformation  .  .  .  .  .  . 104
Novel and Specialized Vectors for Plant Transformation  . 106
Manipulating the Plant Genome to Improve and Control 
Transformation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 108
Using Novel Selection Methods and Restriction  
Enzymes to Control T-DNA Integration  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 109
Conclusions and Future Prospects  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 110
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 111

Introduction

Agrobacterium-mediated  plant  genetic  transformation  is  a 
multistep  process  in  which  the  bacterium  delivers  a  spe-
cific  DNA  molecule  from  its  own  genome  into  the  host-cell 
genome  (Tzfira  and  Citovsky,  2002,  2006;  Gelvin,  2003b, 
2010;  Citovsky  et  al.,  2007;  Banta  and  Montenegro,  2008). 
The transferred DNA molecule (T-DNA) resides on one of the 
bacterium's  genetic  elements,  designated  the  tumor-inducing 
(Ti) plasmid, and encodes a set of oncogenes and opine-catab-
olism  genes  (Britton  et  al.,  2008).  Integration  of  the  native 
T-DNA  molecule  into  the  plant  genome  and  expression  of 
the  oncogenes  leads  to  the  formation  of  tumor-like  struc-
tures (galls) from the transformed tissues (Aloni and Ullrich, 
2008).  The  transformed  gall  tissues  produce  opines,  which 
are amino acid derivatives that serve as a nitrogen source for 
the growing bacteria (Britton et al., 2008; Aloni and Ullrich, 
2008).  Interestingly,  replacing  the  native  T-DNA  molecule 
with  any  other  DNA  sequence  does  not  affect  the  transfor-
mation  process,  and  recombinant  Agrobacterium  strains  have 
therefore been developed as an efficient tool for the delivery 
of genes of interest into plant species (Banta and Montenegro, 
2008).  Under  controlled  conditions,  Agrobacterium  is  also 
capable  of  transforming  yeast,  fungi,  and  even  human  cells 

(reviewed by Lacroix et al., 2006; Soltani et al., 2008), which 
led  to  the  suggestion  that  Agrobacterium  may  also  be  used 
as a tool for functional genomics in fungal species (Michielse 
et  al.,  2005).  Owing  to  its  unique  biology  and  its  important 
role  as  a  biotechnological  tool,  Agrobacterium  has  been  the 
subject of numerous studies aimed at understanding its biol-
ogy and harnessing its power for plant genetic transformation 
(e.g., Hooykaas and Beijersbergen, 1994; Tzfira and Citovsky, 
2002, 2006; Gelvin, 2003b, 2009, 2010; Christie et al., 2005; 
Christie and Cascales, 2005; Citovsky et al., 2007; Banta and 
Montenegro,  2008;  Pitzschke  and  Hirt,  2010).  In  this  chap-
ter,  we  outline  the  biology  of  the  transformation  process 
and introduce the reader to the basic requirements for using 
Agrobacterium  as  a  biotechnological  tool  for  plant  genetic 
engineering. Prospects for enhancing and controlling the trans-
formation process are also discussed.

The Genetic Transformation Process

Agrobacterium  uses  a  set  of  chromosomal  (chv)  and 
Ti-plasmid  virulence  (vir)  proteins  to  sense  the  presence  of 
wounded  plant  tissues  and  to  produce  the  transported  form 
of  the  T-DNA  (a  single-stranded  copy  of  its  T-DNA  region, 
also known as the T-strand), and to deliver it to the plant cell 
(reviewed by Citovsky et al., 2007; Tzfira and Citovsky, 2002, 
2006;  Gelvin,  2003b,  2010).  The  T-DNA,  which  on  native 
Ti  plasmids  resides  in  cis  to  the  vir  region  (Figure  7.1A),  is 
defined by two direct 25 bp repeats, designated left and right 
borders  (Wang  et  al.,  1987).  Unveiling  the  molecular  mech-
anism  by  which  the  T-strand  is  excised  from  the  Ti  plasmid 
by  vir  proteins  acting  in  trans  to  the  T-DNA  region  enabled 
the  development  of  recombinant  and  autonomous  plasmids 
(designated “binary plasmids,” Figure 7.1B), which were engi-
neered  to  carry  a  well-defined  synthetic  DNA  (Hoekema 
et  al.,  1983).  Furthermore,  by  removing  the  native  T-DNA 
region from Ti plasmids, scientists were able to produce dis-
armed Ti-plasmid strains (Figure 7.1B): these were still capa-
ble  of  responding  to  wounded  plant  tissues  and  shuttle  a 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00007-9

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

recombinant T-DNA molecule from a binary vector, but could 
not induce the formation of galls in infected plants. Naturally, 
elimination of the native T-DNA genes required the develop-
ment  of  novel  constructs  and  methods  for  the  regeneration 
and  selection  of  transformed  tissues  and  whole  transgenic 
plants from infected cells, as we describe later in the chapter.
The transformation process has been the subject of numer-
ous  reviews  (Hooykaas  and  Beijersbergen,  1994;  Tzfira  and 
Citovsky,  2002,  2006;  Gelvin,  2003b,  2009,  2010;  Christie  
et  al.,  2005;  Christie  and  Cascales,  2005;  Citovsky  et  al., 
2007; Banta and Montenegro, 2008; Pitzschke and Hirt, 2010) 
and is typically divided into several general steps (Figure 7.2). 
Regardless of whether the T-DNA is launched from a native Ti 
plasmid,  engineered  Ti  plasmid,  or  binary  plasmid,  the  trans-
formation process begins with sensing of signals from wounded 
plant  tissues  by  the  bacterial  VirA-VirG  two-component 
signal-transduction  system  (step  1)  and  attachment  of  the 
Agrobacterium  cells  to  the  infected  plant  tissues,  and  induc-
tion of the virulence(vir) region (step 2). The plant molecule 
acetosyringone,  for  example,  has  been  identified  as  a  specific 
activator of the Agrobacterium vir region (Stachel et al., 1985) 
and is now used for activation of Agrobacterium cells in many 
transformation protocols (Sheikholeslam and Weeks, 1987).

Once expressed, the VirD2/VirD1 heterodimer functions as 
an ssDNA nuclease, which nicks and releases a single-stranded 
(ss) portion of the T-DNA molecule (step 3). A single VirD2 
molecule  remains  attached  to  the  ssT-DNA  (the  T-strand), 
producing the immature T-complex that is then transported via 
a VirB/VirD4 type four secretion system (T4SS) into the plant 
cell (step 4). The exact structure of the secretion system, the 
precise point(s) of contact between components of the T4SS 
and  the  plant  cell  wall,  and/or  membrane,  and  the  mecha-
nism  by  which  the  secretion  apparatus  delivers  the  immature 
T-complex,  as  well  as  several  other  Vir  proteins  (e.g.,  VirF, 
VirE2,  and  VirE3;  step  4)  into  the  plant  cells  are  still  mostly 
unknown (Christie et al., 2005; Christie and Cascales, 2005). 
A mature T-complex is likely to be formed inside the host-cell 
cytoplasm  (step  5)  by  coating  of  the  T-strand  with  numer-
ous  VirE2,  proteins.  VirE2  molecules  are  thought  to  provide 
the  T-strand  with  structure  and  protection  (Citovsky  et  al., 
1989, 1997; Abu-Arish et al., 2004) during its travel through 
the  host-cell  cytoplasm  and  into  the  host-cell  nucleus  (step 
6). Once inside the nucleus, the T-complex is delivered to the 
host-cell chromatin, stripped from its escorting proteins (step 
7) and, finally, randomly integrated into the host-cell genome 
as  either  a  single-  or  double-stranded  (ds)  T-DNA  molecule 
(step 8) most likely into genomic double-stand breaks.

In addition to Vir and Chv proteins, a growing number of 
host factors and proteins have been identified as participants 
in  various  steps  of  the  transformation  process,  in  particular 
the  last  steps  (see  Table  7.1  and  Tzfira  and  Citovsky,  2002, 
2006;  Gelvin,  2003b,  2010;  Citovsky  et  al.,  2007).  More 
specifically,  once  assembled  in  the  cytoplasm  (Figure  7.2, 
step  5),  the  T-complex  interacts  with  a  wide  range  of  host 
factors on its way to the host-cell genome and during its inte-
gration there. Biophysical studies indicate that the T-complex 
may be directed toward the host-cell nucleus along the micro-
tubule system by interactions of VirE2 with putative molecu-
lar  motors  (Salman  et  al.,  2005).  VirE2  and  VirD2  (both  of 

which  have  been  shown  to  possess  nuclear-localization  activ-
ity)  have  also  been  reported  to  function  in  T-strand  nuclear 
import (Shurvinton et al., 1992; Citovsky et al., 1992, 1994; 
Narasimhulu  et  al.,  1996;  Zupan  et  al.,  1996;  Ziemienowicz 
et  al.,  1999,  2001;  Tzfira  and  Citovsky,  2001).  T-complex 
nuclear  import  (Figure  7.2,  step  6)  may  also  depend  on  the 
functions of a wide range of host factors, such as VIP1 (Tzfira 
et  al.,  2001),  several  members  of  the  importin  α  proteins 
(Ballas and Citovsky, 1997; Bhattacharjee et al., 2008), cyclo-
philins  (Deng  et  al.,  1998),  protein  phosphatase  2C  (PP2C; 
Tao  et  al.,  2004),  and  the  bacterial  protein  VirE3  (Lacroix 
et al., 2005).

Targeting  the  T-strand  to  points  of  integration  and  strip-
ping  it  of  its  escorting  proteins  represents  the  second  to  last 
step  of  the  transformation  process  (Figure  7.2,  step  7),  and 
these processes are mediated by the combined action of bacte-
rial and host proteins. The cyclin-dependent kinase-activating  
kinase  (CAK2M)  and  a  TATA-box  binding  protein  (Bako 
et al., 2003), for example, have been proposed to participate 
in guiding the T-complex to preintegration sites by interaction 
with VirD2. Similarly the interaction of VIP1 with VirE2 and 
with histone H2A (Li et al., 2005), the association of DNA-
VirE2-VIP1 with the mononucleosome (Lacroix et al., 2008b), 
and  the  function  of  H2A  in  T-DNA  integration  (Mysore 
et  al.,  2000)  suggest  a  role  for  core  histone  modifications  in 
T-complex  targeting  the  host  DNA  (Lacroix  and  Citovsky, 
2009).  Furthermore,  the  binding  of  the  nucleosome-associ-
ated DNA-VirE2-VIP1 complexes with VirF, a bacterial factor 
involved in targeted proteolysis of VIP1 and VirE2 (Tzfira et 
al.,  2004),  suggests  that  stripping  of  the  T-complex  from  its 
escorting  proteins  may  take  place  near  the  integration  site. 
Interestingly,  Agrobacterium  can  also  induce  the  expression 
of  VBF,  a  plant  factor  that  can  compensate  for  the  absence 
of  VirF  in  targeted  proteolysis  of  VIP1  and  VirE2  (Zaltsman 
et  al.,  2010).  These  studies  (and  many  others,  which  have 
been  extensively  reviewed  by  Hooykaas  and  Beijersbergen, 
1994; Tzfira and Citovsky, 2002, 2006; Gelvin, 2003b, 2009, 
2010;  Christie  et  al.,  2005;  Christie  and  Cascales,  2005; 
Citovsky et al., 2007; Banta and Montenegro, 2008; Pitzschke 
and Hirt, 2010) further reveal the complexity of the last steps 
of the transformation process inside living plant cells.

The  final  step  (step  8)  is  the  integration  of  presum-
ably  naked  T-DNA  molecules  into  the  plant  genome.  The 
T-strand’s  bacterial  chaperones  VirE2  and  VirD2  are  not 
likely  to  actively  participate  in  the  integration  process, 
because  they  do  not  possess  the  enzymatic  activity  needed 
for  T-DNA  integration  in  plant  cells.  Several  studies,  using 
yeast  and  plant  cells  as  hosts  for  Agrobacterium  transforma-
tion,  revealed  that  various  DNA-repair  and  maintenance 
proteins  are  required  for  the  integration  process  (reviewed 
by Tzfira et al., 2004; Ziemienowicz et al., 2008). The plant 
H2A  (Mysore  et  al.,  2000),  the  VirE2-interacting  protein 
2  (VIP2;  Anand  et  al.,  2007),  the  chromatin-assembly  fac-
tor  complex  (CAF-1;  Kirik  et  al.,  2006)  and  the  genomic 
double-strand  break  (DSB)  repair  proteins  from  plants  (i.e., 
Ku80) and from yeast (i.e., Ku70 and Rad50, see van Attikum 
et al., 2001; van Attikum and Hooykaas, 2003) are just a few 
examples of plant proteins that have been proposed to func-
tion  in  the  integration  process  (for  more  reviews  see  Tzfira 

100

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation

C H A P T E R   7

Figure 7.1 l Structure of three types of Agrobacterium vector systems l (A) Integrative Ti plasmid: the native T-DNA region was 
replaced by recombinant T-DNA and is present in cis to the vir region. Integrative Ti plasmids also typically carry opine catabolism and 
conjugation genes. (B) Binary system: composed of a disarmed Ti plasmid (which is essentially similar to an integrative Ti plasmid, only 
without a T-DNA region) and a small, autonomous binary vector. The binary plasmid is engineered to carry an MCS in which genes of interest 
can be cloned to produce a T-DNA, an E. coli ori, and a bacterial selectable marker. Binary plasmids are significantly smaller than Ti plasmids 
and are easier to manipulate in E. coli cells. A broad-range ori facilitates the use of binary vectors in various Agrobacterium strains. (C) Split 
binary system: composed of a disarmed Ti plasmid and a split binary vector, in which the minimized pGreen vector carries the T-DNA region 
and the pSoup vector is engineered to support the replication and maintenance of pGreen in Agrobacterium cells (the repA gene on pSoup 
is required to support the function of pSa ori on pGreen). Abbreviations: LB, left border; RB, right border; ori, origin of replication. 

101

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Figure 7.2 l Model for Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation l A typical engineered Agrobacterium cell carries, 
in addition to its own natural chromosome, a disarmed Ti plasmid and a binary plasmid with a recombinant T-DNA region. We divide the 
transformation process into eight general steps: (1) sensing of wounded plant cells by the VirA/VirG signal-transduction system; (2) activation 
of the virulence (vir) region and production of virulence proteins; (3) production of immature T-complex; (4) export of immature T-complex and 
Vir proteins via the T4SS; (5) formation of mature T-complex and its cytoplasmic transport; (6) T-complex nuclear import; (7) uncoating of the 
T-complex and intranuclear transport; (8) T-DNA integration as a single- or double-stranded intermediate, presumably into genomic DSBs. 

et  al.,  2004;  Ziemienowicz  et  al.,  2008;  Gelvin  and  Kim, 
2007). In addition, a special role has been assigned to genomic 
DSBs  in  attracting  and  capturing  T-DNA  molecules.  More 
specifically,  the  induction  of  genomic  DSBs  at  specific  loca-
tions  by  the  expression  of  restriction  enzymes  leads  to  the 
preferred integration of dsT-DNA intermediates (and possibly 
also  of  T-strands)  into  the  break  sites  (Salomon  and  Puchta, 
1998;  Chilton  and  Que,  2003;  Tzfira  et  al.,  2003).  This 
process  is  mediated  by  the  plant  non-homologous  end  join-
ing  (NHEJ)  DNA-repair  machinery.  It  should  be  noted  that 
T-DNA molecules can be directed to site-specific integration 
in yeast cells, a process that depends on the sequence of the 
T-DNA  molecule  and  the  function  of  homologous  recom-
bination  (HR)  DNA-repair  proteins  (van  Attikum  et  al., 
2001; van Attikum and Hooykaas, 2003). Interestingly, alter-
ing  the  plant  DNA-repair  machinery  by  expressing  a  yeast 

chromatin-remodeling  protein,  Rad54  (Shaked  et  al.,  2005), 
resulted in a high frequency of HR-mediated T-DNA integra-
tion  in  Arabidopsis  plants,  an  observation  further  supporting 
the  idea  that  T-DNA  integration  is  highly  dependent  on  the 
function of plant factors.

Various models have been proposed to explain the random 
integration of T-strands and dsT-DNA intermediates into the 
plant genome (reviewed by Tzfira et al., 2004; Ziemienowicz 
et  al.,  2008).  However,  our  lack  of  knowledge  on  the  pre-
cise  mechanism  of  T-DNA  integration  poses  a  great  chal-
lenge  for  the  use  of  Agrobacterium  as  a  tool  for  site-specific 
genome  engineering  in  plant  cells.  Recent  advances  in  the 
development of zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) as a tool for the 
induction  of  site-specific  DSBs  (Porteus  and  Carroll,  2005; 
Kumar et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2007; Camenisch et al., 2008; 
Weinthal  et  al.,  2010)  and  understanding  the  important  role 

102

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation

C H A P T E R   7

Table 7.1  Examples of host proteins involved in various steps of the transformation process

Protein

AtAGP17

BTI1

Function

Lysine-rich arabinogalactan protein, may be involved in reducing plant resistance 
response to Agrobacterium

Reference

Gaspar et al. (2004)

Interacts with VirB2, may be involved in initial steps of Agrobacterium-plant 
interactions

Hwang and Gelvin (2004)

Microtubules

Cytoplasmic transport of the T-complex toward the nucleus

RocA, Roc4, CypA

Binding to VirD2, possibly involved in maintaining its conformation in the plant 
cytoplasm

Salman et al. (2005)

Deng et al. (1998)

Interacts with VirD2, nuclear import of VirD2

Interacts with VirE2, nuclear import of VirE2

Interacts with VirE2, nuclear import of VirE2

Interacts with VirD2, nuclear import of VirD2

Ballas and Citovsky (1997)

Tzfira et al. (2001, 2002); Djamei et al. (2007)

Bhattacharjee et al. (2008)

Bako et al. (2003)

Interacts with the C-terminal region of VirD2, involved in nuclear import of VirD2

Tao et al. (2004)

Interacts with VirE2, involved in T-DNA integration

Anand et al. (2007)

Interacts with VirF, involved in T-DNA uncoating

Tzfira et al. (2004); Schrammeijer et al. (2001)

AtKapα

VIP1

IMPa-4

CAK2Ms

PP2C

VIP2

ASK1

VBF

H2A

Interacts with VIP1, involved in T-DNA uncoating

T-DNA integration

Ku70, Rad50

T-DNA integration, discovered in yeast

Ku80

CAF-1

T-DNA integration

T-DNA integration

DNA ligase IV

T-DNA integration

Zaltsman et al. (2010)

Mysore et al. (2000)

van Attikum et al. (2001); van Attikum and 
Hooykaas (2003)

Li et al. (2005); Friesner and Britt (2003)

Endo et al. (2006)

Cai et al. (2009)

BTI1, VirB2-interacting protein 1; Roc and CypA, Arabidopsis cyclophilin chaperone family; AtKapα, Arabidopsis thaliana importin α; VIP1, VirE2-interacting protein 1; IMPa-4, 
Arabidopsis importin α isoform  CAK2M, cyclin-dependent kinase-activating kinase; PP2C, protein phosphatase 2C; VIP2, VirE2 interacting protein 2; ASK1, Arabidopsis sKp1-like 
protein; VBF, VIP1-binding F-box protein, CAF-1, chromatin-assembly factor 1.

played  by  DSBs  in  inducing  the  HR-mediated  pathway  in 
plant  cells  (Puchta  et  al.,  1996;  Siebert  and  Puchta,  2002; 
Orel  et  al.,  2003),  may  lead  to  the  development  of  novel 
strategies  for  controlling  the  integration  process,  as  will  be 
described later in the chapter.

Plant  factors  may  also  function  at  earlier  stages  of  the 
transformation  process.  Indeed,  the  interactions  of  several 
host  proteins  (e.g.,  BTI1)  with  VirB2  (a  component  of  the 
bacterial  T-pilus)  have  been  shown  to  be  important  for  the 
transformation  process  (Hoekema  et  al.,  1983),  and  sev-
eral other proteins have been postulated to affect the bacte-
rial attachment and/or T-DNA transfer to plants (Zhu et al., 
2003). Agrobacterium has also been shown to alter the plant 
cell’s defense response (Ditt et al., 2001, 2005, 2006; Veena 
et al.,  2003).  Veena et al.  (2003), for  example,  showed  that 
the transfer of T-DNA and proteins can suppress host defense 
response genes, and Ditt et al. (2005) reported on an inverse 
correlation  between  the  expression  level  of  several  defense 
genes and transformation efficiency. This negative correlation 

may be attributed to the function of salicylic acid, which was 
shown  to  attenuate  the  function  of  the  VirA  kinase  domain 
and  was  thus  proposed  to  function  in  the  repression  of  vir 
expression (Yuan et al., 2007). That salicylic acid inhibits the 
induction of vir genes (Anand et al., 2008), and that salicylic 
acid-over-expressing mutant plants were recalcitrant to tumor 
formation (Yuan et al., 2007) further supports the notion that 
attenuating the plant defense response is a critical step in the 
transformation process.

The precise molecular mechanism by which Agrobacterium 
can  alter  the  plant  defense  response  is  still  unknown;  never-
theless,  the  Arabidopsis  EFR1  protein,  which  is  the  recep-
tor for the bacterial elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu), was shown 
to  restrict  Agrobacterium-mediated  genetic  transformation 
of  Arabidopsis  plants  (Zipfel  et  al.,  2006).  Furthermore, 
a  molecular  link  between  Agrobacterium-mediated  activa-
tion  of  the  MAPK  signaling  pathway  and  the  transforma-
tion  process  were  recently  discovered  (Djamei  et  al.,  2007). 
More  specifically,  Djamei  et  al.  (2007)  discovered  that 

103

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

MAPK-mediated  phosphorylation  of  VIP1,  a  host  protein 
involved  in  T-complex  nuclear  import,  is  required  for  VIP1 
nuclear import and for activation of defense response genes. It 
is intriguing to speculate that Agrobacterium developed novel 
ways of not only suppressing the host defense system, but also 
using specific components of the defense response for its own 
needs (Dafny-Yelin et al., 2008a; Pitzschke and Hirt, 2010).

The  set  of  events  and  the  functions  that  each  of  the  pre-
viously  mentioned  plant  and  bacterial  proteins  play  in 
T-complex  cytoplasmic  trafficking,  nuclear 
import,  and 
integration  have  been  the  subject  of  several  recent  reviews 
(Tzfira  et  al.,  2005;  Lacroix  et  al.,  2008a;  Gelvin,  2010). 
Understanding  their  role  in  the  transformation  process  may 
lead to the development of methods for enhancing the trans-
formation of recalcitrant species and controlling T-DNA inte-
gration, as will be described in the next section.

Agrobacterium as a Tool for Plant 
Transformation

Agrobacterium can genetically transform a wide range of plant 
and non-plant species. It is now used as a practical and robust 
tool  for  the  genetic  engineering  of  many  scientifically  and 
agriculturally  important  plant  species,  including  Arabidopsis, 
tobacco,  tomato,  poplar,  soybean,  rice,  and  wheat  (reviewed 
by  Herrera-Estrella  et  al.,  2005;  Lacroix  et  al.,  2006;  Banta 
and Montenegro, 2008; Soltani et al., 2008). An understand-
ing  of  the  bacterium’s  biology  and  the  development  of  plant 
tissue-culture techniques were crucial for early adaptation and 
engineering  of  this  unique  bacterium  for  plant  genetic  trans-
formation. We focus our discussion on the key factors needed 
for  successful  transformation  and  regeneration  of  trans-
genic  plants,  and  readers  are  referred  to  the  Agrobacterium 
Protocals (Wang 2006a,b) and the Compendium of Transgenic 
Crop Plants (Kole and Hall, 2008) for detailed transformation 
protocols  of  scientifically  and  commercially  important  plant 
species and for an in-depth discussion on commercially impor-
tant transgenic crops and traits.

A  prerequisite  for  the  development  of  a  new  transforma-
tion protocol is the ability to regenerate a whole plant from a 
single, transformed cell. The regeneration of plants from sin-
gle cells relies on the totipotency of many plant cells and can 
be  technically  achieved  under  sterile  conditions,  using  plant 
tissue-culture  techniques  and  the  application  of  exogenous 
growth regulators. With the exception of Arabidopsis plants, 
which  are  typically  transformed  by  dipping  their  flowers  in 
an  Agrobacterium  culture  (Zhang  et  al.,  2006),  all  transfor-
mation  protocols  rely  on  the  in  vitro  co-cultivation  of  plant 
explants  with  aseptic  cultures  of  Agrobacterium  cells  (Wang, 
2006a,b; Kole and Hall, 2008). Since different Agrobacterium 
strains’  cells  vary  in  their  transformation  efficiency  toward 
various  plant  species,  cultivars,  and  even  explants  of  a  given 
plant,  establishing  a  new  transformation  protocol  often 
involves  a  long  process  of  mix  and  match  between  different 
Agrobacterium  strains,  plant  explants,  and  co-cultivation  and 
culturing conditions.

In  the  early  years  of  Agrobacterium  research,  scientists 
developed integrative plasmids in which the genes of interest 

were  integrated  into  the  T-DNA  region  of  existing  Ti  plas-
mids  to  deliver  them  into  plant  cells  (Figure  7.1A).  In  such 
systems,  the  genes  of  interest  are  first  cloned  into  small, 
Escherichia coli-based cloning plasmids. The plasmids are next 
transferred  into  Agrobacterium  cells  where  they  integrate  by 
HR into the T-DNA region of disarmed or native Ti plasmids. 
pGV3850,  for  example,  was  modified  from  a  native  Ti  plas-
mid by replacing its T-DNA region with the sequence of the 
cloning vector pBR322 (Zambryski et al., 1983). Recombinant 
pBR322  plasmids,  carrying  the  genes  of  interest,  are  next 
transferred  into  Agrobacterium  cells  and  recombine  into  the 
pGV3850 T-DNA region. While useful for plant genetic engi-
neering, the manipulation and engineering of large Ti plasmids 
can  be  tedious  and  difficult  to  perform.  Thus,  most  modern 
transformation  protocols  rely  on  the  use  of  binary  vectors 
(Figure 7.1B) for gene delivery from disarmed Agrobacterium 
strains  into  plant  cells  (reviewed  by  Hellens  et  al.,  2000; 
Komari et al., 2006; Lee and Gelvin, 2008). A binary vector 
is typically designed to carry the T-DNA region and an E. coli 
origin of replication and selection marker (Figure 7.1B). The 
latter allows the binary plasmid to be engineered using stand-
ard molecular biology techniques and common E. coli strains. 
Several  examples  of  early  and  modern  binary  plasmids  and 
sets of plasmids can be found in Table 7.2. The T-DNA region 
is  defined  by  its  left  and  right  borders  and  is  usually  com-
posed of a plant selection marker and a multiple cloning site 
(MCS),  which  typically  facilitate  the  cloning  of  one  or  two 
genes of interest (Figure 7.3). Since the T-strand’s right bor-
der  is  protected  by  VirD2,  integration  at  the  right  border  is 
usually more accurate than at the left border of the T-strand. 
Thus, most modern binary plasmids carry the plant selection 
marker  gene  near  the  left  border  (e.g.,  Becker  et  al.,  1992; 
van Engelen et al., 1995), assuring that the gene(s) of interest, 
which is cloned near the right border, will be present in the 
selected cells.

Various genes can be used for the selection of transformed 
plant cells. Genes encoding antibiotic or herbicide resistance 
(e.g., nptII, hpt, ppt, or bar) can be found in many binary plas-
mids and have been successfully used for positive selection of 
a  wide  range  of  plant  species.  pBIN19,  for  example  (Bevan, 
1984),  was  one  of  the  first  commercialized  binary  vectors 
engineered  to  replicate  in  E.  coli  and  to  carry  the  kanamy-
cin  plant  selection  marker.  Interestingly,  despite  its  exten-
sive use for plant genetic engineering, the complete sequence 
of  pBIN19  was  only  reported  in  1995  (Frisch  et  al.,  1995), 
the  same  year  in  which  a  modified  and  improved  version  of 
this  vector  (designated  pBINPLUS),  in  which  the  kanamy-
cin selection marker was located close to the left border, was 
also  revealed  (van  Engelen  et  al.,  1995).  In  another  exam-
ple,  the  pGPTV  set  of  vectors  was  developed  to  facilitate 
the  exchange  of  several  plant  selection  markers  (i.e.,  resist-
ance  to  bleomycin,  basta,  hygromycin,  kanamycin,  and  dihy-
drofolate  reductase)  between  them  (Becker,  1990).  Other 
selection  genes  that  rely  on  negative  (e.g.,  codA,  thymidine 
kinase, and cytochrome P450; Koprek et al., 1999; Gardiner 
and Howlett, 2004), metabolic (e.g., dao1 and alcohol dehy-
drogenase;  Xiaohui  Wang  et  al.,  2001;  Erikson  et  al.,  2004), 
and  phenotypical  (e.g.,  ipt;  Ebinuma  et  al.,  1997)  selection, 
for  example,  have  also  been  deployed  for  the  production  of 

104

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation

C H A P T E R   7

Table 7.2  Examples of Agrobacterium binary vectors

Plasmid(s)

Key features

Reference

Bevan (1984)

pBIN19

pBINPLUS

pBI

pBIB/pBIG

pGPTV

pCAMBIA

pPZP

Plant selection marker (Kan) next to the right border; supports blue/white cloning; limited MCS; 
commercialized by Clontech

Plant selection marker (Kan) next to the left border; supports blue/white cloning; limited MCS; MCS also 
contains two rare restriction sites; a higher copy number in E. coli, and two rare restriction sites

van Engelen et al. (1995)

A set of vectors; plant selection marker (Kan) next to the right border; promoterless gene; 
commercialized by Clontech

Jefferson et al. (1987)

Set of vectors; exchangeable plant selection markers (Kan, Hyg) next to the right border; with or 
without promoterless uidA gene

Becker (1990)

A set of vectors; plant selection genes (Kan, Hyg, Dhfr, Bleo, and Bar) next to the left border; 
promoterless uidA gene, limited MCS

Large set of vectors; constantly being improved and developed by Cambia (an independent non-profit 
institution); supports several plant selection genes (e.g., Kan, Hyg, and Bar); supports translational 
fusion to various tags

Becker et al. (1992)

http://www.cambia.org

Set of small binary plasmids; some vectors assembled with plant selection genes (Kan, Gent) next to 
the left border; some vectors support blue/white cloning; vectors carry bacterial chloramphenicol- or 
spectinomycin-resistant genes

Hajdukiewicz et al. (1994)

BIBAC

Binary bacterial artificial chromosome; designed to transfer very large T-DNA molecules

Hamilton et al. (1996); Hamilton 
(1997)

pSAT/pRCS

A set of vectors; supports construction of multigene T-DNAs by rare cutters; facilitates fluorescence 
protein fusion; based on pPZP

Goderis et al. (2002); Tzfira et al. 
(2005); Dafny-Yelin et al. (2007)

pSITE

pMDC

pEarleyGate

pGreen/pSoup

A set of vectors; based on pPZP; facilitates fluorescence protein fusion by Gateway

Chakrabarty et al. (2007)

A set of vectors; based on pCAMBIA; supports gfp and uidA protein fusion by Gateway; supports 
construction of promoter-reporter and genomic DNA by Gateway

Curtis and Grossniklaus (2003)

A set of vectors; based on pCAMBIA; supports translational fusion to various epitope tags (e.g., FLAG, 
HA, cMyc, and AcV5)

Earley et al. (2006)

Very small T-DNA-carrying binary (pGreen) vector; pSoup provides replication functions for pGreen; 
supports several plant selection genes (Kan, Hyg, Sul and Bar); constantly being improved and further 
developed (see http://www.pgreen.ac.uk)

Hellens et al. (2000)

pMSP

Carries super promoter; supports several plant selection genes (Kan, Hyg, and Bar)

Lee et al. (2007)

Abbreviations: MCS; multiple cloning site; Kan, kanamycin; Hyg, hygromycin; Dhfr, dihydrofolate reductase; Bleo, bleomycin; Bar, basta; Gent, gentamycin;  
uidA, β-D-glucuronidase; Sul, sulfonylurea; gfp, green fluorescent protein.

transgenic plants (for an in-depth discussion on plant selection 
markers, see reviews by Miki and McHugh, 2004; Sundar and 
Sakthivel, 2008).

In  addition  to  selection  genes,  plant  scientists  often  use 
the  uidA  reporter  gene  (which  encodes  the  β-glucuronidase 
enzyme)  as  a  visual  marker  for  transformation  events. 
β-glucuronidase  activity  can  be  easily  monitored  in  infected 
plant tissues by enzymatic conversion of the colorless X-Gluc 
substrate  to  blue  precipitates  (Jefferson  et  al.,  1987).  The 
uidA  reporter  gene  is  thus  especially  powerful  for  detecting 
early transformation events, which are typically monitored 1 
to 2 days post co-cultivation. The pBIN19-derivative pBI121 
(Jefferson et al., 1987; Chen et al., 2003), for example, was 
engineered  to  carry  a  functional  uidA  expression  cassette  in 

addition  to  the  kanamycin  plant  selection  marker,  and  has 
been widely used in the development of many transformation 
protocols.  It  is  important  to  note  that  while  transient  uidA 
expression  is  a  clear  indicator  of  successful  T-DNA  nuclear 
import  and  its  complementation  to  the  double-stranded 
intermediate,  production  of  transgenic  plants  depends  on 
the  integration  of  the  T-DNA  molecule  into  the  plant  cell 
genome and the regeneration of a whole plant under selective 
conditions.

Interestingly, only a small number of Agrobacterium strains 
have been disarmed and are currently used in a large number 
of  transformation  protocols.  Because  many  of  these  strains 
show a certain degree of resistance to various antibiotics (Lee 
and  Gelvin,  2008),  most  of  the  binary  vectors  have  been 

105

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

with  long  exposure  to  low  concentrations  of  Agrobacterium-
eliminating  antibiotics  could  improve  the  transformation 
efficiency  of  antibiotic-sensitive  Fragaria  vesca  and  F.  v. 
semperflorens  plants.  Interestingly,  even  fine-tuning  the  early 
steps  of  the  transformation  process  (e.g.,  the  activation  of 
Agrobacterium cells), can affect the transformation efficiency. 
Thus, for example, while acetosyringone was dispensable for 
the  transformation  of  wheat  cell  suspension  cultures  when 
using  the  combination  of  A.  tumefaciens  strain  C58  and  the 
binary vector pMON18365 (Cheng et al., 1997), doubling its 
concentration  in  the  co-cultivation  medium  led  to  improved 
transformation efficiency of inoculated durum wheat embryos 
when the combination of Agrobacterium strain AGL1 and the 
split  binary  system  pGreen/pSoup  (Figure  7.1C)  was  used 
(He et al., 2010). It should be noted that no direct compar-
ison  between  the  use  of  the  different  Agrobacterium  strains 
and binary vectors was reported in those studies (Cheng et al., 
1997;  He  et  al.,  2010);  nevertheless,  other  studies  clearly 
indicate that different combinations of Agrobacterium strains 
and  binary  plasmids  vary  in  their  transformation  efficiencies 
(e.g., Przetakiewicz et al., 2004; Gasparis et al., 2008).

Many  other  factors  can  potentially  affect  the  transforma-
tion efficiency of various plant species. However, there is no 
clear  and  straightforward  set  of  instructions  for  discovering 
and applying such factors for improvement and control of the 
transformation process. Thus, much of the technical progress 
made  in  plant  genetic  engineering  has  occurred  through  the 
design  of  new,  and  the  manipulation  of  existing,  procedures 
and through the development of novel sets of binary vectors.

Novel and Specialized Vectors  
for Plant Transformation

Binary  vectors  have  been  instrumental  in  the  delivery  of  a 
wide  range  of  genes  into  plant  cells  (reviewed  by  Herrera-
Estrella et al., 2005; Dafny-Yelin and Tzfira, 2007; Banta and 
Montenegro, 2008; Lee and Gelvin, 2008). Most binary vec-
tors have been engineered to facilitate the cloning and trans-
fer of a single gene of interest within their MCS (in addition 
to the selection marker; Figures 7.1B and 7.3), a design that 
often  hinders  the  cloning  of  novel  plant  transformation  con-
structs.  The  growing  use  of  Agrobacterium  for  basic  plant 
research  and  biotechnology,  and  in  particular  the  growing 
interest  in  facilitating  the  expression  of  fluorescent  protein 
fusions,  the  delivery  of  multiple  genes  into  plants,  and  the 
introduction of recombination-based cloning systems, has led 
to the development of a growing number of specialized binary 
vectors and families of vectors (exemplified in Table 7.2).

The  importance  of  developing  specialized  binary  vectors 
was realized in the early days of vector development. One of 
the first specialized binary vectors, for example, was pBI101 
(Jefferson et al., 1987), which was designed to facilitate the 
fusion  of  plant  promoters  to  the  uidA  reporter  gene  to  ena-
ble  gene-expression  studies  in  plant  cells.  The  vector,  which 
was available as a commercial product from Clontech (as part 
of  a  set  of  several  binary  vectors),  carried  a  relatively  small 
MCS, relied on kanamycin as the sole plant selection marker, 
and was not fully sequenced. Thus, while pBI101 was used in 

Figure 7.3 l   General structure of T-DNA region l Current 
practice calls for placing the plant selectable marker expression 
cassette close to the T-DNA’s left border (LB) and constructing a 
versatile MCS next to the T-DNA’s right border (RB). Independent 
plant expression cassette(s) can next be cloned into the MCS. This 
structure ensures that a high proportion of the selected plants will 
carry both the selection marker and the gene(s) of interest. 

designed around a limited number of Agrobacterium origins of 
replication and these vectors carry a relatively small range of 
Agrobacterium selection markers. Thus, for example, the use 
of Agrobacterium strain EHA101 (Hood et al., 1986) was lim-
ited by its natural resistance to kanamycin, which was the pre-
ferred  antibiotic  for  selection  of  several  early  binary  vectors 
(e.g., pBIN, pBIN19, pGA, and pGPTV). EHA101 was later 
engineered to produce EHA105, which was no longer resist-
ant  to  kanamycin  (Hood  et  al.,  1993),  thus  expanding  the 
repertoire  of  Agrobacterium  strains  that  can  be  used  in  con-
junction with kanamycin-resistant binary vectors. The natural 
resistance of Agrobacterium strains adds another layer of com-
plexity  to  their  use  in  plant  genetic  engineering.  Following  a 
co-cultivation step, it is necessary to eliminate the bacterium 
from the culture and to allow the infected explants to recover 
and regenerate into transformed plants. Since the application 
of  antibiotics  to  plant  culture  can  have  a  negative  effect  on 
plant-cell recovery and regeneration, it is important to evalu-
ate the use of several antibiotics at various concentrations for 
Agrobacterium elimination.

Developing a new transformation system relies on the care-
ful  orchestration  of  a  wide  range  of  biological  components 
and  procedural  steps.  These  include  proper  selection  of  the 
plant  explants,  binary  vector,  selection  marker,  antibiotics, 
and Agrobacterium strain, and establishing the procedures for 
regeneration, co-cultivation, bacterium elimination, and selec-
tion  and  recovery  of  transgenic  plants.  Even  after  reporting 
on the successful transformation of a given plant species, sci-
entists  continue  to  improve  existing  procedures  by  changing 
various  parameters  of  the  transformation  protocols.  Husaini 
(2009), for example, reported that eliminating Agrobacterium 
cells  by  a  combination  of  timentin  and  cefotaxime  at  low 
concentrations  leads  to  higher  transformation  and  regenera-
tion efficiency than using just one of these antibiotics at high 
concentration.  This  improvement  in  the  transformation  effi-
ciency was attributed to lowering of the phytotoxic effect of 
these antibiotics on the leaf disks (Husaini and Abdin, 2008; 
Husaini,  2009).  Similarly,  Alsheikh  et  al.  (2002)  reported 
that  combining  the  use  of  specific  Agrobacterium  strains 

106

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation

C H A P T E R   7

many  plant  transformation  studies,  its  cloning  capacity  was 
limited and its modification was tedious.

The growing interest in plant gene expression and protein 
subcellular localization studies and the advances in fluorescent 
proteins  (e.g.,  GFP)  and  confocal  microscopy  technologies 
led to the development of a wide range of specialized binary 
vectors  that  could  facilitate  the  cloning  and  transformation 
of fluorescent fusion genes into plant cells. The pSITE vector 
system (Chakrabarty et al., 2007), for example, was designed 
to  facilitate  the  stable  and  transient  expression  of  fluores-
cent protein fusions (e.g., GFP, YFP, and RFP) in plant cells. 
Not  only  did  this  family  of  vectors  provide  the  user  with  a 
wide  range  of  fluorescent  proteins,  it  was  also  designed  for 
Gateway® cloning (a restriction-enzyme free, recombination-
based  cloning  system)  which  can  significantly  reduce  the 
effort needed to fuse genes of interest into these binary vec-
tors (Karimi et al., 2007).

Realizing  the  power  of  Gateway-based  cloning,  many 
other  binary  vectors  have  been  designed  to  support  this  new 
technology  for  plant  genetic  transformation  (e.g.,  Curtis  and 
Grossniklaus,  2003;  Helliwell  and  Waterhouse,  2003;  Cheo  
et  al.,  2004;  Sasaki  et  al.,  2004;  Karimi  et  al.,  2005;  Earley 
et  al.,  2006;  Gehl  et  al.,  2009).  The  pMDC  set  of  vec-
tors  (Curtis  and  Grossniklaus,  2003),  for  example,  has  been 
designed to facilitate constitutive or inducible gene expression, 
uidA  and  GFP  protein  fusion,  promoter  analysis,  and  more. 
Specialized  Gateway-based  binary  vectors  have  also  been 
developed to facilitate epitope-tag translational fusion (Earley 
et al., 2006), analysis of protein–protein interactions by bimo-
lecular  fluorescence  complementation  (BiFC)  assay  (Gehl 
et  al.,  2009),  and  for  hairpin  RNA-mediated  gene-silencing 
experiments in plants (Helliwell and Waterhouse, 2003).

Further advances in Gateway technology led to additional 
progress in binary vector construction technology and, in par-
ticular, to the introduction of modular binary vector assembly 
and  construction  of  multigene  vectors.  More  specifically,  the 
development  of  MultiSite  Gateway  technology,  which  ena-
bles  the  recombination  of  several  DNA  segments  in  a  single 
reaction step (Cheo et al., 2004; Sasaki et al., 2004), enabled 
the assembly of novel T-DNA vectors by simultaneous recom-
bination  of  multiple  DNA  fragments  (Karimi  et  al.,  2005). 
MultiSite Gateway also enabled the construction of multigene 
binary vectors (Wakasa et al., 2006). Chen et al. (2006), for 
example, introduced MultiRound Gateway as a novel strategy 
for  the  construction  of  multigene  binary  vectors  by  altering 
between  different  Gateway  Entry  vectors.  In  another  exam-
ple,  a  multiple-round  in  vivo  site-specific  assembly  (desig-
nated  MISSA)  Gateway  recombination  system  (Chen  et  al., 
2010) was developed as a novel in vivo assembly method for 
the construction of multigene binary vectors from a collection 
of  DNA  modules  that  could  be  designed  to  code  for  virtu-
ally any type of DNA sequence (e.g., promoters, terminators, 
genes  of  interest,  selection  markers,  fluorescent  genes,  and 
even complete gene-expression cassettes).

Other  designs  for  the  construction  of  multigene  plasmids 
have also been reported. Lin et al. (2003) developed a novel 
plant  binary  assembly  system  that  takes  advantage  of  com-
bining  the  Cre/loxP  recombination  system  and  the  use  of 
two  rare-cutting  endonucleases  for  the  sequential  assembly 

of  multiple  plant  expression  cassettes  onto  a  transforma-
tion-competent  artificial  chromosome  (TAC)  based  vector 
(Liu  et  al.,  1999).  The  authors  used  this  system  to  construct 
T-DNAs  with  40-  to  80kb  genomic  DNA  fragments  and 
reported  on  their  successful  transfer  into  Arabidopsis  plants 
(Liu  et  al.,  1999).  Other  systems,  such  as  the  pPZP-RCS2/
pAUX  (Goderis  et  al.,  2002)  and  the  pPZP-RCS2/pSAT 
(Tzfira et al., 2005; Chung et al., 2005), rely exclusively on the 
use of rare-cutting enzymes for sequential assembly of up to 7 
gene-long transformation vectors. While these systems rely on 
a  very  limited  number  of  commercially  available  rare-cutting 
enzymes (Goderis et al., 2002; Chung et al., 2005; Tzfira et al., 
2005), their capacity can potentially be increased by using arti-
ficial restriction enzymes (i.e., ZFNs), which have been proven 
useful for the construction of plant binary vectors (Zeevi et al., 
2008, 2010).

The relatively large backbone of many binary vectors may 
pose  a  technical  obstacle  for  their  genetic  manipulation,  so 
scientists  developed  sets  of  vectors  with  minimal  backbone 
sequences. The pCB series of mini binary vectors, for exam-
ple, are about half the size of pBIN19 and were constructed 
by  eliminating  over  5 kb  that  were  deemed  non-essential  for 
their function in plant transformation from the pBIN19 vec-
tor backbone (Xiang et al., 1999). It should be noted that by 
minimizing  pBIN19,  the  authors  eliminated  the  traF  region 
from  the  vector  backbone,  and  thus  limited  the  transfer  of 
pCB  vectors  into  Agrobacterium  to  direct  transformation 
methods.  The  pPZP  family  of  small  binary  vectors,  on  the 
other  hand,  has  been  designed  to  maintain  the  pBR322bom 
site,  which  enables  their  conjugal  transfer  from  E.  coli  to 
Agrobacterium  cells  (Hajdukiewicz  et  al.,  1994).  Further 
minimization of the binary vector backbone was achieved by 
Hellens et al. (2000), who constructed the pGreen series of 
vectors  by  removing  the  RepA  and  Mob  functions  from  the 
vector  backbone  and  supporting  the  replication  of  pGreen 
vectors  in  Agrobacterium  cells  by  a  second  plasmid,  pSoup 
(Figure 7.1C).

Overcoming  the  technical  challenge  of  constructing  large 
and  complex  T-DNA  molecules  is  just  one  of  the  concerns 
when planning their transfer into plant cells. Hamilton et al. 
(1996,  1997),  for  example,  reported  that  reinforcing 
Agrobacterium  with  additional  copies  of  the  virG  and  virE 
genes  was  necessary  to  transfer  a  150 kb  T-DNA  molecule 
using  the  binary-BAC  (BIBAC)  vector  system,  which  they 
developed, in plant cells. While the BIBAC binary vector sys-
tem  was  successfully  used  for  delivery  of  very  long  T-DNA 
molecules  into  several  plant  species  (e.g.,  Feng  et  al.,  2006; 
He  et  al.,  2006;  Li,  et  al.,  2007;  Vega  et  al.,  2008).  Song 
et al. (2003) reported that BIBAC potato genomic fragments 
larger  than  100 kb  were  not  stable  in  several  Agrobacterium 
strains, including two recA-deficient ones. Similarly, Liu et al. 
(1999), who developed the TAC binary vector and used it to 
construct an Arabidopsis genomic DNA fragment (40–80 kb) 
library of approximately 10,000 clones, recognized that large 
binary  plasmid  clones  may  not  be  stable  in  Agrobacterium 
cells  and  recommended  testing  individual  constructs  before 
using them in plant transformation experiments. Interestingly, 
Chen  et  al.  (2010)  reported  that  using  conjugal  DNA  trans-
fer instead of electroporation for the delivery of a multigene 

107

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

binary  vector  into  a  recA-deficient  Agrobacterium  strain  was 
crucial for obtaining Agrobacterium clones with stable binary 
vectors. Thus, while Tao and Zhang (1998) demonstrated that 
even though over 300 kb fragments can be cloned into BIBAC 
vectors  and  stably  maintained  in  E.  coli  cells,  their  transfer 
and  maintenance  in  Agrobacterium  cells  should  be  regarded 
with caution.

Overall,  significant  progress  has  been  made  in  the  last 
two  decades  in  the  design  and  construction  of  a  wide  range 
of binary vectors and new vectors are constantly being devel-
oped  (e.g.,  Dafny-Yelin  et  al.,  2007;  Lee  et  al.,  2007;  Thole 
et al., 2007; Zaltsman et al., 2007; Koizumi and Iwata, 2008). 
Nevertheless,  while  it  seems  that  there  is  a  vector  for  every 
task  (exemplified  in  Table  7.2),  plant  scientists  and  biotech-
nologists  still  face  the  challenges  of  improving  the  transfor-
mation  rate  of  recalcitrant  species,  extending  the  range  of 
Agrobacterium  cells  to  new  plant  species  and  cultivars,  and 
controlling the outcome of the transformation process. These 
difficulties  can  potentially  be  overcome  by  manipulating  the 
host and by interfering with the T-DNA integration.

Manipulating the Plant Genome to 
Improve and Control Transformation

Developing  an  Agrobacterium-mediated  genetic  transfor-
mation  procedure  is  an  empirical  process  in  which  scientists 
examine  various  combinations  of  bacteria  and  binary  plas-
mids and inoculation, regeneration, and selection techniques. 
Remarkably, many of the transformation procedures that have 
been  developed  in  the  last  several  decades  have  relied  on  a 
relatively  small  number  of  Agrobacterium  strains  and  binary 
vectors, while many plant species, varieties, and cultivars still 
remain recalcitrant to Agrobacterium infection. It seems that 
further genetic manipulation of the bacterium and the devel-
opment of additional binary vectors may not be sufficient to 
expand  the  bacterium  host  range  and  to  improve  existing, 
albeit  low-efficiency,  transformation  procedures  of  certain 
plant  species.  It  was  thus  suggested  that  further  improve-
ments in transformation technologies may arise by using plant 
factors  known  to  function  during  the  transformation  process 
(Gelvin, 2003a; Tzfira and Citovsky, 2006).

We  previously  noted  that  various  host  factors  have  been 
assigned  functional  roles  during  different  steps  of  the  trans-
formation  process  (Table  7.1).  In  addition,  through  exten-
sive  genetic  screens  for  plant  genes  that  are  involved  in 
the  transformation  process,  a  large  number  of  rat  (resist-
ant  to  Agrobacterium  infection)  and  hat  (hypersensitive  to 
Agrobacterium  infection)  Arabidopsis  mutants  have  been 
identified (e.g., Nam et al., 1999; Zhu et al., 2003). It is thus 
possible  that  manipulating  these  genes,  and  their  putative 
homologs,  in  recalcitrant  plant  species  may  provide  a  unique 
pathway  for  improving  their  Agrobacterium-mediated  genetic 
transformation efficiencies. Indeed, over-expression of several 
host  proteins  in  transgenic  plants  rendered  them  more  sus-
ceptible to Agrobacterium infection. Thus, for example, over-
expression of VIP1, a plant protein involved in T-DNA nuclear 
import,  T-DNA  targeting  to  the  plant  genome,  and  T-DNA 
uncoating  (Tzfira  et  al.,  2001,  2004;  Citovsky  et  al.,  2004; 
Li  et  al.,  2005;  Lacroix  et  al.,  2008b)  in  transgenic  tobacco 

108

plants, increased its susceptibility to Agrobacterium-mediated 
genetic  transformation,  most  likely  due  to  the  increased  rate 
of  T-DNA  nuclear  import  in  the  transgenic  plants  (Tzfira 
et  al.,  2002).  In  another  example,  over-expression  of  KU80, 
a  plant  DNA-repair  protein, 
increased  the  susceptibil-
ity  of  transgenic  Arabidopsis  to  Agrobacterium  infection 
(Li  et  al.,  2005).  Since  KU80,  involved  in  DSB  repair  (West 
et al., 2002), was suggested to mediate the integration of dsT-
DNA  intermediates  into  genomic  DSBs  (Tzfira  et  al.,  2004; 
Li et al., 2005; Ziemienowicz et al., 2008), the increased sus-
ceptibility may be attributed to increased T-DNA integration 
rate  in  the  transgenic  plants.  Increased  transformation  effi-
ciency  was  also  reported  in  transgenic  BTI1-over-expressing 
Arabidopsis  plants  (Hwang  and  Gelvin,  2004).  The  precise 
mechanism  by  which  this  VirB2-interacting  protein  func-
tions  during  the  transformation  process  is  still  unknown,  but 
it  exemplifies  how  over-expression  of  plant  proteins,  which 
presumably function during early stages of the transformation 
process, can increase plant transformation efficiency.

Enhancing plant genetic transformation by genetic modifi-
cation is still mostly limited to model plants (i.e., Arabidopsis 
and  tobacco).  Nevertheless,  in  a  recent  report,  Zheng  et  al. 
(2009)  showed  that  over-expression  of  the  Arabidopsis 
HTA1 in rice leads to higher transformation efficiency of the 
transgenic  plants.  The  histone  H2A  protein  was  originally 
described as an Arabidopsis protein involved in T-DNA inte-
gration  (Mysore  et  al.,  2000)  and  its  expression,  as  well  as 
the  expression  of  several  other  Arabidopsis  histone-encoding 
genes,  increased  the  efficiency  of  Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation of H2A-overexpressing transgenic Arabidopsis 
plants (Mysore et al., 2000; Tenea et al., 2009). It is impor-
tant to note that not only stable, but also transient expression 
of  HTA1  was  sufficient  to  increase  Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation in rice, as evidenced by transformation experi-
ments  in  which  both  HTA1  expression  and  the  target  gene 
vectors  were  co-transformed  into  rice  tissues  (Zheng  et  al., 
2009).  Thus  transient  delivery  of  other  plant  proteins  may 
be  sufficient  to  improve  the  transformation  of  other  agro-
nomically  important  and  hard-to-transform  plant  species 
and  cultivars.  Naturally,  other  gene  delivery  methods  (e.g., 
microbombardment)  may  be  used  for  the  initial  plant  gene 
expression  in  plant  species  that  are  highly  recalcitrant  to 
Agrobacterium  infection.  Alternatively,  Agrobacterium  cells, 
which  are  capable  of  exporting  several  Vir  proteins  inde-
pendently  of  the  T-DNA  molecule  (Vergunst  et  al.,  2000), 
can  potentially  be  engineered  to  export  recombinant  plant 
proteins during the infection process. Indeed, Vergunst et al. 
(2005)  showed  that  Cre  recombinase  protein,  which  was 
tagged with a VirF export signal, could be exported into plant 
cells,  as  determined  by  Cre-mediated  activation  of  the  GFP 
reporter  gene  in  the  infected  plants.  Similarly,  Lacroix  et  al. 
(2005) showed that Agrobacterium could export the mGAL4-
VP16  chimeric  transcription  activator,  when  fused  to  the 
VirE3 protein, into plant cells, and that the fusion was capable 
of activating the uidA reporter gene in transgenic plants. It is 
thus possible that future technologies will rely on fusing plant 
proteins  to  full-length  Vir  proteins  or  to  short  Vir  export 
signals  to  export  them,  in  parallel  (or  prior)  to  infection  by 
Agrobacterium  cells  that  carry  the  genes  of  interest  on  their 
T-DNA.

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation

C H A P T E R   7

Manipulating the host genome can also affect the efficiency 
of  the  overall  process,  as  well  as  that  of  T-DNA  integration. 
van Attikum et al. (2001) used a set of DNA-repair mutants 
to  investigate  T-DNA  integration  in  yeast  cells.  The  authors 
discovered  that  the  yeast  proteins  Ku70,  Rad50,  Mre11, 
Xrs2,  Lig4,  and  Sir4  were  all  required  for  NHEJ-mediated 
T-DNA integration, whereas Rad51 and Rad52 were required 
for HR-mediated T-DNA integration in yeast cells. They also 
reported  that  a  Ku70/Rad52  double  mutant  was  blocked  in 
T-DNA  integration.  These  observations  support  the  notion 
that genetic manipulation of the host (in that case yeast cells) 
can affect the route of T-DNA integration and the final out-
come of the transformation process.

In  the  past  several  years,  various  attempts  have  been 
made  to  alter  the  route  of  T-DNA  integration  in  plant  cells 
by expressing heterologous genes or by downregulating native 
DNA-repair genes. Reiss et al. (2000), for example, expressed 
the recA gene from E. coli in tobacco in an attempt to induce 
HR-mediated T-DNA integration in plant cells. Nevertheless, 
while  RecA  indeed  functions  in  plant  cells  (as  evidenced  by 
an  increase  in  sister  chromatid  exchanges),  no  increase  in 
HR-mediated gene targeting was observed. In another report, 
Shalev et al. (1999) over-expressed RuvC (a bacterial protein 
involved  in  resolving  Holliday  junctions)  and  demonstrated 
that  it  can  increase  somatic  crossovers,  and  intra-  and  extra-
chromosomal  recombination.  The  authors  did  not  determine 
whether  it  can  also  be  used  to  enhance  T-DNA  integra-
tion  via  HR.  Impressive  enhancement  of  T-DNA  integration 
via  HR  was  observed  in  Arabidopsis  plants  over-expressing 
Rad54  (a  member  of  the  SWI2/SNF2  chromatin-remode-
ling  gene  family;  Shaked  et  al.,  2005).  More  specifically,  the 
authors  reported  that  HR-mediated  T-DNA  integration  in 
Rad54-transgenic plants was, on average, 27-fold higher than 
HR-mediated  T-DNA  integration  in  non-transgenic,  wild-
type  plants.  The  authors  thus  suggested  that  the  lack  of 
Rad54-like activity in wild-type plants may be a limiting fac-
tor for T-DNA integration via HR and proposed that further 
improvements in such integration might be achieved by stack-
ing rad54 with additional HR-related genes or by using plants 
mutated  in  NHEJ  genes  (e.g.,  Gherbi  et  al.,  2001;  Molinier 
et al., 2004; Takeda et al., 2004). Indeed, several reports have 
suggested  that  altering  plant  DNA-repair  genes  may  affect 
DNA-repair  and  maintenance  responses.  Thus,  for  exam-
ple,  decreased  intrachromosomal  HR  was  observed  in  MIM 
mutant plants (Hanin et al., 2000), whereas increased intrac-
hromosomal HR was observed in MIM-over-expressing plants 
(Hanin et al., 2000), rad50 (Gherbi et al., 2001), and chro-
matin-assembly  factor  1  (caf-1;  Endo  et  al.,  2006)  mutants. 
Whether T-DNA integration via HR and/or NHEJ can also be 
affected in these plants still needs to be studied.

Using Novel Selection Methods 
and Restriction Enzymes to Control 
T-DNA Integration

T-DNA  molecules  can 
integrate  via  HR  even  without 
host-genome  manipulation.  However,  since  HR-mediated 
T-DNA  integration  occurs  at  a  much  lower  frequency  than 

NHEJ-mediated T-DNA integration, scientists suggested that 
using  novel  selection  and  screening  methods  may  assist  in 
indentifying and selecting for these rare HR-mediated integra-
tion events (reviewed by Hohn and Puchta, 1999; Kumar and 
Fladung, 2001; Puchta, 2002, 2003; Britt and May, 2003; Iida 
and Terada, 2005). Paszkowski et al. (1988) were the first to 
demonstrate that foreign DNA molecules can integrate into a 
predetermined site via HR. In their experimental approach, a 
defective  selection  marker  in  transgenic  plants  was  repaired 
by retransformation with a linear plasmid construct that was 
engineered  to  carry  regions  that  were  complementary  and 
homologous  to  the  defective  selection  marker.  This  report 
was later followed by the work of Offringa et al. (1990) who 
demonstrated that T-DNA molecules can also function as sub-
strates for HR-mediated selection marker repair in transgenic 
plants,  by  Lee  et  al.  (1990)  who  used  T-DNA  molecules  to 
target  the  native  selectable  gene  coding  for  ALS  (acetolac-
tate synthase) in tobacco, and by Miao and Lam (1995) who 
targeted the TGA3 (a bZIP-like transcription factor) locus in 
Arabidopsis, again using T-DNA molecules. In the latter case, 
targeting of the TGA3-encoding gene was detected by replac-
ing  part  of  the  gene  with  a  kanamycin-resistance-encoding  
sequence.  Since  kanamycin-resistant  cells  could  also  be 
obtained via random T-DNA integration, the authors included 
the  GUS-encoding  gene  outside  the  region  of  homology  
on  the  incoming  T-DNA  molecule,  which  allowed  them  to 
distinguish  between  NHEJ-  and  HR-mediated  T-DNA  inte-
gration. These studies, and those of others (e.g., Hrouda and 
Paszkowski, 1994; Risseeuw et al., 1995; Hanin et al., 2001; 
Endo  et  al.,  2006,  2007),  clearly  showed  that  T-DNA  and 
dsDNA  molecules  (i.e.,  plasmid  DNA)  can  be  directed  to 
HR-mediated  integration  in  plant  cells,  albeit  at  a  low  fre-
quency  (for  further  reading  see  Hohn  and  Puchta,  1999; 
Kumar  and  Fladung,  2001;  Puchta,  2002,  2003;  Britt  and 
May, 2003; Iida and Terada, 2005).

selecting 

for 

To  overcome 

the  problem  of 

rare 
HR-mediated  T-DNA  integration  events  in  non-selectable 
genes,  scientists  developed  T-DNA  molecules  that  facili-
tate  the  use  of  positive-negative  selection  schemes  (Mansour 
et  al.,  1988).  Positive-negative  selection  schemes  are  useful 
for  discriminating  between  NHEJ-  and  HR-mediated  inte-
gration  events.  From  a  technical  point  of  view,  a  positive- 
negative  selection  approach  calls  for  the  construction  of  a 
novel T-DNA molecule in which a positive selection marker is 
flanked by regions of homology to the target gene, and a nega-
tive  selection  gene  is  cloned  outside  of  the  target  sequence. 
Both NHEJ- and HR-mediated T-DNA integration events can 
be  selected  for  by  positive  selection,  whereas  negative  selec-
tion  enables  the  elimination  of  NHEJ-mediated  integration 
events  from  the  population  of  transgenic  events.  The  posi-
tive-negative  selection  approach  was  used  to  drive  T-DNA 
integration  into  the  Gln1  and  Pzf  genes  in  Lotus  japonicus 
(Thykjaer et al., 1997) and into the chalcone synthase (CHS) 
encoding  gene  and  an  artificial  htp  gene  in  Arabidopsis  cell-
suspension culture (Gallego et al., 1999). In neither case was 
there any conclusive evidence supporting the notion that the 
T-DNA molecules indeed integrated into the target genes. Yet, 
molecular  analysis  revealed  that  the  alcohol  dehydrogenase 
(ADH)  encoding  gene  in  Arabidopsis  and  Waxy,  Adh2,  and 
the methyltransferase (MET1a) encoding genes in rice (Terada 

109

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

et al., 2002, 2007; Johzuka-Hisatomi et al., 2008;  Yamauchi 
et al., 2009; Xiaohni Wang et al., 2001) were all targeted via 
HR-mediated  T-DNA 
integration  using  positive-negative 
selection  schemes.  These  observations  further  support  the 
notion  that  T-DNA  molecules  can  indeed  integrate  via  HR 
into the plant genome. Nevertheless, achieving HR-mediated 
T-DNA  integration  in  crop  and  model  plants  remains  a  chal-
lenge  (reviewed  by  Hohn  and  Puchta,  1999;  Kumar  and 
Fladung, 2001; Puchta, 2002, 2003; Britt and May, 2003; Iida 
and Terada, 2005; Puchta and Hohn, 2005; Porteus, 2009).

Deploying novel selection schemes does not alter the path-
ways  for  T-DNA  integration,  but  merely  assists  in  selecting 
specific  and  rare  HR-mediated  integration  events.  Studies  in 
various  eukaryotic  cells  showed  that  induction  of  genomic 
DSBs  can  stimulate  HR-mediated  DNA  repair  (reviewed 
by  Carroll,  2004;  Puchta,  2005;  Porteus,  2009),  and  it  was 
thus suggested that induction of DSBs may enhance T-DNA 
integration  via  HR.  Indeed,  intrachromosomal  HR  in  plant 
cells  has  been  enhanced  by  the  excision  of  transposable  ele-
ments  (Xiao  and  Peterson,  2000)  or  by  X-ray  (Tovar  and 
Lichtenstein, 1992), both of which cause DSBs in plant cells. 
Similarly,  expression  of  site-specific  endonucleases  (e.g.,  HO 
and  I-SceI)  also  enhanced  intrachromosomal  HR  in  plant 
cells (Chiurazzi et al., 1996; Puchta et al., 1996; Siebert and 
Puchta, 2002; Orel et al., 2003). It should still be noted (as 
previously  mentioned)  that  NHEJ  is  the  preferred  mode  of 
DSB repair in plant cells (Britt and May, 2003; Puchta, 2005), 
and  that  T-DNA  molecules  are  preferentially  captured  via 
NHEJ in DSBs (Salomon and Puchta, 1998; Chilton and Que, 
2003; Tzfira et al., 2003). Nevertheless, combining the use of 
artificial  rare-cutting  restriction  enzymes  (e.g.,  ZFNs)  with 
T-DNA molecules, which can be engineered to carry regions 
of  homology  to  genomic  sequences,  holds  great  promise  for 
enhancing  site-specific  T-DNA  integration  via  HR  (Carroll, 
2004; Paques and Duchateau, 2007; Weinthal et al., 2010).

ZFNs  are  synthetic  restriction  enzymes  that  can  induce 
DSBs  in  a  wide  range  of  eukaryotic  cells,  including  plant 
cells (for recent reviews see Porteus and Carroll, 2005; Durai 
et  al.,  2005;  Carroll  et  al.,  2006).  Expression  of  ZFNs  in 
plants often results in NHEJ-mediated, site-specific mutagen-
esis  (e.g.,  Lloyd  et  al.,  2005;  de  Pater  et  al.,  2009;  Tovkach 
et  al.,  2009;  Osakabe  et  al.,  2010;  Tanaka  et  al.,  2010). 
ZFNs  are  also  useful  for  inducing  HR-mediated  integration 
of  plasmid  and  T-DNA  molecules  in  plants.  Wright  et  al. 
(2006), for example, showed that plasmid dsDNA molecules 
were  directed  to  HR-mediated,  site-specific  integration  in 
tobacco  protoplasts  upon  expression  of  ZFNs.  More  specifi-
cally,  the  authors  produced  several  transgenic  tobacco  plants 
that  carried  a  non-functional  gus::nptII  fusion  marker  and  a 
ZFN-recognition  site.  They  next  co-transformed  transgenic 
protoplasts  with  a  ZFN-expressing  construct  and  a  plasmid 
DNA  molecule  that  carried  homologous  regions  and  repair 
sequences  to  the  non-functional  gus::nptII  fusion  marker. 
Kanamycin-resistant and GUS-expressing calluses were recov-
ered,  indicating  the  nature  of  the  HR-mediated  integration 
and gus::nptII repair by the plasmid DNA molecule. The same 
research  group  later  reported  that  ZFN  and  HR-mediated 
gene  replacement  (delivered  by  plasmid  DNA)  can  be  used 

to  target  and  mutate  native  tobacco  genes  (i.e.,  SuR  genes’ 
coding sequences; Townsend et al., 2009).

ZFN  and  HR-mediated  integration  are  not  limited  to 
plasmid  DNA.  Cai  et  al.  (2009)  showed  that  ZFN  expres-
sion  combined  with  engineered  T-DNA  molecules  can  lead 
to  site-specific  integration  and  replacement  of  not  only  pre-
integrated,  non-functional  reporter  genes  (i.e.,  a  disabled  gfp 
and  pat  genes)  but  also  an  endogenous  locus  (i.e.,  the  endo-
chitinase  gene  CHN50).  In  addition,  Shukla  et  al.  (2009) 
demonstrated  that  ZFNs  can  direct  T-DNA  molecules  to 
HR-mediated,  site-specific  integration  in  corn  plants  by  tar-
geting  and  replacing  the  IPK1  gene  (which  encodes  the 
enzyme that catalyzes the final step in phytate biosynthesis). 
Collectively,  these  studies  clearly  indicate  that  by  combining 
selection methods, novel constructs, and expression of restric-
tion  enzymes,  T-DNA  molecules  can  potentially  be  directed 
to HR-mediated integration and be selected and used for gene 
targeting in plant cells.

Conclusions and Future Prospects

Over  the  past  several  decades,  Agrobacterium  has  been 
established  as  a  novel  and  critical  tool  for  plant  research 
and  biotechnology.  Extensive  research  has  revealed  much  of 
the  bacterium’s  unique  and  fascinating  biology  and  a  wide 
range  of  transformation  protocols  have  been  developed  for 
an  impressive  number  of  plant  species,  varieties,  and  culti-
vars.  Furthermore,  extensive  progress  has  been  made  in  the 
development  and  construction  of  both  versatile  and  special-
ized  Agrobacterium  binary  vectors  that  have  further  facili-
tated  the  use  of  Agrobacterium  for  various  tasks  in  basic 
plant  cell  research.  Nevertheless,  many  commercially  impor-
tant  plant  species  and  cultivars  still  remain  recalcitrant  to 
Agrobacterium  transformation  and  plant  scientists  are  still 
limited in their ability to control the transformation process, 
even in susceptible plant species. Unveiling the role of plant 
factors  and  cellular  mechanisms  in  the  transformation  proc-
ess  and  developing  novel  tools  for  the  induction  of  site-spe-
cific  genomic  DSBs  has  allowed  scientists  to  interfere  with 
the  transformation  process  and  to  improve  and  even  control 
the outcome of transformation events. Still, more research is 
needed  to  systematically  dissect  the  route  of  the  T-complex 
and other proteins inside the plant cytoplasm and nucleus and 
to  determine  the  role  of  DNA-repair  machineries  in  T-DNA 
integration. Some of the questions that still remain open are: 
(1)  how  the  T-complex  and  Vir  proteins  pass  through  the 
plant  cell  wall  barrier,  (2)  the  precise  structure  and  func-
tion of the bacterial T4SS, (3) how the mature T-complex is 
assembled  and  transported  through  the  plant-cell  cytoplasm, 
(4)  which  plant  proteins  are  responsible  for  complement-
ing  the  T-strands  into  double-stranded  intermediates,  and 
(5)  how  the  T-complex  is  delivered  into  genomic  DSBs  (or 
other  genomic  locations)  for  integration.  In  addition,  further 
development in ZFN technology and vector design is needed 
to  allow  scientists  and  plant  biotechnologists  to  harness  this 
powerful  tool  for  controlling  T-DNA  and  for  genome  engi-
neering in plant cells.

110

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation

C H A P T E R   7

Acknowledgments

We  apologize  to  colleagues  whose  work  was  not  cited  due 
to  lack  of  space.  Our  lab  is  supported  by  grants  from  The 
Consortium  for  Plant  Biotechnology  Research  (CPBR),  Dow 

Agrosciences,  Biotechnology  Research  and  Development 
Corporation  (BRDC),  the  U.S.-Israel  Binational  Agricultural 
Research  and  Development  (BARD),  and  the  U.S.-Israel 
Binational Science Foundation (BSF).

References

Abu-Arish, A., Frenkiel-Krispin, D., Fricke, 

T., Tzfira, T., Citovsky, V., & Grayer Wolf, 
S., et al. (2004). Three-dimensional 
reconstruction of Agrobacterium VirE2 
protein with single-stranded DNA. Journal 
of Biological Chemistry, 279, 25359–25363.

Aloni, R., & Ullrich, C. I. (2008). Biology of 

crown gall tumors. In T. Tzfira & V. Citovsky 
(Eds.), Agrobacterium (pp. 565–591). New 
York: Springer.

Alsheikh, M. K., Suso, H. -P., Robson, M., 

Battey, N. H., & Wetten, A. (2002). 
Appropriate choice of antibiotic 
and Agrobacterium strain improves 
transformation of antibiotic-sensitive 
Fragaria vesca and F. v. semperflorens. Plant 
Cell Reports, 20, 1173–1180.

Anand, A., Krichevsky, A., Schornack, S., 
Lahaye, T., Tzfira, T., & Tang, Y., et al. 
(2007). Arabidopsis VIRE2 INTERACTING 
PROTEIN2 is required for Agrobacterium 
T-DNA integration in plants. Plant Cell, 19, 
1695–1708.

Anand, A., Uppalapati, S. R., Ryu, C. M., 
Allen, S. N., Kang, L., & Tang, Y., et al. 
(2008). Salicylic acid and systemic acquired 
resistance play a role in attenuating crown 
gall disease caused by Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens. Plant Physiology, 146, 
703–715.

Bako, L., Umeda, M., Tiburcio, A. F., Schell, J.,  

& Koncz, C. (2003). The VirD2 pilot 
protein of Agrobacterium-transferred DNA 
interacts with the TATA box-binding protein 
and a nuclear protein kinase in plants. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
100, 10108–10113.

Ballas, N., & Citovsky, V. (1997). Nuclear 
localization signal binding protein from 
Arabidopsis mediates nuclear import of 
Agrobacterium VirD2 protein. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 94, 10723–10728.

Banta, L. M., & Montenegro, M. (2008). 

Agrobacterium and plant biotechnology. In
T. Tzfira & V. Citovsky (Eds.), Agrobacterium 
(pp. 73–147). New York: Springer.

Becker, D. (1990). Binary vectors which allow 

the exchange of plant selectable markers 
and reporter genes. Nucleic Acids Research, 
18, 203.

Becker, D., Kemper, E., Schell, J., & Masterson, 

R. (1992). New plant binary vectors with 
selectable markers located proximal to the 
left T-DNA border. Plant Molecular Biology, 
20, 1195–1197.

Bevan, M. W. (1984). Binary Agrobacterium 
vectors for plant transformation. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 12, 1811–1821.

Bhattacharjee, S., Lee, L. Y., Oltmanns, H., 
Cao, H., Veena, Cuperus, J., & Gelvin, 
S. B. (2008). IMPa-4, an Arabidopsis 
importin alpha isoform, is preferentially 
involved in Agrobacterium-mediated plant 
transformation. Plant Cell, 20, 2661–2680.

Britt, A. B., & May, G. D. (2003). Re-

engineering plant gene targeting. Trends in 
Plant Science, 8, 90–95.

Britton, M. T., Escobar, M. A., & Dandekar,  

A. M. (2008). The oncogenes of 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens and 
Agrobacterium rhizogenes. In T. Tzfira & V. 
Citovsky (Eds.), Agrobacterium (pp. 524–
563). New York: Springer.

Cai, C. Q., Doyon, Y., Ainley, W. M., Miller, J. 
C., Dekelver, R. C., & Moehle, E. A., et al. 
(2009). Targeted transgene integration in plant 
cells using designed zinc finger nucleases. 
Plant Molecular Biology, 69, 699–709.

Camenisch, T. D., Brilliant, M. H., & Segal, 

D. J. (2008). Critical parameters for 
genome editing using zinc finger nucleases. 
Mini Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry, 8, 
669–676.

Carroll, D. (2004). Using nucleases to stimulate 

homologous recombination. Methods in 
Molecular Biology, 262, 195–207.

Carroll, D., Morton, J. J., Beumer, K. J., & 

Segal, D. J. (2006). Design, construction 
and in vitro testing of zinc finger nucleases. 
Nature Protocols, 1, 1329–1341.

Chakrabarty, R., Banerjee, R., Chung, S. -M., 

Farman, M., Citovsky, V., & Hogenhout, 
S. A., et al. (2007). pSITE vectors for 
stable integration or transient expression of 
autofluorescent protein fusions in plants: 
Probing Nicotiana benthamiana-virus 
interactions. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 20, 740–750.

Chen, P. -Y., Wang, C. -K., Soong, S. -C., & To, 

K. -Y. (2003). Complete sequence of the 
binary vector pBI121 and its application in 
cloning T-DNA insertion from transgenic 
plants. Molecular Breeding, 11, 287–293.
Chen, Q. J., Xie, M., Ma, X. X., Dong, L.,  

Chen, J., Wang, X. C. (2010) MISSA 
is a highly efficient in vivo DNA 
assembly method for plant multiple-gene 
transformation. Plant Physiology 153, 
41–51.

Chen, Q. J., Zhou, H. M., Chen, J., & Wang, 
X. C. (2006). A Gateway-based platform 
for multigene plant transformation. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 62, 927–936.

Cheng, M., Fry, J. E., Pang, S., Zhou, H., 

Hironaka, C. M., & Duncan, D. R., et al. 
(1997). Genetic transformation of wheat 
mediated by Agrobacterium tumefaciens. 
Plant Physiology, 115, 971–980.

Cheo, D. L., Titus, S. A., Byrd, D. R., Hartley, 

J. L., Temple, G. F., & Brasch, M. A. (2004). 
Concerted assembly and cloning of multiple 
DNA segments using in vitro site-specific 
recombination: Functional analysis of 
multi-segment expression clones. Genome 
Research, 14, 2111–2120.

Chilton, M. -D., & Que, Q. (2003). Targeted 

integration of T-DNA into the tobacco 
genome at double-strand breaks: New 
insights on the mechanism of T-DNA 
integration. Plant Physiology, 133, 956–965.

Chiurazzi, M., Ray, A., Viret, J. F., Perera, R., 
Wang, X. H., & Lloyd, A. M., et al. (1996). 
Enhancement of somatic intrachromosomal 
homologous recombination in Arabidopsis 
by the HO endonuclease. Plant Cell, 8, 
2057–2066.

Christie, P. J., Atmakuri, K., Krishnamoorthy, V.,  

Jakubowski, S., & Cascales, E. (2005). 
Biogenesis, architecture, and function of 
bacterial type IV secretion systems. Annual 
Review of Microbiology, 59, 451–485.

Christie, P. J., & Cascales, E. (2005). Structural 

and dynamic properties of bacterial type 
IV secretion systems. Molecular Membrane 
Biology, 22, 51–61.

Chung, S. M., Frankman, E. L., & Tzfira, 

T. (2005). A versatile vector system for 
multiple gene expression in plants. Trends in 
Plant Science, 10, 357–361.

Citovsky, V., Guralnick, B., Simon, M. N., & 

Wall, J. S. (1997). The molecular structure 
of Agrobacterium VirE2-single stranded 
DNA complexes involved in nuclear import. 
Journal of Molecular Biology, 271, 718–727.

Citovsky, V., Kapelnikov, A., Oliel, S., Zakai, 

N., Rojas, M. R., & Gilbertson, R. L.,  
et al. (2004). Protein interactions involved 
in nuclear import of the Agrobacterium 
VirE2 protein in vivo and in vitro. Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, 279, 29528–29533.

Citovsky, V., Kozlovsky, S. V., Lacroix, B., 

Zaltsman, A., Dafny-Yelin, M., & Vyas, S., 
et al. (2007). Biological systems of the host 
cell involved in Agrobacterium infection. 
Cellular Microbiology, 9, 9–20.

Citovsky, V., Warnick, D., & Zambryski, P. C. 
(1994). Nuclear import of Agrobacterium 
VirD2 and VirE2 proteins in maize and 
tobacco. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 91, 3210–3214.

Citovsky, V., Wong, M. L., & Zambryski, P. C. 

 (1989). Cooperative interaction of 
Agrobacterium VirE2 protein with single 
stranded DNA: Implications for the T-DNA 
transfer process. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 86, 1193–1197.

111

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Citovsky, V., Zupan, J., Warnick, D., & 

Zambryski, P. C. (1992). Nuclear 
localization of Agrobacterium VirE2 protein 
in plant cells. Science, 256, 1802–1805.
Curtis, M. D., & Grossniklaus, U. (2003). 
A Gateway cloning vector set for high-
throughput functional analysis of genes in 
planta. Plant Physiology, 133, 462–469.
Dafny-Yelin, M., Chung, S. -M., Frankman, 

E. L., & Tzfira, T. (2007). pSAT RNA 
interference vectors: A modular series for 
multiple gene down-regulation in plants. 
Plant Physiology, 145, 1272–1281.

Dafny-Yelin, M., Levy, A., & Tzfira, T. (2008). 

The ongoing saga of Agrobacterium-host 
interactions. Trends in Plant Science, 13, 
102–105.

Dafny-Yelin, M., & Tzfira, T. (2007). Delivery 
of multiple transgenes to plant cells. Plant 
Physiology, 145, 1118–1128.

de Pater, S., Neuteboom, L. W., Pinas, J. 

E., Hooykaas, P. J., & van der Zaal, B. J. 
(2009). ZFN-induced mutagenesis and 
gene-targeting in Arabidopsis through 
Agrobacterium-mediated floral dip 
transformation. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 
7, 821–835.

Deng, W., Chen, L., Wood, D. W., Metcalfe, T., 

Liang, X., & Gordon, M. P., et al. (1998). 
Agrobacterium VirD2 protein interacts with 
plant host cyclophilins. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 95, 7040–7045.

Ditt, R. F., Kerr, K. F., de Figueiredo, P., 

Delrow, J., Comai, L., & Nester, E. 
W. (2006). The Arabidopsis thaliana 
transcriptome in response to Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 19, 665–681.

Ditt, R. F., Nester, E. W., & Comai, L. 

(2001). Plant gene expression response to 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 10954–10959.
Ditt, R. F., Nester, E., & Comai, L. (2005). 

The plant cell defense and Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 
247, 207–213.

Djamei, A., Pitzschke, A., Nakagami, H., Rajh, 
I., & Hirt, H. (2007). Trojan horse strategy 
in Agrobacterium transformation: Abusing 
MAPK defense signaling. Science, 318, 
453–456.

Durai, S., Mani, M., Kandavelou, K., Wu, 

J., Porteus, M. H., & Chandrasegaran, S. 
(2005). Zinc finger nucleases: Custom-
designed molecular scissors for genome 
engineering of plant and mammalian cells. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 33, 5978–5990.

Earley, K. W., Haag, J. R., Pontes, O., Opper, 
K., Juehne, T., & Song, K., et al. (2006). 
Gateway-compatible vectors for plant 
functional genomics and proteomics. Plant 
Journal, 45, 616–629.

Ebinuma, H., Sugita, K., Matsunaga, E., & 

Yamakado, M. (1997). Selection of marker-
free transgenic plants using the isopentenyl 
transferase gene. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 94, 2117–2121.

Endo, M., Ishikawa, Y., Osakabe, K., Nakayama, 

S., Kaya, H., & Araki, T., et al. (2006). 
Increased frequency of homologous 

112

recombination and T-DNA integration in 
Arabidopsis CAF-1 mutants. The EMBO 
Journal, 25, 5579–5590.

Endo, M., Osakabe, K., Ichikawa, H., & Toki, 

S. (2006). Molecular characterization of 
true and ectopic gene targeting events at the 
acetolactate synthase gene in Arabidopsis. 
Plant and Cell Physiology, 47, 372–379.

Endo, M., Osakabe, K., Ono, K., Handa, H., 
Shimizu, T., & Toki, S. (2007). Molecular 
breeding of a novel herbicide-tolerant rice by 
gene targeting. Plant Journal, 52, 157–166.

Erikson, O., Hertzberg, M., & Nasholm, T. 

(2004). A conditional marker gene allowing 
both positive and negative selection in 
plants. Nature Biotechnology, 22, 455–458.
Feng, J., Vick, B. A., Lee, M. K., Zhang, H. B., 
& Jan, C. C. (2006). Construction of BAC 
and BIBAC libraries from sunflower and 
identification of linkage group-specific clones 
by overgo hybridization. Theoretical And 
Applied Genetics, 113, 23–32.

Friesner, J., & Britt, A. B. (2003). Ku80- and 

DNA ligase IV-deficient plants are sensitive 
to ionizing radiation and defective in T-DNA 
integration. Plant Journal, 34, 427–440.

Frisch, D. A., Harris-Haller, L. W., Yokubaitis, 

N. T., Thomas, T. L., Hardin, S. H., & 
Hall, T. C. (1995). Complete sequence of 
the binary vector Bin 19. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 27, 405–409.

Gallego, M. E., Sirand-Pugnet, P., & White, 
C. I. (1999). Positive-negative selection 
and T-DNA stability in Arabidopsis 
transformation. Plant Molecular Biology, 39, 
83–93.

Gardiner, D. M., & Howlett, B. J. (2004). 

Negative selection using thymidine kinase 
increases the efficiency of recovery of 
transformants with targeted genes in the 
filamentous fungus Leptosphaeria maculans. 
Current Genetics, 45, 249–255.

Gaspar, Y. M., Nam, J., Schultz, C. J., Lee, 
L. Y., Gilson, P. R., & Gelvin, S. B., et al. 
(2004). Characterization of the Arabidopsis 
lysine-rich arabinogalactan-protein AtAGP17 
mutant (rat1) that results in a decreased 
efficiency of Agrobacterium transformation. 
Plant Physiology, 135, 2162–2171.
Gasparis, S., Bregier, C., Orczyk, W., 

& Nadolska-Orczyk, A. (2008). 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of 
oat (Avena sativa L.) cultivars via immature 
embryo and leaf explants. Plant Cell 
Reports, 27, 1721–1729.

Gehl, C., Waadt, R., Kudla, J., Mendel, R. R., 

& Hansch, R. (2009). New GATEWAY 
vectors for high throughput analyses of 
protein–protein interactions by bimolecular 
fluorescence complementation. Molecular 
Plant, 2, 1051–1058.

Gelvin, S. B. (2003a). Improving plant genetic 
engineering by manipulating the host. Trends 
in Biotechnology, 21, 95–98.

Gelvin, S. B. (2003b). Agrobacterium-mediated 

plant transformation: The biology behind 
the “gene-jockeying” tool. Microbiology and 
Molecular Biology Reviews, 67, 16–37.

Gelvin, S. B. (2009). Agrobacterium in the 

genomics age. Plant Physiology, 150, 
1665–1676.

Gelvin, S. B. (2010). Plant proteins involved 

in Agrobacterium-mediated genetic 

transformation. Annual Review of 
Phytopathology, 48, 45–68.

Gelvin, S. B., & Kim, S. I. (2007). Effect of 
chromatin upon Agrobacterium T-DNA 
integration and transgene expression. 
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1769, 
410–421.

Gherbi, H., Gallego, M. E., Jalut, N., Lucht, 

J. M., Hohn, B., & White, C. I. (2001). 
Homologous recombination in planta is 
stimulated in the absence of Rad50. EMBO 
Reports, 2, 287–291.

Goderis, I. J., De Bolle, M. F., Francois, I. E., 

Wouters, P. F., Broekaert, W. F., & Cammue, 
B. P. (2002). A set of modular plant 
transformation vectors allowing flexible 
insertion of up to six expression units. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 50, 17–27.

Hajdukiewicz, P., Svab, Z., & Maliga, P. 

(1994). The small, versatile pPZP family 
of Agrobacterium binary vectors for plant 
transformation. Plant Molecular Biology, 25, 
989–994.

Hamilton, C. M. (1997). A binary-BAC 
system for plant transformation with 
high-molecular-weight DNA. Gene, 200, 
107–116.

Hamilton, C. M., Frary, A., Lewis, C., & 

Tanksley, S. D. (1996). Stable transfer of 
intact high molecular weight DNA into plant 
chromosomes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 93, 9975–9979.

Hanin, M., Mengiste, T., Bogucki, A., & 

Paszkowski, J. (2000). Elevated levels 
of intrachromosomal homologous 
recombination in Arabidopsis overexpressing 
the MIM gene. Plant Journal, 24, 183–189.
Hanin, M., Volrath, S., Bogucki, A., Briker, M., 

Ward, E., & Paszkowski, J. (2001). Gene 
targeting in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 28, 
671–677.

He, R. F., Wang, Y. Y., Du, B., Tang, M., 

You, A. Q., & Zhu, L. L., et al. (2006). 
Development of transformation system 
of rice based on binary bacterial artificial 
chromosome (BIBAC) vector. Yi Chuan Xue 
Bao, 33, 269–276.

He, Y., Jones, H. D., Chen, S., Chen, X. M., 

Wang, D. W., & Li, K. X., et al. (2010). 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation 
of durum wheat (Triticum turgidum L. var. 
durum cv Stewart) with improved efficiency. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 
1567–1581.

Hellens, R. P., Edwards, E. A., Leyland, N. 

R., Bean, S., & Mullineaux, P. M. (2000). 
pGreen: A versatile and flexible binary Ti 
vector for Agrobacterium-mediated plant 
transformation. Plant Molecular Biology, 42, 
819–832.

Hellens, R., Mullineaux, P., & Klee, H. (2000). 
Technical Focus: A guide to Agrobacterium 
binary Ti vectors. Trends in Plant Science, 5, 
446–451.

Helliwell, C., & Waterhouse, P. (2003). 

Constructs and methods for high-throughput 
gene silencing in plants. Methods, 30, 
289–295.

Herrera-Estrella, L., Simpson, J., & Martinez-
Trujillo, M. (2005). Transgenic plants: An 
historical perspective. Methods in Molecular 
Biology, 286, 3–32.

Hoekema, A., Hirsch, P. R., Hooykaas, P. J. 

J., & Schilperoort, R. A. (1983). A binary 
plant vector strategy based on separation 
of vir- and T-region of the Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens Ti-plasmid. Nature, 303, 
179–180.

Hohn, B., & Puchta, H. (1999). Gene therapy 

in plants. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 96, 8321–8323.

Hood, E. E., Gelvin, S. B., Melchers, L. S., & 
Hoekema, A. (1993). New Agrobacterium 
helper plasmids for gene transfer to plants. 
Transgenic Research, 2, 33–50.

Hood, E. E., Helmer, G. L., Fraley, R. T., & 

Chilton, M. D. (1986). The hypervirulence 
of Agrobacterium tumefaciens A281 is 
encoded in a region of pTiBo542 outside 
of T-DNA. Journal of Bacteriology, 168, 
1291–1301.

Hooykaas, P. J. J., & Beijersbergen, A. G. 

M. (1994). The virulence system of 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Annual Review 
of Phytopathology, 32, 157–179.

Hrouda, M., & Paszkowski, J. (1994). 

High fidelity extrachromosomal 
recombination and gene targeting in plants. 
Molecular & General Genetics, 243, 
106–111. 

Husaini, A. M. (2009). Pre- and post-

agroinfection strategies for efficient leaf 
disk transformation and regeneration of 
transgenic strawberry plants. Plant Cell 
Reports, 29, 97–110.

Husaini, A. M., & Abdin, M. Z. (2008). 

Development of transgenic strawberry 
(Fragaria  ananassa Duch.) plants tolerant 
to salt stress. Plant Science, 174, 446–455.
Hwang, H. H., & Gelvin, S. B. (2004). Plant 

proteins that interact with VirB2, the 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens pilin protein, 
mediate plant transformation. Plant Cell, 
16, 3148–3167.

Iida, S., & Terada, R. (2005). Modification of 

endogenous natural genes by gene targeting 
in rice and other higher plants. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 59, 205–219.

Jefferson, R. A., Kavanagh, T. A., & Bevan, M. 

W. (1987). GUS fusions: Beta-glucuronidase 
as a sensitive and versatile gene fusion 
marker in higher plants. The EMBO Journal, 
6, 3901–3907.

Johzuka-Hisatomi, Y., Terada, R., & Iida, S. 
(2008). Efficient transfer of base changes 
from a vector to the rice genome by 
homologous recombination: Involvement 
of heteroduplex formation and mismatch 
correction. Nucleic Acids Research, 36, 
4727–4735.

Karimi, M., De Meyer, B., & Hilson, P. (2005). 

Modular cloning in plant cells. Trends in 
Plant Science, 10, 103–105.

Karimi, M., Depicker, A., & Hilson, P. (2007). 
Recombinational cloning with plant gateway 
vectors. Plant Physiology, 145, 1144–1154.

Kirik, A., Pecinka, A., Wendeler, E., & Reiss, 

B. (2006). The chromatin assembly 
factor subunit FASCIATA1 is involved in 
homologous recombination in plants. Plant 
Cell, 18, 2431–2442.

Koizumi, N., & Iwata, Y. (2008). Construction 

of a binary vector for transformation of 

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation

C H A P T E R   7

Arabidopsis thaliana with a new selection 
marker. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and 
Biochemistry, 72, 3041–3043.

Kole, C., & Hall, T. C. (2008). Compendium of 
transgenic crop plants, 10 volume set. Wiley-
Blackwell.

Komari, T., Takakura, Y., Ueki, J., Kato, N., 

Ishida, Y., & Hiei, Y. (2006). Binary vectors 
and super-binary vectors. Methods in 
Molecular Biology, 343, 15–41.

Koprek, T., McElroy, D., Louwerse, J., 

Williams-Carrier, R., & Lemaux, P. G. 
(1999). Negative selection systems for 
transgenic barley (Hordeum vulgare 
L.): Comparison of bacterial codA- and 
cytochrome P450 gene-mediated selection. 
Plant Journal, 19, 719–726.

Kumar, S., Allen, G. C., & Thompson, W. F. 
(2006). Gene targeting in plants: Fingers 
on the move. Trends in Plant Science, 11, 
159–161.

Kumar, S., & Fladung, M. (2001). Controlling 

transgene integration in plants. Trends in 
Plant Science, 6, 155–159.

Lacroix, B., & Citovsky, V. (2009). 

Agrobacterium aiming for the host 
chromatin: Host and bacterial proteins 
involved in interactions between T-DNA 
and plant nucleosomes. Communicative & 
Integrative Biology, 2, 42–45.

Lacroix, B., Elbaum, M., Citovsky, V., & 

Tzfira, T. (2008a). Intracellular transport 
of Agrobacterium T-DNA. In T. Tzfira & V. 
Citovsky (Eds.), Agrobacterium (pp. 365–
394). New York: Springer.

Lacroix, B., Loyter, A., & Citovsky, V. (2008b). 

Association of the Agrobacterium T-DNA-
protein complex with plant nucleosomes. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
105, 15429–15434.

Lacroix, B., Tzfira, T., Vainstein, A., & 

Citovsky, V. (2006). A case of promiscuity: 
Agrobacterium’s endless hunt for new 
partners. Trends in Genetics, 22, 29–37.

Lacroix, B., Vaidya, M., Tzfira, T., & Citovsky, V. 
(2005). The VirE3 protein of Agrobacterium 
mimics a host cell function required for 
plant genetic transformation. The EMBO 
Journal, 24, 428–437.

Lee, K. Y., Lund, P., Lowe, K., & Dunsmuir, 
P. (1990). Homologous recombination in 
plant cells after Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation. Plant Cell, 2, 415–425.
Lee, L. Y., & Gelvin, S. B. (2008). T-DNA 

binary vectors and systems. Plant Physiology, 
146, 325–332.

Lee, L. Y., Kononov, M. E., Bassuner, B., 

Frame, B. R., Wang, K., & Gelvin, S. B. 
(2007). Novel plant transformation vectors 
containing the superpromoter. Plant 
Physiology, 145, 1294–1300.

Li, J., Krichevsky, A., Vaidya, M., Tzfira, T., 

& Citovsky, V. (2005). Uncoupling of 
the functions of the Arabidopsis VIP1 
protein in transient and stable plant 
genetic transformation by Agrobacterium. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
102, 5733–5738.

Li, J., Vaidya, M., White, C., Vainstein, 
A., Citovsky, V., & Tzfira, T. (2005). 

Involvement of KU80 in T-DNA integration 
in plant cells. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 102, 19231–19236.

Li, Y., Uhm, T., Ren, C., Wu, C., Santos,  

T. S., & Lee, M. K., et al. (2007). A plant-
transformation-competent BIBAC/BAC-
based map of rice for functional analysis and 
genetic engineering of its genomic sequence. 
Genome, 50, 278–288.

Lin, L., Liu, Y. G., Xu, X., & Li, B. (2003). 
Efficient linking and transfer of multiple 
genes by a multigene assembly and 
transformation vector system. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 100, 5962–5967.

Liu, Y. G., Shirano, Y., Fukaki, H., Yanai, Y., 

Tasaka, M., & Tabata, S., et al. (1999). 
Complementation of plant mutants 
with large genomic DNA fragments by 
a transformation-competent artificial 
chromosome vector accelerates positional 
cloning. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 96, 6535–6540.

Lloyd, A., Plaisier, C. L., Carroll, D., & Drews, 

G. N. (2005). Targeted mutagenesis 
using zinc-finger nucleases in Arabidopsis. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
102, 2232–2237.

Mansour, S. L., Thomas, K. R., & Capecchi, M. 
R. (1988). Disruption of the proto-oncogene 
int-2 in mouse embryo-derived stem cells: 
A general strategy for targeting mutations to 
non-selectable genes. Nature, 336, 348–352.

Miao, Z. H., & Lam, E. (1995). Targeted 

disruption of the TGA3 locus in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Plant Journal, 7, 359–365.

Michielse, C. B., Hooykaas, P. J., van den 
Hondel, C. A., & Ram, A. F. (2005). 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation 
as a tool for functional genomics in fungi. 
Current Genetics, 48, 1–17.

Miki, B., & McHugh, S. (2004). Selectable 

marker genes in transgenic plants: 
Applications, alternatives and biosafety. 
Journal of Biotechnology, 107, 193–232.

Molinier, J., Ramos, C., Fritsch, O., & Hohn, B. 
(2004). CENTRIN2 modulates homologous 
recombination and nucleotide excision repair 
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 16, 1633–1643.

Mysore, K. S., Nam, J., & Gelvin, S. B. (2000). 

An Arabidopsis histone H2A mutant 
is deficient in Agrobacterium T-DNA 
integration. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 97, 948–953.

Nam, J., Mysore, K. S., Zheng, C., Knue, M. K., 

Matthysse, A. G., & Gelvin, S. B. (1999). 
Identification of T-DNA tagged Arabidopsis 
mutants that are resistant to transformation 
by Agrobacterium. Molecular & General 
Genetics, 261, 429–438.

Narasimhulu, S. B., Deng, X. -B., Sarria, R., & 
Gelvin, S. B. (1996). Early transcription of 
Agrobacterium T-DNA genes in tobacco and 
maize. Plant Cell, 8, 873–886.

Offringa, R., de Groot, M. J., Haagsman, 

H. J., Does, M. P., van den Elzen, P. J., & 
Hooykaas, P. J. (1990). Extrachromosomal 
homologous recombination and gene 
targeting in plant cells after Agrobacterium 

113

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

mediated transformation. The EMBO 
Journal, 9, 3077–3084.

Orel, N., Kyryk, A., & Puchta, H. (2003). 

Different pathways of homologous 
recombination are used for the repair of 
double-strand breaks within tandemly 
arranged sequences in the plant genome. 
Plant Journal, 35, 604–612.

Osakabe, K., Osakabe, Y., & Toki, S. (2010). 
Site-directed mutagenesis in Arabidopsis 
using custom-designed zinc finger nucleases. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
107, 12034–12039.

Paques, F., & Duchateau, P. (2007). 

Meganucleases and DNA double-strand 
break-induced recombination: Perspectives 
for gene therapy. Current Gene Therapy, 7, 
49–66.

Paszkowski, J., Baur, M., Bogucki, A., & 

Potrykus, I. (1988). Gene targeting in 
plants. The EMBO Journal, 7, 4021–4026.
Pitzschke, A., & Hirt, H. (2010). New insights 

into an old story: Agrobacterium-induced 
tumour formation in plants by plant 
transformation. The EMBO Journal, 29, 
1021–1032.

Porteus, M. H. (2009). Plant biotechnology: 
Zinc fingers on target. Nature, 459, 337–
338.

Porteus, M. H., & Carroll, D. (2005). Gene 

targeting using zinc finger nucleases. Nature 
Biotechnology, 23, 967–973.

Przetakiewicz, A., Karas, A., Orczyk, 

W., & Nadolska-Orczyk, A. (2004). 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of 
polyploid cereals. The efficiency of selection 
and transgene expression in wheat. Cellular 
& Molecular Biology Letters, 9, 903–917.

Puchta, H. (2002). Gene replacement by 

homologous recombination in plants. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 48, 173–182.

Puchta, H. (2003). Towards the ideal GMP: 

Homologous recombination and marker gene 
excision. Journal of Plant Physiology, 160, 
743–754.

Puchta, H. (2005). The repair of double-

strand breaks in plants: Mechanisms and 
consequences for genome evolution. Journal 
of Experimental Botany, 56, 1–14.

Puchta, H., Dujon, B., & Hohn, B. (1996). Two 

different but related mechanisms are used 
in plants for the repair of genomic double-
strand breaks by homologous recombination. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 93, 
5055–5060.

Puchta, H., & Hohn, B. (2005). Green light for 

gene targeting in plants. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 102, 11961–11962.

Reiss, B., Schubert, I., Kopchen, K., Wendeler, 

E., Schell, J., & Puchta, H. (2000). RecA 
stimulates sister chromatid exchange and the 
fidelity of double-strand break repair, but 
not gene targeting, in plants transformed by 
Agrobacterium. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 97, 3358–3363.

Risseeuw, E., Offringa, R., Franke-van Dijk, 
M. E., & Hooykaas, P. J. (1995). Targeted 
recombination in plants using Agrobacterium 

114

coincides with additional rearrangements at 
the target locus. Plant Journal, 7, 109–119.

Salman, H., Abu-Arish, A., Oliel, S., Loyter, 
A., Klafter, J., & Granel, R., et al. (2005). 
Nuclear localization signal peptides induce 
molecular delivery along microtubules. 
Biophysical Journal, 89, 2134–2145.

Salomon, S., & Puchta, H. (1998). Capture 
of genomic and T-DNA sequences during 
double-strand break repair in somatic plant 
cells. The EMBO Journal, 17, 6086–6095.

Sasaki, Y., Sone, T., Yoshida, S., Yahata, K., 

Hotta, J., & Chesnut, J. D., et al. (2004). 
Evidence for high specificity and efficiency 
of multiple recombination signals in mixed 
DNA cloning by the Multisite Gateway 
system. Journal of Biotechnology, 107, 
233–243.

Schrammeijer, B., Risseeuw, E., Pansegrau, W., 

Regensburg-Tuïnk, T. J. G., Crosby, W. L., 
& Hooykaas, P. J. J. (2001). Interaction of 
the virulence protein VirF of Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens with plant homologs of the yeast 
Skp1 protein. Current Biology, 11, 258–262.
Shaked, H., Melamed-Bessudo, C., & Levy, A. 

A. (2005). High frequency gene targeting 
in Arabidopsis plants expressing the yeast 
RAD54 gene. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 102, 12265–12269.

Shalev, G., Sitrit, Y., Avivi-Ragolski, N., 

Lichtenstein, C., & Levy, A. A. (1999). 
Stimulation of homologous recombination 
in plants by expression of the bacterial 
resolvase ruvC. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 96, 7398–7402.

Sheikholeslam, S. N., & Weeks, D. P. (1987). 
Acetosyringone promotes high efficiency 
transformation of Arabidopsis thaliana 
explants by Agrobacterium tumefaciens. 
Plant Cell Reports, 8, 291–298.

Shukla, V. K., Doyon, Y., Miller, J. C., Dekelver, 

R. C., Moehle, E. A., & Worden, S. E., et 
al. (2009). Precise genome modification in 
the crop species Zea mays using zinc-finger 
nucleases. Nature, 459, 437–441.

Shurvinton, C. E., Hodges, L., & Ream, L. 
W. (1992). A nuclear localization signal 
and the C-terminal omega sequence in 
the Agrobacterium tumefaciens VirD2 
endonuclease are important for tumor 
formation. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 89, 11837–11841.

Siebert, R., & Puchta, H. (2002). Efficient 

repair of genomic double-strand breaks by 
homologous recombination between directly 
repeated sequences in the plant genome. 
Plant Cell, 14, 1121–1131.

Soltani, J., van Heusden, G. P. H., & Hooykaas, 

P. J. (2008). Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformation of non-plant organisms. In T. 
Tzfira & V. Citovsky (Eds.), Agrobacterium 
(pp. 650–674). New York: Springer.

Song, J., Bradeen, J. M., Naess, S. K., Helgeson, 

J. P., & Jiang, J. (2003). BIBAC and TAC 
clones containing potato genomic DNA 
fragments larger than 100 kb are not stable 
in Agrobacterium. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 107, 958–964.

Stachel, S. E., Messens, E., Van Montagu, M., 

& Zambryski, P. C. (1985). Identification of 

the signal molecules produced by wounded 
plant cell that activate T-DNA transfer in 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Nature, 318, 
624–629.

Sundar, I. K., & Sakthivel, N. (2008). Advances 

in selectable marker genes for plant 
transformation. Journal of Plant Physiology, 
165, 1698–1716.

Takeda, S., Tadele, Z., Hofmann, I., Probst, A. 
V., Angelis, K. J., & Kaya, H., et al. (2004). 
BRU1, a novel link between responses to 
DNA damage and epigenetic gene silencing 
in Arabidopsis. Genes & Development, 18, 
782–793.

Tanaka, S., Ishii, C., Hatakeyama, S., & 

Inoue, H. (2010). High efficient gene 
targeting on the AGAMOUS gene in an 
Arabidopsis AtLIG4 mutant. Biochemical 
and Biophysical Research Communications, 
396, 289–293.

Tao, Q., & Zhang, H. B. (1998). Cloning and 

stable maintenance of DNA fragments over 
300 kb in Escherichia coli with conventional 
plasmid-based vectors. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 26, 4901–4909.

Tao, Y., Rao, P. K., Bhattacharjee, S., & Gelvin, 

S. B. (2004). Expression of plant protein 
phosphatase 2C interferes with nuclear 
import of the Agrobacterium T-complex 
protein VirD2. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 101, 5164–5169.

Tenea, G. N., Spantzel, J., Lee, L. Y., Zhu, 

Y., Lin, K., & Johnson, S. J., et al. (2009). 
Overexpression of several Arabidopsis 
histone genes increases Agrobacterium-
mediated transformation and transgene 
expression in plants. Plant Cell, 21, 3350–
3367.

Terada, R., Johzuka-Hisatomi, Y., Saitoh, 
M., Asao, H., & Iida, S. (2007). Gene 
targeting by homologous recombination as 
a biotechnological tool for rice functional 
genomics. Plant Physiology, 144, 846–856.
Terada, R., Urawa, H., Inagaki, Y., Tsugane, K., 
& Iida, S. (2002). Efficient gene targeting by 
homologous recombination in rice. Nature 
Biotechnology, 20, 1030–1034.

Thole, V., Worland, B., Snape, J. W., & Vain, P. 

(2007). The pCLEAN dual binary vector 
system for Agrobacterium-mediated plant 
transformation. Plant Physiology, 145, 
1211–1219.

Thykjaer, T., Finnemann, J., Schauser, L., 

Christensen, L., Poulsen, C., & Stougaard, 
J. (1997). Gene targeting approaches using 
positive-negative selection and large flanking 
regions. Plant Molecular Biology, 35, 
523–530.

Tovar, J., & Lichtenstein, C. (1992). Somatic 
and meiotic chromosomal recombination 
between inverted duplications in transgenic 
tobacco plants. Plant Cell, 4, 319–332.
Tovkach, A., Zeevi, V., & Tzfira, T. (2009). 

A toolbox and procedural notes for 
characterizing novel zinc finger nucleases for 
genome editing in plant cells. Plant Journal, 
57, 747–757.

Townsend, J. A., Wright, D. A., Winfrey, R. J., 

Fu, F., Maeder, M. L., & Joung, J. K.,  
et al. (2009). High-frequency modification 
of plant genes using engineered zinc-finger 
nucleases. Nature, 459, 442–445.

Tzfira, T., & Citovsky, V. (2001). Comparison 

between nuclear import of nopaline- 
and octopine-specific VirE2 protein of 
Agrobacterium in plant and animal cells. 
Molecular Plant Pathology, 2, 171–176.
Tzfira, T., & Citovsky, V. (2002). Partners-

in-infection: Host proteins involved 
in the transformation of plant cells by 
Agrobacterium. Trends in Cell Biology, 12, 
121–129.

Tzfira, T., & Citovsky, V. (2006). 

Agrobacterium-mediated genetic 
transformation of plants: Biology and 
biotechnology. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 17, 147–154.

Tzfira, T., Frankmen, L., Vaidya, M., & Citovsky, 

V. (2003). Site-specific integration of 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens T-DNA via 
double-stranded intermediates. Plant 
Physiology, 133, 1011–1023.

Tzfira, T., Lacroix, B., & Citovsky, V. (2005). 
Nuclear Import of Agrobacterium T-DNA. 
In T. Tzfira & V. Citovsky (Eds.), Nuclear 
Import and Export in Plants and Animals 
(pp. 83–99). New York: Landes Bioscience/
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.

Tzfira, T., Li, J., Lacroix, B., & Citovsky, V. 

(2004). Agrobacterium T-DNA integration: 
Molecules and models. Trends in Genetics, 
20, 375–383.

Tzfira, T., Tian, G. -W., Lacroix, B., Vyas, S., 
Li, J., & Leitner-Dagan, Y., et al. (2005). 
pSAT vectors: A modular series of plasmids 
for autofluorescent protein tagging and 
expression of multiple genes in plants. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 57, 503–516.

Tzfira, T., Vaidya, M., & Citovsky, V. (2001). 

VIP1, an Arabidopsis protein that interacts 
with Agrobacterium VirE2, is involved in 
VirE2 nuclear import and Agrobacterium 
infectivity. The EMBO Journal, 20, 3596–
3607.

Tzfira, T., Vaidya, M., & Citovsky, V. 

(2002). Increasing plant susceptibility to 
Agrobacterium infection by overexpression 
of the Arabidopsis nuclear protein VIP1. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 99, 
10435–10440.

Tzfira, T., Vaidya, M., & Citovsky, V. (2004). 

Involvement of targeted proteolysis in plant 
genetic transformation by Agrobacterium. 
Nature, 431, 87–92.

van Attikum, H., Bundock, P., & Hooykaas, P. 
J. J. (2001). Non-homologous end-joining 
proteins are required for Agrobacterium 
T-DNA integration. The EMBO Journal, 20, 
6550–6558.

van Attikum, H., & Hooykaas, P. J. J. (2003). 

Genetic requirements for the targeted 
integration of Agrobacterium T-DNA in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 31, 826–832.

van Engelen, F. A., Molthoff, J. W., Conner, A. 

J., Nap, J. P., Pereira, A., & Stiekema, W. 
J. (1995). pBINPLUS: An improved plant 
transformation vector based on pBIN19. 
Transgenic Research, 4, 288–290.

Veena, , Jiang, H., Doerge, R. W., & Gelvin, 
S. B. (2003). Transfer of T-DNA and Vir 
proteins to plant cells by Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens induces expression of host genes 
involved in mediating transformation and 

Agrobacterium-mediated plant genetic transformation

C H A P T E R   7

suppresses host defense gene expression. 
Plant Journal, 35, 219–236.

Vega, J. M., Yu, W., Han, F., Kato, A., Peters, 

E. M., & Zhang, Z. J., et al. (2008). 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of 
maize (Zea mays) with Cre-lox site specific 
recombination cassettes in BIBAC vectors. 
Plant Molecular Biology, 66, 587–598.

Vergunst, A. C., Schrammeijer, B., den Dulk-
Ras, A., de Vlaam, C. M. T., Regensburg-
Tuink, T. J., & Hooykaas, P. J. J. (2000). 
VirB/D4-dependent protein translocation 
from Agrobacterium into plant cells. Science, 
290, 979–982.

Vergunst, A. C., van Lier, M. C., den Dulk-Ras, 

A., Grosse Stuve, T. A., Ouwehand, A., 
& Hooykaas, P. J. (2005). Positive charge 
is an important feature of the C-terminal 
transport signal of the VirB/D4-translocated 
proteins of Agrobacterium. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 102, 832–837.

Wakasa, Y., Yasuda, H., & Takaiwa, F. (2006). 

High accumulation of bioactive peptide 
in transgenic rice seeds by expression 
of introduced multiple genes. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 4, 499–510.

Wang, K. (2006a). Agrobacterium protocols 

(Vol. 1). Humana Press.

Wang, K. (2006b). Agrobacterium protocols 

(Vol. 2). Humana Press.

Wang, K., Stachel, S. E., Timmerman, B., 
Van Montagu, M., & Zambryski, P. C. 
(1987). Site-specific nick occurs within the 
25 bp transfer promoting border sequence 
following induction of vir gene expression 
in Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Science, 235, 
587–591.

Weinthal, D., Tovkach, A., Zeevi, V., & Tzfira, 
T. (2010). Genome editing in plant cells by 
zinc finger nucleases. Trends in Plant Science, 
15, 308–321.

West, C. E., Waterworth, W. M., Story, G. 

W., Sunderland, P. A., Jiang, Q., & Bray, C. 
M. (2002). Disruption of the Arabidopsis 
AtKu80 gene demonstrates an essential role 
for AtKu80 protein in efficient repair of 
DNA double-strand breaks in vivo. Plant 
Journal, 31, 517–528.

Wright, D. A., Thibodeau-Beganny, S., Sander, 

J. D., Winfrey, R. J., Hirsh, A. S., & 
Eichtinger, M., et al. (2006). Standardized 
reagents and protocols for engineering 
zinc finger nucleases by modular assembly. 
Nature Protocols, 1, 1637–1652.

Wu, J., Kandavelou, K., & Chandrasegaran, 
S. (2007). Custom-designed zinc finger 
nucleases: What is next? Cellular and 
Molecular Life Sciences, 64, 2933–2944.
Xiang, C., Han, P., Lutziger, I., Wang, K., & 

Oliver, D. J. (1999). A mini binary vector 
series for plant transformation. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 40, 711–717.
Xiao, Y. L., & Peterson, T. (2000). 
Intrachromosomal homologous 
recombination in Arabidopsis induced by 
a maize transposon. Molecular & General 
Genetics, 263, 22–29.

Xiaohui Wang, H., Viret, J. F., Eldridge, A., 
Perera, R., Signer, E. R., & Chiurazzi, M. 
(2001). Positive-negative selection for 
homologous recombination in Arabidopsis. 
Gene, 272, 249–255.

Yamauchi, T., Johzuka-Hisatomi, Y., Fukada-

Tanaka, S., Terada, R., Nakamura, I., & Iida, 
S. (2009). Homologous recombination-
mediated knock-in targeting of the 
MET1a gene for a maintenance DNA 
methyltransferase reproducibly reveals 
dosage-dependent spatiotemporal gene 
expression in rice. Plant Journal, 60, 
386–396.

Yuan, Z. C., Edlind, M. P., Liu, P., Saenkham, 

P., Banta, L. M., & Wise, A. A., et al. 
(2007). The plant signal salicylic acid shuts 
down expression of the vir regulon and 
activates quormone-quenching genes in 
Agrobacterium. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 104, 11790–11795.

Zaltsman, A., Krichevsky, A., Loyter, A., & 

Citovsky, V. (2010). Agrobacterium induces 
expression of a host F-box protein required 
for tumorigenicity. Cell Host & Microbe, 7, 
197–209.

Zaltsman, A., Yi, B. Y., Krichevsky, A., Gafni, 

Y., & Citovsky, V. (2007). Yeast-plant 
coupled vector system for identification 
of nuclear proteins. Plant Physiology, 145, 
1264–1271.

Zambryski, P. C., Joos, H., Genetello, 

C., Leemans, J., Van Montagu, M., & 
Schell, J. (1983). Ti plasmid vector for 
the introduction of DNA into plant 
cells without alteration of their normal 
regeneration capacity. The EMBO Journal, 2, 
2143–2150.

Zeevi, V., Tovkach, A., & Tzfira, T. (2008). 

Increasing cloning possibilities using artificial 
zinc finger nucleases. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 105, 12785–12790.
Zeevi, V., Tovkach, A., & Tzfira, T. (2010). 
Artificial zinc finger nucleases for DNA 
cloning. Methods in Molecular Biology, 649, 
209–225.

Zhang, X., Henriques, R., Lin, S. S., Niu, Q. 
W., & Chua, N. H. (2006). Agrobacterium-
mediated transformation of Arabidopsis 
thaliana using the floral dip method. Nature 
Protocols, 1, 641–646.

Zheng, Y., He, X. W., Ying, Y. H., Lu, J. F., 

Gelvin, S. B., & Shou, H. X. (2009). 
Expression of the Arabidopsis thaliana 
histone gene AtHTA1 enhances rice 
transformation efficiency. Molecular Plant, 
2, 832–837.

Zhu, Y., Nam, J., Humara, J. M., Mysore, K. 

S., Lee, L. Y., & Cao, H., et al. (2003). 
Identification of Arabidopsis rat mutants. 
Plant Physiology, 132, 494–505.

Ziemienowicz, A., Görlich, D., Lanka, E., 
Hohn, B., & Rossi, L. (1999). Import of 
DNA into mammalian nuclei by proteins 
originating from a plant pathogenic 
bacterium. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 96, 3729–3733.

Ziemienowicz, A., Merkle, T., Schoumacher, 

F., Hohn, B., & Rossi, L. (2001). Import of 
Agrobacterium T-DNA into plant nuclei: 
Two distinct functions of VirD2 and VirE2 
proteins. Plant Cell, 13, 369–384.

Ziemienowicz, A., Tzfira, T., & Hohn, B. 

(2008). Mechanisms of T-DNA integration. 
In T. Tzfira & V. Citovsky (Eds.), 

115

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

Agrobacterium (pp. 395–440). New York: 
Springer.

Zipfel, C., Kunze, G., Chinchilla, D., Caniard, 
A., Jones, J. D., & Boller, T., et al. (2006). 
Perception of the bacterial PAMP EF-Tu by 

the receptor EFR restricts Agrobacterium-
mediated transformation. Cell, 125, 
749–760.

Zupan, J., Citovsky, V., & Zambryski, P. C. 

(1996). Agrobacterium VirE2 protein 

mediates nuclear uptake of ssDNA in plant 
cells. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
93, 2392–2397.

116

From epigenetics to epigenomics and their 
implications in plant breeding

14

Athanasios Tsaftaris  Aliki Kapazoglou  Nikos Darzentas
Institute of Agrobiotechnology, CERTH, Thermi-Thessaloniki, Greece

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Mechanisms of Epigenetic Inheritance and  
their Interactions   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 207
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .207
Epigenetic mechanisms and their interactions  . . . . . .208
From Epigenetics to Epigenomics  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 212

Deciphering epigenomes: A matter of scale and 
complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .212
Epigenomic methods and the type of data collected  .212
Epigenomic resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .213
Transposable elements on the emerging  
epigenomic landscape(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .216
An illustrative and practical example of data and 
resources integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .217

Epigenetic Phenomena and their Implications  
in Plant Breeding   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 217

Epigenetic controls during vegetative  
development and the role of the environment . . . . . . .217
Epigenetic control of flowering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .219
Endosperm development and parental imprinting . . . .220
Conclusions and Prospects  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 222
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 222
Abbreviations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 222

Mechanisms of Epigenetic 
Inheritance and their Interactions

Introduction

After having different meanings in the last few decades, epige-
netics is now defined as the mitotically (from cell to cell dur-
ing development) and meiotically (from one generation to the 
next) heritable variation that does not entail a change in DNA.

Indicative to the stability of epigenetic variation (epialleles) 
is perhaps the peloric mutant phenotype described by Linnaeus 
250  years  ago.  Peloric  characterizing,  a  change  from  bilateral 
to  radial  flower  symmetry  both  in  Antirrhinum  majus  and 
Linaria vulgaris still showing the same phenotype today, is due 
to an epigenetic change in the cycloidea gene, causing it to be 
silenced.

Almost  35  years  have  passed  since  it  was  proposed  that 
DNA methylation at cytosine residues in eukaryotes could act 
as  a  stably  inherited  epigenetic  modification  controlling  gene 
expression  and  be  involved  in  cellular  differentiation.  Since 
then intense research efforts have expanded the field of epi-
genetics by expanding better understanding of diverse aspects 
of  DNA  methylation  deciphering  the  involvement  of  meth-
ylation  in  multivarious  biological  processes,  and  expanding 
the epigenetic field with the discovery of extra novel mecha-
nisms of epigenetic inheritance. Thus, the ever-expanding list 
of  epigenetic  mechanisms  includes,  beyond  DNA  methyla-
tion, histone protein variants for all four histone proteins par-
ticipating  in  nucleosome  core  formation  and  their  numerous 
covalent modifications, as well as a cloud of small interfering 
RNAs of varying sizes, modes of biogenesis, amplification, and 
targeting.

The  current  explosion  of  different  “omics”  technologies, 
that marked not only the transition from the study of individ-
ual genes and their products to the study of whole genomes, 
but  also  allowed  a  more  integrated  and  holistic  view  of  the 
interrelation  of  different  genomic  and  epigenomic  (genome-
wide map of epigenetic modifications) systems. It was known, 
for  instance,  that  the  different  epigenetic  mechanisms  men-
tioned  do  not  operate  independently  of  each  other.  Histone 
deacetylation and other modifications, particularly the meth-
ylation of lysine 9 within histone H3 (H3K9) of histone tails, 
cause  chromatin  condensation  and  block  transcription.  In 
addition,  histone  modification  can  also  attract  DNA  MTases 
to  initiate  5  methyl  cytosine  (5mC)  formation,  which  in 
turn  can  reinforce  histone  modification  patterns  conducive 
to  silencing  (Tariq  and  Paszkowski,  2004;  Fuks,  2005).  The 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00014-6

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

opposite  is  also  true;  that  is,  DNA  methylation  reinforces 
silencing  by  the  attraction  of  histone  modifications  (meth-
ylation  and  deacetylation),  leading  to  a  more  compact  and 
thus inactive chromatin (Tamaru and Selker, 2001; Tariq and 
Paszkowski, 2004). With the recent advent of RNA interfer-
ence in the epigenetic field, it became clear almost from the 
start that among their other roles, sRNAs also provide a com-
mon  denominator  of  both  DNA  methylation  and/or  histone 
modifications.  Experiments  in  plants  have  clearly  shown  the 
involvement  of  sRNAs  in  the  establishment  of  heterochro-
matic  states  and  silencing  (Wassenegger  et  al.,  1994;Matzke 
et  al.,  2001).  Disruption  of  one  of  these  interacting  systems 
can lead to expression or silencing of genes, resulting in epige-
netically controlled phenotypes.

Work  in  epigenomics  is  now  reinforcing  the  view  for 
the  whole  genome  providing  significant  outputs.  The  very 
recent sequence of the maize genome opens new avenues to 
this  research.  Maize  is  the  largest  plant  genome  to  be  fully 
sequenced  and  characterized.  It  contains  a  high  percentage 
of  transposable  elements  (TEs)  of  different  types,  providing 
an  excellent  opportunity  to  study  and  understand  the  role 
of different TEs in eukaryotic large genome organization and 
function, but most important it provides an understanding of 
the  function  of  epigenomic  mechanisms  as  TE  regulators  at 
a  genomic  level.  Keeping  in  mind  that  TEs  were  discovered 
in  maize  many  years  ago,  thanks  to  the  pioneering  work  of  
B.  McClintock  and  P.  Peterson,  and  that  significant  biologi-
cal  phenomena  involving  epigenetic  phenomena  like  para-
mutation  and  parental  imprinting  of  genes  were  discovered 
and  studied  for  a  long  time  in  maize,  the  opportunities  now 
offered  by  maize  genomic  fields  are  obvious.  Maize  develop-
ment is well studied, but most important is that maize went 
through a domestication process for more than 10,000 years, 
dramatically  changing  its  phenotype,  and  through  intense 
breeding  in  the  last  100  years  increasing  its  yields  almost  
100-fold. This was done mainly by discovering and exploiting 
heterosis in this crop.

In  this  chapter,  after  a  brief  description  of  the  different 
epigenetic  mechanisms,  this  transition  from  epigenetics  to 
epigenomics will be described in the section From Epigenetics 
to  Epigenomics,  together  with  the  genome-wide  methods 
used and the data, resources, and tools available in exploring, 
integrating, and extracting useful information. Finally, the role 
of  epigenomics  in  plant  development,  phenotypic  variation, 
response  to  environmental  cues  and  stresses,  and  the  impli-
cation  of  different  epigenetic  phenomena  in  plant  breeding 
will  be  discussed  in  the  section  Epigenetic  Phenomena  and 
their  Implications  in  Plant  Breeding.  Due  to  space  limita-
tions,  only  indicative  phenomena  like  parental  imprinting 
involved in endosperm size and thus yield in many crops, or 
the epigenetic control of flowering time with implications in 
breeding early or late varieties for many annual crops, will be 
described.

For different topics related to this chapter, there are excel-
lent  recent  reviews  that  will  be  mentioned  accordingly,  but 
the  integrative  approach,  based  on  recent  findings  on  epige-
nomic mechanisms and their implication in plant breeding, is 
the main objective of this chapter.

208

Epigenetic mechanisms and their 
interactions

DNA cytosine methylation
Cytosine-5-methylation  is  a  critical  epigenetic  modification 
that  is  established  and  maintained  by  multiple  interacting 
cellular  mechanisms.  Similar  to  animals,  cytosine  methyla-
tion  in  plants  is  found  predominately  in  a  symmetrical  CG 
dinucleotide  site.  However,  unlike  animals,  it  also  occurs  at 
CHG  and  asymmetric  CHH  sites  (where  H  is  A,  C,  or  T). 
A dynamic interplay between methylation and demethylation 
accomplished  through  specific  enzymes  is  critical  for  proper 
cellular  regulation  during  plant  development.  Distinct  DNA 
methylation mechanisms operate in higher plants involving de 
novo  and  “maintenance”  DNA  methyltransferases  (MTases), 
together  with  DNA  demethylases,  histone-modifying 
enzymes,  chromatin  remodeling  factors,  and  small  interfer-
ing  RNAs  (siRNAs;  Law  and  Jacobsen,  2010).  The  mamma-
lian DNMT1 homolog, METHYLTRANSFERASE 1 (MET1), 
is  responsible  for  maintenance  of  primarily  CG  methyla-
tion,  whereas  the  plant-specific  CHROMOMETHYLASE3 
(CMT3)  interacts  with  H3K9  histone  methyltransferase 
KRYPTONITE  (SUVH4)  and  maintains  DNA  meth-
ylation  at  CHG  sites.  The  DOMAINS  REARRANGED 
METHYLTRANSFERASE  1  and  2  (DRM1/2;  homologs  of 
the  mammalian  DNMT3a/b)  catalyze  de  novo  methylation 
and maintain CHH methylation (Chan et al., 2005).

In  plants,  as  in  other  higher  eukaryotes,  DNA  methyla-
tion  has  been  thought  to  protect  genomes  from  endogenous 
selfish  DNA  elements  (TEs)  and  exogenous  viral  invasions 
(Zilberman, 2008). These elements are usually heavily methyl-
ated  and,  consequently,  transcriptionally  inactive.  In  addition, 
cytosine  methylation  has  a  prominent  role  in  regulating  gene 
expression during plant development and in response to condi-
tions  of  stress  (Zilberman  et  al.,  2007;  Zhu,  2008).Processes 
such as vernalization, flower and seed development, and abiotic 
and  biotic  stress  tolerance,  are  largely  regulated  by  cytosine 
methylation (Chinnusamy and Zhu, 2009a).

Although for several years it has been believed that DNA 
methylation resided in the promoter regions of genes, recent 
studies  based  on  large-scale,  genome-wide  analysis  of  the 
Arabidopsis  “methylome”  (Zhu,  2008;  Cokus  et  al.,  2008; 
Lister  et  al.,  2008)  have  shown  that  at  least  in  this  model 
plant cytosine methylation covers both regulatory regions and 
the “bodies” of genes (exons, introns, and 5 and 3 untrans-
lated  regions).  Of  all  expressed  genes,  about  5%  are  meth-
ylated  in  the  promoters  and  33%  in  transcribed  regions.  In 
plants,  promoter  methylation  usually  leads  to  transcriptional 
repression.  Surprisingly,  body-methylated  genes  showed 
no  or  only  a  moderate  effect  in  gene  expression,  and  were 
transcribed  in  a  less  tissue-specific  manner  than  unmethyl-
ated  genes.  However,  there  are  exceptions  to  these  rules. 
For example, cytosine methylation in the transcribed regions 
of  the  Arabidopsis  floral  genes  SUPERMAN  (SUP)  and 
AGAMOUS  (AG)  results  in  substantial  reduction  in  gene 
expression  (Ito  et  al.,  2003).  Furthermore,  methylation  in  a 
long  distance  element  3  downstream  of  the  gene PHERES1 

From epigenetics to epigenomics and their implications in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 4

(PHE1),  important  in  seed  development  in  Arabidopsis, 
results  in  gene  activation  (Makarevich  et  al.,  2008),  and  a 
recent study of a Petunia floral gene, pMADS3, showed that 
methylation  in  a  particular  CG  was  associated  with  upregu-
lated ectopic gene expression (Shibuya et al., 2009).

Even  though  DNA  methylation  is  a  relatively  stable  epi-
genetic mark, it is subject to passive or active demethylation 
during plant development (Zhu et al., 2007). Passive demeth-
ylation can occur when methylated cytosines are replaced by 
non-modified  cytosines  during  DNA  replication  (Tsaftaris  et 
al., 2008). Active DNA demethylation is achieved by specific 
DNA  glycosylases  through  the  base  excision  repair  pathway, 
which  recognizes  and  removes  methylated  cytosines  (Zhu, 
2009).  The  DNA  glycosylase  DEMETER  (DME)  functions 
only in the central cell of the female gametophyte to establish 
parental  genomic  imprinting  crucial  for  seed  viability  (Choi 
et  al.,  2002;  Huh  et  al.,  2008;  see  the  section  Epigenetic 
Phenomena  and  their  Implications  in  Plant  Breeding).  Its 
homologs  REPRESSOR  OF  SILENCING  (ROS1),  DML2, 
and  DML3  are  expressed  in  vegetative  tissues  and  target 
transposons,  repetitive  elements,  and  small  RNA-generating 
loci  (Agius  et  al.,  2006;  Penterman  et  al.,  2007a).  In  addi-
tion,  they  seem  to  target  loci  that  reside  at  the  boundaries 
of  euchromatin  and  heterochromatin,  where  they  might 
protect  genes  from  deleterious  methylation  (Penterman 
et  al.,  2007b).  Very  recent  reports  on  global  DNA  meth-
ylation  profiling  of  endosperm  and  embryo  genomes  dem-
onstrated  widespread  reduction  of  DNA  methylation  in 
the  endosperm,  particularly  at  regions  corresponding  to  TEs 
and  small  RNAs  (Gehring  et  al.,  2009;  Hsieh  et  al.,  2009). 
These were largely due to DME action in the central cell, the 
progenitor  of  the  endosperm,  which  develops  after  fusion 
of  the  central  cell  with  one  of  the  sperm  cells  of  the  pollen 
(while  the  other  sperm  cell  fuses  to  the  egg  cell  to  produce 
the  embryo).  Although  DME  action  is  restricted  to  the  cen-
tral  cell,  global  demethylation  persists  in  the  developing 
endosperm post-fertilization. These data suggested that DME 
carries  out  less  specific  and  more  global  demethylation  than 
previously thought (see the section Endosperm Development 
and Parental Imprinting).

Unlike  mammals,  which  erase  and  reset  DNA  methyla-
tion  in  embryogenesis,  plants  can  inherit  epigenetic  changes 
through  meiosis.  “Epialleles”  —  phenotypic  variants  that  are 
epigenetically rather than genetically different from their par-
ents  —  are  frequently  encountered  in  plants  and  in  certain 
cases  found  to  be  inherited  by  the  next  progeny  generation. 
A  striking  example  of  the  inherited  stability  of  epialleles  is 
the  peloric  mutant  (a  change  from  bilateral  to  radial  flower 
symmetry)  found  both  in  Antirrhinum  and  Linaria,  which 
was  originally  described  by  Linnaeus  and  whose  phenotype 
remained  stable  for  250  years.  Cubas  et  al.  (1999)  demon-
strated that in the Linaria mutant, the CYCLOIDEA (CYC) 
gene (encoding for a TCP transcription factor) is extensively 
methylated and transcriptionally silenced.

Finally, it should be noted that DNA methylation, in addi-
tion  to  being  the  cause  of  epigenetic  variations,  is  the  cause 
of mutations and genetic variation. The C methylation path-
way is inherently mutagenic, particularly under conditions of 

limiting  supply  of  the  methyl  donor  S-Ade-Met  (Matzke  et 
al., 2001). Such a low in the S-Ade-Met environment permits 
the  accumulation  of  an  intermediate  in  the  C  methylation 
pathway  (5,6-dihydrocytosine),  which  has  a  104-fold  higher 
rate of deamination than 5-methylcytosine.

Histone modifications
Modifications  on  nucleosomal  histone  tails  include  meth-
ylation,  acetylation,  phosphorylation,  ubiquitylation,  bioti-
nylation,  and  sumoylation  on  specific  lysines  and  arginines. 
A  complex  pattern  of  site-specific  combinations  of  histone 
modifications  on  different  residues  known  as  the  “epige-
netic  histone  code”  leads  to  specific  chromatin  states  that 
regulate  transcriptional  activity  and  are  inherited  by  daugh-
ter  cells  (Strahl  and  Allis,  2000).  In  plants,  the  best  charac-
terized  modifications  are  histone  methylation  and  histone 
acetylation.  Generally,  di-methylation  of  histone  3  on  lysine 
9  (H3K9me2)  and  tri-methylation  of  histone  3  on  lysine  27 
(H3K27me3)  leads  to  a  repressive  chromatin  state  correlat-
ing  with  gene  silencing;  whereas  tri-methylation  of  histone 
3  on  lysine  4  (H3K4me3)  leads  to  a  permissive  chromatin 
state  correlating  with  gene  activation  (Kouzarides,  2007).  In 
plants  H3K9me2  is  mostly  associated  with  transcriptional 
silencing  of  transposons  and  repeats  in  centromeric/pericen-
tromeric  heterochromatin  regions.  Genome-wide  analysis  in 
Arabidopsis  (Turck  et  al.,  2007;  Zhang  et  al.,  2007a,  2009) 
has  determined  the  global  H3  methylation  patterns  along 
chromatin  (see  the  section  Epigenetic  Mechanisms  and  their 
Interactions) and showed an agreement between the localiza-
tion  of  H3  methylation  marks  and  their  proposed  functions 
based on previous locus-specific studies. H3K4me3, which is 
associated  with  gene  activation,  was  found  mostly  in  endog-
enous genes but not in transposons, whereas H3K9me2 coin-
cides  almost  exclusively  with  transposons  and  other  repeats. 
H3K27me3  was  correlated  with  a  large  number  of  tissue-
specific  expressed  genes  transcriptionally  silent  in  the  tissue 
studied  (young  seedlings;  Turck  et  al.,  2007;  Zhang  et  al., 
2007a).  However,  inactivation  through  H3K27me3  methyla-
tion is a reversible process, but when accompanied by H3K9 
methylation along with histone deacetylation and DNA meth-
ylation,  chromatin  becomes  progressively  more  and  more 
condensed and heterochromatic, which leads to more perma-
nent  (cemented)  inactivation  that  is  almost  irreversible  dur-
ing  development  (Tariq  and  Paszkowski,  2004).  This  type  of 
compact silenced chromatin characterizes the majority of the 
heterochromatic genome comprised of TEs and other repeats.
The concerted and/or antagonizing actions of different his-
tone  methyltransferases  (HMTs)  and  histone  demethylases 
(HDMs)  with  different  specificities  determine  the  histone 
methylation  pattern  of  chromatin  in  different  cell  types  at 
different times during plant development. Similarly, dynamic 
histone  acetylation  and  deacetylation  patterns  established  by 
histone  acetyltransferases  (HATs)  and  histone  deacetylases 
(HDACs) result in active and silent chromatin forms, respec-
tively  (Chen  and  Tian,  2007).  Interplay  between  the  two 
mechanisms  allows  for  dynamic  chromatin  remodeling  dur-
ing  development  and  in  response  to  environmental  changes. 

209

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Like  cytosine  methylation,  histone  modifications  function  in 
various  aspects  of  plant  growth  and  development  including 
flower  and  seed  formation  and  stress  responses  (Kohler  and 
Villar,  2008;  Chinnusamy  and  Zhu,  2009a;  Amasino,  2010). 
Extensive analysis of Arabidopsis mutants has suggested that 
there  is  significant  cross-talk  between  histone  modifications 
and  DNA  methylation  (Vaillant  and  Paszkowski,  2007).  For 
example,  in  kyp  mutants  where  the  action  of  an  H3K9me2 
HMT, KRYPTONITE (KYP) is perturbed, severe reduction of 
CHG DNA methylation was observed (Jackson et al., 2002; 
Malagnac et al., 2002). In addition, genome-wide profiling of 
H3K9me2 and CHG methylation revealed a high correlation 
between these two marks (Bernatavichute et al., 2008). It was 
proposed  that  CHG  methylation  catalyzed  by  CMT3  is  rec-
ognized  by  KYP,  which  is  recruited  at  those  chromatin  sites. 
In turn, CMT3 binds these methylated histone marks through 
its  chromodomain,  thus  reinforcing  CHG  methylation  (Law 
and Jacobsen, 2010). This kind of interdependent cooperative 
action  between  two  silencing  marks  results  in  further  chro-
matin  compaction  in  heterochromatic  regions,  most  likely 
to  ensure  transcriptional  silencing  of  transposons  and  other 
repetitive elements.

Specific HMT homologs belonging to the Polycomb group 
(PcG) complex variants perform H3K27me3 in a spatiotem-
poral-specific manner leading to specific transcriptional repres-
sion  at  different  developmental  stages  (Schatlowski  et  al., 
2008).  Three  different  PcG  complexes  have  been  described 
in Arabidopsis, operating during the processes of seed devel-
opment,  vernalization,  and  flower  development,  respectively 
(Kohler  and  Villar,  2008).  The  FIS2-FIE-MEA-MSI1  com-
plex  functions  during  seed  development,  and  the  EMF2-
CLF/SWN-FIE-MSI1  complex  has  been  suggested  to  play 
a  role  in  suppressing  the  transition  from  vegetative  develop-
ment to flowering and flower organ formation (Chanvivattana 
et al., 2004; Schubert et al., 2006) and the VRN2-CLF/SWN-
FIE-MSI1  complex  has  been  implicated  in  the  regulation  of 
the process of vernalization (Sung and Amasino, 2004; Wood 
et  al.,  2006).  In  all  three  complexes  FIE  and  MSI1  (WD40 
proteins) remain constant, whereas the homologs MEA/CLF/
SWN  (encoding  H3K27me3  HMTs)  and  FIS2/EMF2/VRN2 
(encoding  Drosophila  Su(Z)12  homologs)  change  depending 
on the PcG variant (Kohler and Villar, 2008).

Trithorax  group  (TrxG)  proteins  antagonize  the  action  of 
PcG  proteins  and  lead  to  activation  of  PcG-silenced  genes. 
These  include  SET-domain  histone  methyltransferases  with 
H3K4me3  specificity,  as  well  as  ATP-dependent  chromatin 
remodeling factors such as the chromodomain/helicase/DNA-
binding  domain  CHD3  protein  PICKLE  (PKL).  PKL  targets 
PcG genes like SWN and EMF2 known to silence embryonic-
activating  regulators,  and  uplifts  the  suppressive  PcG-effect 
on embryonic development (Aichinger et al., 2009).

Histone  demethylases  are  a  recent  discovery  (Shi  et  al., 
2004).  Human 
lysine-specific  demethylase1  (LSD1),  a 
nuclear  amine  oxidase,  specifically  demethylates  H3K4me1 
and H3K4me2, and a number of JmjC domain-containing pro-
teins  have  been  demonstrated  to  be  H3K4,  H3K9,  H3K27, 
H3K36,  H3R2,  and  H4R3  demethylases.  In  Arabidopsis,  21 
genes  encoding  JmjC  family  proteins  were  identified  (Hong 
et al., 2009). AtJmj1and AtJmj2 were shown to be involved in 

210

photoperiodic flowering and FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) 
regulation,  respectively.  AtJmj15  represses  genic  cytosine 
methylation  and  AtJmj1  and  AtJmj4  were  shown  to  directly 
repress FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) expression via demeth-
ylation of H3K4me3 (Jeong et al., 2009).

Two HDAC families, the RPD3/HDA1 and the plant-spe-
cific  HD2,  have  been  well  characterized  in  Arabidopsis,  and 
have  been  associated  with  distinct  functions.  For  example, 
the  AtHDAC6  gene  (RPD3/HDA1-Class  I)  was  shown  to 
play a role in transgenic and repetitive DNA silencing and in 
the  nuclear  organization  of  rDNA  loci  (Aufsatz  et  al.,  2002; 
Probst et al., 2004). AtHDA6 and AtHDA19 have been impli-
cated in repression of embryonic-specific gene functions dur-
ing germination (Tanaka et al., 2008) and AtHDA6 is required 
for  jasmonate  response,  senescence,  and  flowering  (Wu  et 
al.,  2008).  Similarly,  HD2a  has  been  associated  with  seed 
development  and  maturation  (Wu  et  al.,  2000;  Zhou  et  al., 
2004;  Sridha  and  Wu,  2006).  In  recent  years,  histone  modi-
fiers such as HMTs and HDACs have also been identified and 
analyzed in agriculturally important crop plants. For example, 
the genes encoding PcG complexes and HDAC proteins have 
been characterized in rice (Fu et al., 2007; Luo et al., 2009). 
Likewise,  in  maize  a  number  of  HDAC  genes  have  been 
identified  (Lusser  et  al.,  2001;  Rossi  et  al.,  2003)  and  the 
HDA101 gene (RPD3/HDA1-Class I) has been shown to be 
involved in vegetative to reproductive transitions and in other 
chromatin  modifications  such  as  histone  methylations  and 
phosphorylations (Rossi et al., 2007). In barley, our group has 
identified, characterized, and mapped PcG and HDAC genes, 
and has examined their expression in different barley varieties 
and  upon  exposure  to  stress-related  hormones  (Demetriou 
et al., 2009, 2010; Kapazoglou et al., 2010). Differential gene 
expression  for  both  HDAC  and  PcG  genes  was  evidenced 
during  seed  development  in  different  barley  varieties.  Most 
HDAC  genes  were  induced  by  exposure  to  jasmonate,  and 
the barley PcG genes E(Z) and FIE were strongly induced by 
ABA. Similar studies were performed for different members 
of barley HAT genes, which showed that differential expres-
sion during seed development and induction by ABA has also 
characterized (Papaefthimiou et al., 2010).

In addition to modifications of the so-called canonical his-
tones  participating  in  nucleosomal  formation  (2H2A,  2H2B, 
2H3,  and  2H4),  histone  variants  can  also  be  incorporated 
into  nucleosomes  during  plant  development.  The  canoni-
cal histones comprise the major part of histone proteins, are 
encoded by multiple genes, and are expressed predominately 
during  the  S  phase  of  the  cell  cycle.  Thus,  their  deposition 
into  chromatin  is  strictly  coupled  to  DNA  replication.  Even 
though histones are the slowest evolving proteins, allelic vari-
ants with differences in amino acid sequence do exist. Unlike 
canonical  histones,  histone  variants  are  often  encoded  by 
a  single  gene  and  are  expressed  throughout  the  cell  cycle; 
hence,  they  can  be  incorporated  into  nucleosomes  during 
the entire cell cycle. Extensive studies during the last decade 
have  pointed  to  a  role  for  histone  variants  in  the  structural 
and  functional  aspects  of  chromatin.  The  H2A.Z  is  involved 
in transcription and plays an important role in plant develop-
ment. Recent studies on Arabidopsis have shown that H2A.Z 
deposition  acts  against  DNA  methylation,  implying  that 

From epigenetics to epigenomics and their implications in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 4

H2A.Z has a role in protecting genes from silencing (March-
Diaz and Reyes, 2009). Genome-wide profiling of histone var-
iants using the ever-improving high-throughput technologies is 
possible. Such a large-scale analysis would help to unravel the 
histone  variant  landscape  and  its  association  with  other  his-
tone  modifications  and  DNA  methylation  patterns  and  tran-
scription factor activities.

Small RNAs
Small  RNAs  were  found  to  interfere  with  many  aspects  of 
gene  activity  and  genome  organization;  consequently,  they 
control  crucial  processes  in  the  cell  cycle  and  the  develop-
ment of eukaryotic organisms. Four major pathways producing 
endogenous  RNAi  have  been  identified  in  plants.  The  micro 
RNA  (miRNA),  transacting  siRNA  (ta-siRNA),  and  natural-
antisense  siRNA  (nat-siRNA)  function  predominately  at  the 
post-transcriptional  level  through  mRNA  degradation  and/
or  translational  inhibition  (Chapman  and  Carrington,  2007). 
The  heterochromatic  (hc-RNAs)  siRNA  pathway  is  involved 
mainly  in  transcriptional  gene  silencing  by  directing  DNA 
methylation  (Henderson  and  Jacobsen,  2007).  miRNAs  con-
stitute  only  5%  of  the  total  small  RNA  mass  and  less  than 
0.1% of sequence complexity in Arabidopsis. The rest repre-
sents more than 100,000 different siRNAs that originate from 
thousands of loci (Kasschau, 2007; Mosher et al., 2008).

Growing  evidence  in  recent  years  has  demonstrated  that 
siRNAs  direct  methylation  of  DNA  sequences  complemen-
tary  to  the  siRNAs;  a  process  known  as  RNA-directed  DNA 
methylation  (RdDM;  Chinnusamy  and  Zhu,  2009b).  The 
majority of siRNAs are 24nt RNAs corresponding to TEs and 
other repetitive elements and cause epigenetic gene silencing 
by directing de novo cytosine methylation of DNA (Zhang et 
al.,  2007b).  They  originate  from  double-stranded  (ds)  RNA 
precursors  generated  by  the  RNA  polymerase  isoform  IVa 
(Pol  IVa)  and  RNA-dependent  RNA  polymerase  2  (RDR2). 
The dsRNA precursors are then processed by DCL3 to 24-nt 
siRNAs  and  are  loaded  to  ARGONAUTE4  containing  RNA-
induced  silencing  complex  (RISC).  The  complex  interacts 
with  PolIVb  to  guide  DRM1/2-mediated  DNA  methylation 
(Zhang  et  al.,  2007b;  Mosher  et  al,.  2008).  Genome-wide 
DNA  methylation  profiling  by  microarray  and  shotgun  bisul-
fate  sequencing  in  Arabidopsis  revealed  that  DNA  methyla-
tion is most abundant in heterochromatic regions (Zilberman 
et  al.,  2007;  Cokus  et  al.,  2008).  Comparison  of  the  global 
DNA  methylation  pattern  and  siRNA  profiles  demonstrated 
that  about  37%  of  the  methylated  loci  are  associated  with 
siRNA clusters.

Apart  from  silencing  transposons,  RdDM  has  a  role  in 
gene  regulation  and  proper  plant  development.  For  exam-
ple, a 3 non-coding region of the Arabidopsis BONSAI gene 
was  found  to  harbor  a  long  interspersed  nuclear  element 
(LINE)  retrotransposon  insertion  that  gives  rise  to  siRNAs 
required for hypermethylation (Saze and Kakutani, 2007). A 
mutant  in  the  chromatin  remodeling  factor  DDM1  caused  a 
developmental  defect  that  was  associated  with  siRNA-medi-
ated  hypermethylation  of  the  BONSAI  3  region.  Likewise, 
RdDM-mediated  silencing  of  the  SUPPRESSOR  OF  DRM1 
DRM2  CMT3  (SDC)  gene  was  shown  to  be  important  for 

normal leaf development. Over-expression of SDC results in 
a curled-leaf phenotype. In wild-type plants siRNAs originat-
ing  from  tandem  repeats  on  the  SDC  promoter  direct  DNA 
methylation  of  the  repeats  and  the  SDC  gene  is  silenced 
(Henderson and Jacobsen, 2008).

The  regulation  of  the  FWA  (Flower  Wageningen)  gene 
is  another  example  where  siRNA,  as  well  as  other  epige-
netic  mechanisms  such  as  DNA  and  histone  modifications, 
are  involved  in  gene  suppression.  FWA  encodes  a  homeobox 
transcription  factor  and  fwa  mutants  cause  a  late-flowering 
phenotype.  The  gene  is  only  expressed  from  the  maternal 
allele  in  the  endosperm,  whereas  it  is  silenced  biparentally 
in  the  other  tissues.  Ectopic  expression  of FWA  in  adult  tis-
sue in the fwa mutant results in delayed flowering. The FWA 
silencing  is  associated  with  methylation  of  tandem  repeats 
around  the  transcriptional  start  site,  which  are  hypomethyl-
ated  in  the  endosperm  or  in  the  mutant  where  the  gene  is 
expressed (Soppe et al., 2000; Kinoshita et al., 2004, 2007). 
It  was  demonstrated  that  promoter  methylation  is  under 
RNA-directed  methylation  as  the  tandem  repeats  produced 
siRNAs, which in turn direct DNA methylation at those sites 
(Chan  et  al.,  2005;  Kinoshita  et  al.,  2007).  In  addition  to 
RNA-directed DNA methylation, it was recently shown that 
sporophytic silencing of FWA is also achieved through H3K4 
histone  demethylation  by  the  Arabidopsis  LDL1and  LDL2 
homologs (Jiang et al., 2007).

MiRNAs  also  play  crucial  roles  in  a  wide  range  of  plant 
developmental and stress-related processes. In the last decade 
a  plethora  of  information  concerning  the  diverse  functions  of 
miRNAs  in  both  monocots  (rice,  maize,  Brachypodium)  and 
dicots  (Arabidopsis,  Populus)  has  been  reported  (reviewed 
in  Martin  et  al.,  2010).  Aside  from  their  post-transcriptional 
mode  of  action,  miRNAs  act  at  the  transcriptional  level  and 
regulate gene expression through DNA methylation, as current 
studies have revealed (Wu et al., 2009; Khraiwesh et al., 2010).
Small  RNAs  can  follow  non-cell  autonomous  travel 
throughout the plant organism using different proteins as car-
riers.  The  effects  of  post-transcriptional  RNA  silencing  can 
extend beyond its sites of initiation, owing to the movement 
of signal molecules. Breakthrough grafting experiments dem-
onstrated the transmission of the Nia (nitrate reductase) co-
suppressed  state  from  silenced  root-stocks  to  non-silenced 
transgenic scions (Palauqui et al., 1997). Shortly after this it 
was found that leaf infiltration into transgenic tobacco plants 
expressing  the  green  fluorescent  protein  (GFP)  triggered  a 
systemic  sequence-specific  loss  of  GFP  expression  (Voinnet 
et  al.,  1998).  The  nature  of  the  mobile  signal  had  been 
unclear  until  very  recently  when 
it  was  demonstrated 
that  mobile  siRNAs  and  miRNAs  can  migrate  in  grafted 
plants  from  roots  to  shoots  and  vice  versa  and  direct  epige-
netic  modifications  in  recipient  cells  (Dunoyer  et  al.,  2010; 
Martienssen,  2010;  Molnar  et  al.,  2010).  Understanding  the 
small  RNA-mediated  mechanisms  of  systemic  signaling  is  of 
major importance given the growing interest of using grafted 
plants in vegetable production (Tsaftaris et al., 2008).

Finally, in the same context of small RNA action, the phe-
nomenon  of  transgene  silencing  should  not  go  unmentioned. 
In  the  past  decade  the  production  of  transgenic  plants  was 
made  possible  through  the  development  of  techniques  for 

211

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

introducing  and  expressing  foreign  genes.  However,  often 
transgene  silencing  was  observed  where  the  foreign  gene 
was  not  expressed  as  expected.  Intensive  research  discov-
ered  small  RNA-mediated  silencing  mechanisms  underly-
ing  this  phenomenon.  Stabilizing  transgene  expression  is  a 
priority,  especially  to  the  agricultural  biotechnology  indus-
try  that  avidly  pursued  transgenic  approaches  to  modulate 
gene  expression  and  produce  superior  plants.  For  a  detailed 
description of the implications of small RNAs to breeding, in 
relation to systemic signaling and stability of transgenes, refer 
to Tsaftaris et al. (2008).

The  functional  relationships  between  the  different  epi-
genetic  mechanisms  mentioned  earlier  and  their  mutual 
reinforcement are unexpectedly complex. This is best exem-
plified by their involvement in the formation of large complex 
structures  engaged  in  chromatin  remodeling.  In  addition  to 
DNA  methylases/demethylases  and  the  histone-modifying 
enzymes,  these  complexes  also  contain  histone  chaperones 
and  ATP-dependent  chromatin  remodeling  enzymes.  Thanks 
to  their  individual  epigenetic  mechanisms,  these  complexes 
could have direct interaction with each other, reinforcing each 
other’s activity. Furthermore, due to their modular structure, 
by exchanging parts, complexes could lead to gene activation 
or suppression. Different types of such complexes have been 
described in more detail in yeast and animal systems (see Ho 
and Crabtree, 2010), but this knowledge is now expanding to 
plant chromatin remodeling systems too (Jarillo et al., 2009). 
As  described  by  these  authors,  chromatin  remodeling  com-
plexes  control  gene  expression  both  in  shoot  and  root  apical 
meristems by keeping actively dividing cells undifferentiated, 
thus totipotent, or by keeping fate-determined cells commit-
ted to later giving rise to specific organs. The specific chroma-
tin  remodeling  complexes  involved  in  pluripotent  stem  cells 
able  to  both  self-renew  and  generate  undifferentiated  cells 
committed  to  the  formation  of  new  tissues  and  organs  were 
also described recently (Shen and Xu, 2009).

Finally, recent findings indicated the relevance of the spa-
tial distribution of genes within the nucleus to their transcrip-
tional  control  (Sexton  et  al.,  2007;  Singh  et  al.,  2008).  The 
topology of the chromatin at the position where a particular 
gene  is  located  could  determine  its  proper  expression  in  the 
context of a developmental program, revealing a mechanistic 
link between gene position and gene expression.

From Epigenetics to Epigenomics

Deciphering epigenomes: A matter of scale 
and complexity

Life  sciences  have  entered  an  era  of  immense  data  genera-
tion capabilities, enabled by significant steps forward in rel-
evant  technologies.  Soon,  one  or  more  epigenomes  will  be 
available  —  a  genome-wide  map  of  epigenetic  modifica-
tions  —  for  every  plant  genome,  focusing  on  different  cul-
tivars, hybrids, tissues, developmental stages, environmental 
conditions,  abiotic  and  biotic  stresses,  and  so  forth.  Such  a 
development is now seen as a prerequisite to explaining the 

212

diversity  of  life,  since  genomes  have  proved  too  similar  to  
do so (Slack, 2010).

Arabidopsis and rice have been relatively simple case stud-
ies compared to the ever clearer complexity of maize, which 
is a massive genome, 85% of which consists of TEs (Baucom 
et al., 2009; Schnable et al., 2009), and thus is very dynamic 
and  capable  of  great  plasticity.  It  has  been  the  center  of 
much attention (also in this chapter). The Panzea consortium 
(http://panzea.org)  has  been  working  on  a  large  number  of 
landraces,  hybrids,  lines,  and  so  forth,  of  maize  and  its  wild 
relative,  the  teosinte.  The  goal  is  to  capture  their  diversity 
on a genetic, phenotypic, and, consequently, functional basis, 
making  an  annotated  DNA  mosaic  available  with  which  the 
additional layers of large-scale “omic” data can be integrated 
for further research. Such data integration requires expertise 
from  the  fields  of  bioinformatics  and  computational  biol-
ogy  for  gathering,  organizing,  storing,  and  connecting  data  in 
databases;  data  mining;  knowledge  and  association  discovery; 
and  modeling  of  reactions,  processes,  pathways,  cells,  and 
visualization.

Epigenomic methods and the type of data 
collected

ChIP-chip
Chromatin  immunoprecipitation  (ChIP)  is  a  technique  used 
for  assaying  protein–DNA  binding  in  vivo.  In  principle, 
genomic DNA is sheared by sonication into small fragments, 
preferentially  in  the  range  of  a  200  to  800  base  pairs.  The 
proteins are then linked to the DNA by gentle formaldehyde 
treatment.  An  antibody  specific  to  the  protein  of  interest  is 
used  to  immunoprecipitate  the  protein–DNA  assembly  and 
enrich  the  DNA  fragments  associated  with  the  protein.  The 
cross-links are then reversed by acid treatment to release the 
DNA, the DNA is purified, and then the DNA fragments are 
amplified by PCR. For ChIP-chip experiments PCR products 
are then labeled, hybridized on microarrays, and fluorescence 
read by a scanner; this enables a genome-scale view of DNA–
protein interactions. On high-density tiling arrays, oligonucle-
otide probes can be placed across an entire genome or across 
selected regions of a genome (e.g., promoters) at a preferred 
resolution. Usually when the epigenetic landscape of histone 
modifications are to be determined, antibodies raised against 
the  particular  modification  (e.g.,  H327K3me  or  H34Kme3) 
are  used.  The  quality  of  ChIP-chip  data  depends  on  a  vari-
ety  of  factors,  the  most  important  one  is  the  specificity  of 
the antibody. Another factor is the development of the plat-
form.  To  precisely  map  the  locations  of  binding  or  modifica-
tion,  sufficient  probe  resolution  is  crucial,  and  this  might  be 
compromised by the total number of probes that can be fitted 
on  an  array.  Striking  progress  has  been  made  in  array  manu-
facturing  technology  with  the  use  of  oligonucleotide  probes. 
Whole  genome  tiling  at  low  cost  has  been  feasible  for  small 
genomes.  For  example,  a  single  “tiling”  array  manufactured 
by Affymetrix covers the entire genome of Drosophila mela-
nogaster with 25 mer probes at 38 bp resolution (Park, 2008). 
A  variety  of  tools  is  available  for  processing  the  data  and 
reducing noise (Johnson et al., 2008).

From epigenetics to epigenomics and their implications in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 4

ChIP-seq
Progress in next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology has 
allowed  the  combination  of  ChIP  and  NGS  known  as  ChIP-
seq.  In  ChIP-seq  experiments  the  enriched  DNA  fragments 
of  interest  are  sequenced  directly,  instead  of  hybridized  on 
an  array.  Currently  there  are  four  sequencing  platforms:  the 
Illumina  (Solexa)  Genome  Analyzer;  the  Applied  Biosystems 
SOLiD; the Roche 454 pyrosequencing; and the Helicos plat-
form.  The  Illumina  and  SOLiD  technologies  can  sequence 
35–50 bp  fragments,  and  a  single  lane  out  of  eight  on  a  flow 
cell can generate 8–12 million reads. Most ChIP-seq data have 
been  generated  with  the  Illumina  Genome  Analyzer.  In  this 
platform  a  library  of  adapter-ligated  ChIP  DNA  fragments  is 
constructed and loaded onto a solid substrate. Cluster ampli-
fication  ensues  that  generates  many  clonal  copies  of  each 
fragment  by  bridge  PCR.  The  sequencing  step  involves  the 
enzyme-driven extension of all templates in parallel with fluo-
rescently labeled reversible terminator nucleotides. After each 
extension,  the  fluorescent  labels  that  have  been  incorporated 
are  detected  through  high-resolution  imaging.  There  are  two 
main  advantages  of  ChIP-seq  compared  to  ChIP-chip.  First, 
it  provides  single  base  pair  resolution  of  direct  sequencing. 
Secondly, it suffers from much less noise than ChIP-chip. The 
microarray approach relies on hybridization chemistry between 
the  probe  and  the  DNA  target.  Nucleic  acid  hybridization 
depends on many factors such as GC content, length, concen-
tration,  and  secondary  structure  of  the  two  sequences.  Non-
specific  hybridization  between  imperfect  matches  frequently 
occurs and contributes to the noise. In addition to signal quan-
tification,  the  amount  of  signal  captured  through  a  scanner 
might not be linear over its entire range (Park, 2008, 2009).

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling
Methylated  DNA  immunoprecipitation  (MeDIP)  is  a  tech-
nique  for  performing  large-scale  analysis  of  whole  genome 
DNA methylation. It utilizes a monoclonal antibody that rec-
ognizes  5-methyl-cytosine  to  immunoprecipitate  methylated 
DNA  sequences.  High  molecular  weight  genomic  DNA  is 
sheared  to  300–500 bp  fragments  by  sonication  and  is  subse-
quently  immunoprecipitated  using  the  anti-5-methyl-cytosine 
antibody.  The  enriched  fragments  are  then  analyzed  using 
genomic  tiling  arrays.  The  only  drawback  of  this  method  is 
the  CpG-density  factor,  that  is,  the  efficiency  by  which  the 
DNA  is  immunoprecipitated  depends  on  the  degree  of  CpG 
methylation  within  the  fragment.  This  complicates  DNA 
methylation  quantification  and  cross-comparisons  between 
samples  with  different  profiles.  However,  by  adding  external 
control  DNA  the  data  can  be  normalized  and  used  reliably. 
MeDIP  was  used  for  genome-wide  DNA  methylation  map-
ping  of  the  Arabidopsis  genome  (Zhang  and  Jacobsen,  2006; 
Zilberman  et  al.,  2007).  The  combination  of  MeDIP  with 
massive parallel sequencing, MeDIP-seq, could be a powerful 
approach  for  genome-wide  DNA  methylation  profiling  (Beck 
and Rakyan, 2008). However, the presence of bulk quantities 
of  heavily  methylated  repeat  DNA  poses  a  problem  for  this 
method.  These  fragments  will  be  recovered  with  very  high 
efficiencies  and  cannot  be  assigned  unequivocally  to  specific 
genomic regions. This represents a major disadvantage for the 

MeDIP-seq method. MeDIP-ChIP does not have this problem, 
because  genomic  tiling  microarray  probes  are  repeat-masked. 
Another  very  powerful  technique,  sodium  bisulfate  (BS)-seq, 
has  been  used  to  generate  a  DNA  methylation  map  at  one-
nucleotide resolutions across the genome, through the coupling 
of bisulfate treatment of DNA and NGS technology. Sodium 
bisulfate  converts  unmethylated  cytosines  to  uracils,  whereas 
methylated cytosines remain unconverted. Consequently, after 
amplification  by  PCR,  unmethylated  cytosines  are  displayed 
as  thymines  and  methylated  cytosines  as  cytosines.  Genomic 
DNA is first sheared, linked to adapters, subjected to bisulfate 
treatment,  and  then  shotgun  sequenced.  This  technique  was 
first employed by using the Illumina GA to sequence 3.8 Gbp 
of  Arabidopsis  sulfate-converted  DNA,  providing  the  first 
methylome at single base resolution of the entire Arabidopsis 
genome  (Cokus  et  al.,  2008).  Owing  to  its  high  sensitiv-
ity,  BS-seq  proved  superior  to  previously  used  methylome-
profiling  techniques  based  on  tiling  arrays.  First,  it  identified 
particular  methylated  CGs  that  had  been  previously  missed. 
Secondly, it allowed distinction between symmetric (CG and 
CHG) and asymmetric (CHH) DNA methylation. Thirdly, it 
enabled  analysis  of  repetitive  sequences  including  telomeric 
repeats,  which  are  difficult  to  analyze  by  microarray  tech-
niques.  Finally,  it  allowed  identification  of  precise  boundaries 
between methylated and unmethylated regions such as tandem 
repeats and flanking regions (Cokus et al., 2008).

Epigenomic resources

Plant species have been relatively slow to become part of the 
omics  era,  mainly  because  of  their  complexity  and  genome 
size. This is even more obvious in the field of plant epigenom-
ics,  which  had  to  follow  efforts  in  plant  genomics,  transcrip-
tomics, and so forth, to have data to lie upon and interconnect. 
Nevertheless,  epigenomic-related  data  and  methods  are  now 
becoming  increasingly  abundant,  and  Table  14.1,  although  by 
no  means  comprehensive,  provides  an  overview  of  publicly 
available plant epigenomics resources.

Access  to  information  on  the  molecular  machinery  behind 
chromatin modifications can be critical in understanding these 
processes.  Protein  families  playing  major  roles  include  DNA 
methyltransferases, and histone acetyltransferases and deacety-
lases.  ChromDB  (1;  first  resource  in  Table  14.1;  Gendler  et 
al.,  2008)  is  a  resource  offering  such  information,  including 
on  RNA  interference,  based  on  plant  transcription  products 
(ESTs  and  cDNAs)  and  genome  sequences  (where  available). 
Snapshots of the effects of these processes on the genome are 
becoming readily available for key plant species. The Jacobsen 
Laboratory  at  the  University  of  California  in  Los  Angeles  (3; 
in  Table  14.1)  provides  links  to  diverse  data  from  large-scale 
Arabidopsis epigenomics investigations, covering histone modi-
fications, methylation, nucleosomes, and small RNAs. Rice and 
maize  have  seen  similar  efforts  from  front-running  research 
groups  in  the  United  States  and  China,  producing  extensive 
datasets on epigenetic modifications and their relationships to 
small  RNA  and  mRNA  transcriptomes  in  maize  (10  in  Table 
14.1; Wang et al., 2009), and on global mapping of epigenetic 
modifications in rice (11 in Table 14.1; Li et al., 2008).

213

S
E
C
T

I

O
N

 

B

i

 

B
r
e
e
d
n
g
b
o
t
e
c
h
n
o
o
g
e
s

i

l

i

2
1
4

Table 14.1  Resources table

#

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Date

Method(s)

Educational

Name

Description

Chromatin/
histone 
modification

Methylation

Small 
RNAs/RNAI

Plant(s)

Country

URL

PMID

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

ChromBB

miRBase

Jacobsen 
lab

Arabidopsis 
Small RNA 
Project

RNA22

UEA sRNA 
tools

SiLoDB

miRanda

X

X

display 
chromatin-
associated 
proteins, 
including RANi-
associated 
proteins

Published miRNA 
sequences and 
annotation

diverse 
epigenomics 
data

microRNA, 
endogenous 
siRNA and other 
small RNA-
related data

pattern-based 
method for the 
identification of 
microRna-target 
sites and their 
corresponding 
RNA/RNA 
complexes

analysis of high-
throughput small 
RNA data

genomic loci that 
produce sRNAs

finding genomic 
targets for 
microRNAs

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

various

US

http://www.chromdb.
org/

17942414

various

UK

http://www.mirbase.
org/

17991681

Arabidopsis

US

http://epigenomics.
mcdb.ucla.edu/

various

Arabidopsis

US

http://asrp.cgrb.
oregonstate.edu/

17999994

generic

US

http://cbcsrv.watson.
ibm.com/ma22.html

16990141

generic

various

UK

UK

generic

US/UK

http://sma-tools.cmp.
uea.ac.uk/plant/cgi-
bin/sma-tools.cgi

18713789

http://silodb.cmp.
uea.ac.uk/

n/a

15502875

http://www.microma.
org/microma.
org/microma/
getDownloads.do

9

X

psRNATarget

10

X

11

X

12

X

13

X

14

X

X

NCBI GEO 
dataset

NCBI GEO 
dataset

Compartaive 
Sequencing 
of Plant 
small RNAs

Massively 
Parallel 
Signature 
Sequencing 
(MPSS)

Teaching 
Tools in 
Plant Biology

plant small 
RNA regulators 
and targets 
prediction

epigenetic 
modifications 
and their 
relationships 
to smRNA 
and nRNA 
transcriptomes 
in maize

global mapping 
of histone 
modifications 
and methylation 
in rice

comparative 
sequencing of 
plant small RNAs

different projects 
for many 
plant species, 
including 
multiple sRNA 
collections

online feature 
of The Plant 
Cell consisting 
of teaching 
materrials**

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

generic

US

http://bioinfo3.noble.
org/psRNATarget/

15980567*

Zea mays

US/China

19376930

http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/
geo/query/acc.
cgi?acc  GSE15286

Oryza sativa

China

18263775

http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/
geo/query/acc.
cgi?acc  GSE9925

various

US

http://smallrna.udel.
edu/

n/a

various

US

http://mpss.udel.edu/

16381968

generic

n/a

http://www.plantcell.
org/teachingtools/

n/a

*the publication refers to the previous version of the systim
**first six sections free, require subscription to Plant Cell

2
1
5

i

F
r
o
m
 
e
p
g
e
n
e
t
i
c
s
 
t
o
 
e
p
g
e
n
o
m
c
s
 
a
n
d
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
i

i

i

m
p

l
i

l

c
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
i
n
 
p
a
n
t
 
b
r
e
e
d
n
g

i

C
H
A
P
T
E
R

 

1
4

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

The  majority  of  available  resources  and  methods  on  plant 
epigenomics are concentrating on RNA interference and small 
RNAs  such  as  siRNAs  and  microRNAs  (miRNAs).  A  well-
known computational method to check whether miRNAs can 
potentially  bind  to  DNA  sequences  is  miRanda  (8;  in  Table 
14.1),  based  on  established  sequence  alignment  and  ther-
modynamic  principles,  and  actually  validated  on  mammalian 
data  —  both  inputs  are  user-provided,  with  miRNAs  taken 
from  specialized  repositories  of  published  data  such  as  the 
miRBase (2 in Table 14.1; John et al., 2004). Another excel-
lent example of how bioinformatics acts as a horizontal plat-
form for research, is the RNA22 algorithm (5 in Table 14.1; 
Miranda et al., 2006), developed at IBM Research. Based on 
a generic pattern discovery algorithm (TEIRESIAS; Rigoutsos 
and Floratos, 1998), it is able to comprehensively capture the 
characteristics of a known miRNA set (e.g., by a resource like 
miRBase) and search for potential targets in DNA sequences 
in  a  very  sensitive  manner,  thus  providing  unprecedented 
depths  of  prediction.  Providing  a  more  plant-orientated 
methodology, the Plant Small RNA Regulator Target (psRNA-
Target) Analysis Server (9 in Table 14.1; Zhang et al., 2005) 
allows users to search for targets of small RNAs and to anno-
tate potential regulators based on published ones.

As  already  mentioned,  technological  advancements  have 
allowed the production of many millions of short sequences from 
biological samples, potentially of great importance in understand-
ing  their  regulatory  role  and  effect  on  plants.  To  mine  useful 
information from this mountain of data, state-of-the-art bioinfor-
matics tools are necessary, and a useful collection is found at the 
University of East Anglia (UEA) sRNA toolkit (6 in Table 14.1; 
Moxon et al., 2008). It has a plant-specific section based on large-
scale sRNA datasets, so it can assist in filtering sequences, iden-
tify miRNAs and create their expression profiles, predict targets 
and regulatory patterns, and visualization. Consequently, placing 
large sets of such sequences on genomes can lead to the identifi-
cation of potential sRNA-producing genomic loci — see SiLoDB 
(7 in Table 14.1; http://silodb.cmp.uea.ac.uk/).

Data for such tools exist due to the effort of a number of 
U.S.-based  (and  -funded)  research  groups.  The  Arabidopsis 
Small  RNA  Project  at  Oregon  State  University  (4  in  Table 
14.1;  Backman  et  al.,  2008)  provides  access  to  miRNAs, 
endogenous  siRNAs,  and  other  small  RNA-related  data  on 
a  genome-wide  level  for  A.  thaliana  in  different  mutants, 
developmental stages, and treatments — such a wide range of 
data  provide  the  necessary  context  and  depth  to  understand 
the  impact  of  small  RNA  pathways.  The  Meyers  Laboratory 
(http://ag.udel.edu/meyers_lab/) 
the  University  of 
Delaware has been a key player in the large-scale epigenomics 
data generation and analysis partnered with the collaborating 
laboratories of Pam Green at the University of Delaware and 
(http://ag.udel.edu/plsc/faculty/pamgreen/)  and  Xing  Deng 
at  Yale  (http://www.yale.edu/denglab/).  They  first  spear-
headed  the  Massively  Parallel  Signature  Sequencing  (MPSS) 
of  several  plant  species  and  the  creation  of  signature-based 
transcriptional  resources  for  analyses  of  mRNA  and  small 
RNA (13 in Table 14.1; Nakano et al., 2006); Illumina's SBS 
method has recently replaced the original MPSS/454 provid-
ing considerably better quality data. The labs of Blake Meyers 
and  Pamela  Green  at  the  University  of  Delaware  are  also 

at 

216

behind  the  Comparative  Sequencing  of  Plant  Small  RNAs 
(12  in  Table  14.1;  http://smallrna.udel.edu/),  an  extensive 
sequence resource of plant small RNAs (21 to 24 nucleotides) 
from representative species across the plant kingdom.

Finally, it is important to highlight efforts in educating and 
involving students and the general public. An initiative by the 
journal  The  Plant  Cell  provides  online  educational  material, 
which includes two parts on epigenetics and small RNAs (14 
in  Table  14.1;  http://www.plantcell.org/teachingtools/)  that 
provide an accessible, comprehensive, current, and illustrated 
view. The aforementioned Panzea project also has an outreach 
program  on  evolution,  genetics,  and  agriculture,  recognizing 
the  value  of  maize  as  a  showcase  for  the  effect  of  domesti-
cation on genetic and phenotypic variability, and the value of 
research-driven breeding programs.

Transposable elements on the emerging 
epigenomic landscape(s)

Transposable  elements  (TEs)  are  highly  active  and  mobile 
genetic elements that can be found within the genomes of vir-
tually all living organisms. Initially considered as junk or selfish 
DNA,  their  profound  influence  in  shaping  eukaryotic  genomes 
is  now  widely  accepted.  Long  terminal  repeat  (LTR)  retro-
transposons form the most abundant TE type in plants, largely 
accounting for the vast differences in plant genome sizes (Vitte 
and  Panaud,  2005).  Their  “copy  and  paste”  replication  mecha-
nism  has  the  potential  to  greatly  amplify  their  numbers,  even 
over  short  evolutionary  timescales,  enabling  them  to  become  a 
major  component  of  plant  genomes.  Characteristically,  plant 
genome  size  positively  correlates  with  LTR  retrotransposon 
abundance.  Small  genome  plants  like  Arabidopsis  and  rice  are 
sparsely  populated  by  LTR  retrotransposons,  5.6%  (Pereira, 
2004) and 17% (McCarthy et al., 2002), respectively, in contrast 
to medium and large genome plants, where the LTR retrotrans-
poson fraction may reach up to 70% (barley; Vicient et al., 1999) 
or 75% (maize) (Baucom et al., 2009; Schnable et al., 2009).

The ability of TEs to insert in various areas of the genome, 
including  gene-rich  regions,  can  lead  to  deleterious  mutations 
detrimental  to  the  host  plant.  Consequently,  it  comes  as  no 
surprise that their activity is tightly regulated both at the tran-
scriptional and post-transcriptional levels (Matzke and Birchler, 
2005). The advent of technologies that enable the precise posi-
tional determination of epigenetic marks added either to DNA 
or  chromatin/histone  proteins  has  already  revealed,  and  in 
the future will elucidate even further, how areas occupied by 
TEs carry chemical marks that may even vary according to the 
respective  TE  family.  Overall,  the  concept  that  DNA  meth-
ylation  is  primarily  a  mechanism  of  genome  defense  against 
TE is now robustly supported (Suzuki and Bird, 2008). DNA 
methylation  of  genomic  regions  rich  in  TE  insertions  induces 
heterochromatin  formation  and  subsequent  TE  silencing.  In 
contrast,  repression  of  DNA  methylation,  by  DNA  methyl-
transferase  gene  mutants,  is  concomitant  to  an  increase  in 
TE  activity.  Plants  have  evolved  a  TE  methylation  strategy 
guided  by  siRNAs;  for  example,  an  RNA-dependent  DNA 
methylation  system  (Vaucheret,  2008).  Centromeric  and  TE 
regions have a similar repertoire of both DNA and chromatin 

From epigenetics to epigenomics and their implications in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 4

modifications  that  usually  associate  with  silent  chromatin 
formation.  However,  different  classes  of  TEs  interact  with 
different  histone  modification  marks.  The  near-gene  hetero-
chromatin insertion patterns of the maize Sireviruses Opie and 
Ji correlate with the modified histone H3K4me2 (Lamb et al., 
2007); whereas other LTR retrotransposons prefer accumulat-
ing  into  large  gene-free  heterochromatic  blocks,  and  the  cen-
tromere-specific retrotransposons of maize (CRM) may target 
for insertion centromere histone H3 (CENH3) or its methyla-
tion variants (Wolfgruber et al., 2009).

Along with guiding DNA methylation, siRNAs also silence 
TE expression at the post-transcriptional level by degradation 
of  homologous  mRNA  TE  targets  (Hollick,  2008).  Massive 
parallel  sequencing  of  small  RNAs  and  mRNAs  has  shown 
the complicated interactions between siRNAs and TE regula-
tion in plants. In principle, interruption of the RNA interfer-
ence  (RNAi)  pathway  results  in  the  over-expression  of  most 
TE  families  (Jia  et  al.,  2009).  Intriguingly,  analysis  of  siRNA 
libraries produced from B73 wild-type or mop1-mutant maize 
plants,  or  from  different  maize  tissues  (young  leaves,  imma-
ture  ears,  and  immature  tassels)  showed  that  siRNA  species 
of different lengths (22 bp vs. 24 bp) appear to originate from 
or target TEs under these different circumstances and tissues 
(Nobuta et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2009).

Our  insights  into  the  complex  interactions  between  TEs 
and plant hosts have been greatly facilitated by the develop-
ment  of  technologies  that  can  conduct  large-scale,  genome-
wide  epigenomic  analyses.  Crucially,  all  of  the  components 
of  the  network  —  TE  regulation  and  activity,  small  RNAs 
abundance,  DNA  methylation  and  histone  modification  pat-
terns  —  are  dynamic  entities  that  are  greatly  influenced  by 
plant biotic and abiotic stresses. The genome and epigenome 
fluidity found among different maize genotypes that underlies 
phenotypic  variability  can  provide  valuable  new  information 
to breeders in the quest for ever more tolerant and productive 
varieties.

An illustrative and practical example of 
data and resources integration

In  an  attempt  to  highlight  a  few  aspects  of  bioinformatics 
research,  we  decided  to  visualize  datasets  from  the  Wang  et 
al. (2009) publication of in The Plant Cell (10; in Table 14.1). 
Such  an  exercise  involves  accessing  online  data  repositories 
(in  this  case  NCBI’s  Gene  Expression  Omnibus),  download-
ing and organizing data, converting sequence coordinates data 
from  Zea  mays  BACs  (as  provided)  to  chromosomes,  trans-
forming  raw  data  to  binned  frequency  counts  on  the  maize 
genome,  and  finally  visualizing  all  of  the  information  using 
Circos  (Krzywinski  et  al.,  2009),  a  popular  software  pack-
age  for  visualizing  data  and  information  in  a  circular  layout, 
making it ideal for exploring relationships between objects or 
positions.

Figure 14.1 depicts the 10 chromosomes of maize as ideo-
grams  in  a  clockwise  manner,  starting  with  chromosome 
1  at  12  o’clock.  The  centromere  is  highlighted  with  a  red-
filled  band.  All  lengths  are  relative;  that  is,  chromosome  1 
has the longest ideogram since it is the longest chromosome. 

Concentric  heat  map  tracks  represent  different  epigenomic 
datasets  from  the  Wang  et  al.  (2009)  paper,  as  well  as  the 
distributions  of  a  specific  retrotransposon  class  (Bousios 
et al., 2010) of genes as found by the sequencing consortium 
(http://www.maizesequence.org/), and high-quality haplotype 
SNP  data  from  the  Panzea  consortium  (http://panzea.org/
index.html;  Gore  et  al.,  2009).  Heat  map  colors  begin  with 
white for the lowest frequency and reach very dark shades of 
the perspective color for the highest frequencies.

In  particular,  and  from  outside  to  inside,  the  first  five 
tracks  in  Figure  14.1  in  shades  of  red  are  H3K27me3, 
H3K36me3,  H3K4me3,  H3K9ac,  and  methylation  data 
(respectively) in maize roots, the next five in shades of green 
are  the  equivalent  data  but  in  shoots.  The  track  shaded  in 
blue  represents  the  Sirevirus  retrotransposons,  and  the  track 
shaded in gray provides the distribution of genes. A glimpse of 
the  variability  at  the  nucleotide  level  between  the  two  well-
studied  varieties  of  maize,  B73  and  MO17,  can  be  seen  in 
the  next  inward  track  containing  275,000  high-quality  SNPs 
(that  differ  between  the  two)  in  the  form  of  a  kaleidoscope 
of  colors  representing  the  four  bases  and  deletions  (A,  red; 
C,  blue;  G,  green;  T,  black;  deletion,  yellow;  n/a,  white).  In 
the  remaining  space  in  the  circle,  known  miRNA  identified 
in  the  high-throughput  sequencing  data  are  mapped  on  the 
chromosomes  with  lines  connecting  occurrences  of  the  same 
sequence  —  in  green  the  sequences  are  identified  in  shoots 
and in red they are identified in roots.

Although  the  purpose  of  this  exercise  was  to  stress  the 
need  for  and  power  of  data  integration  (and  the  tools  that 
make  it  possible),  and  therefore  no  biological  insight  is 
intended, it is interesting to note visual biases such as the high 
density  in  almost  all  tracks  at  around  three  quarters  along 
chromosome  four,  or  shoot-only  (all  green)  or  root-only  (all 
red) instances of miRNAs.

Epigenetic Phenomena and their 
Implications in Plant Breeding

Epigenetic controls during vegetative 
development and the role of the 
environment

Flowering  plants  undergo  major  developmental  transitions, 
such  as  the  transition  from  the  embryonic  to  the  vegetative 
stage, and finally to the reproductive stage.

Epigenetic mechanisms are at the core of these endogenous 
developmental  regulatory  mechanisms  responsible  for  mate-
rializing a certain developmental stage and transit to the next 
one, while at the same time blocking the genes responsible for 
the one further down. For example, for a plant to get from the 
juvenile vegetative (where the genes controlling this stage are 
active)  to  the  next  adult  vegetative  phase  requires  the  sup-
pression  of  the  juvenile  vegetative  stage  genes,  the  activation 
of  the  adult  vegetative  stage  genes,  and  the  blockage  of  the 
genes of the ensuing reproductive stage for allowing the period 
to  materialize  the  adult  vegetative  stage.  The  involvement  of 

217

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Figure 14.1 l The ten chromosomes of Zea mays B73, encircling layers of epigenomic information (red and green tracks), specific 
retrotransposable elements (blue track), genes (gray track), haplotype SNPs between the B73 and MO17 maize lines (multicolor double-
track), and miRNAs (red and green links in the center). All tracks are heat maps of frequencies, from white to the darkest shade of the 
perspective color, apart from the SNP data — see details in the text. Visualization was created with Circos and in-house PERL scripts. 

epigenetic  chromatin  remodeling  complexes  in  controlling 
SAM  and  RAM  during  early  and  late  embryonic  stages  were 
mentioned  in  the  section  Epigenetic  Mechanisms  and  their 
Interactions. The role of the complexes in later stages, like the 
transition to reproductive stage and seed development, will be 
described in the sections Epigenetic Control of Flowering and 
Endosperm Development and Parental Imprinting. It is worth 
mentioning  that  small  RNAs,  and  particularly  miRNAs  origi-
nally  discovered  as  master  regulators  of  developmental  tim-
ing  in  Caenorhabditis  elegans,  regulate  developmental  timing 
in plants too. As described in a recent review (Poethig, 2009), 
small  RNAs  play  a  central  role  in  the  timing  of  developmen-
tal transitions. Focusing on the aforementioned transition from 
the juvenile vegetative stage to the adult vegetative stage, the 
review  specifically  describes  two  miRNAs:  miR156,  target-
ing  an  SBP-box  transcription  factor;  and  miR172,  targeting 
the  AP2-LIKE  transcription  factor  that  suppresses  flowering. 
miRNA156  is  strongly  expressed  during  the  juvenile  vegeta-
tive stage and it is mainly responsible for the manifestation of 
this stage. SBP-box transcription factors are important for con-
trolling the expression of genes for the adult vegetative stage. 

Thus, by targeting SBP-transcription factors, miR156 prevents 
the  transition  to  the  next  stage,  that  is,  the  adult  vegetative 
stage. In addition, miR156 targets an SBP transcription factor 
that negatively controls the expression of miR172. In this way 
miR156  allows  for  the  expression  of  miR172,  which  in  turn 
targets  and  cleaves  AP2-LIKE  transcripts.  Destruction  of  the 
AP2-LIKE suppressor promotes the transition to flowering.

Numerous  other  examples  of  different  miRNAs  control-
ling other developmental transitions have been reported. The 
importance  of  this  epigenetic  mechanism  on  imposing  het-
erochronic  changes  prolonging  or  shortening  developmental 
stages, and the implications of this to breeding different plant 
varieties,  is  obvious.  Furthermore,  by  their  involvement  in 
controlling  the  developmental  programs  during  the  different 
developmental  stages,  epigenetic  mechanisms  can  operate  as 
integrators  of  external  environmental  signals  affecting  devel-
opment. Reprogramming of cell differentiation in response to 
environmental  stress  leads  to  phenological  and  developmen-
tal plasticity, both important mechanisms of plant resistance. 
Phenotypic  plasticity  helps  adjust  the  durations  of  various 
phenological phases in plants, and thus allows plants to avoid 

218

From epigenetics to epigenomics and their implications in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 4

exposure  of  critical  growth  phases,  and  especially  reproduc-
tive  development,  to  stress.  Further,  adjustment  of  growth 
and  development  is  critical  for  effective  use  of  resources 
under stress (Chinnusamy and Zhu, 2009a).

A  number  of  studies,  including  our  own,  have  indicated 
that epigenetic changes are taking place as a result of chang-
ing environmental cues/stresses, such as light (circadian clock, 
photoperiod,  light  quality,  temperature  (high  or  low),  water 
availability  (drought  or  flooding),  and  so  forth.  For  example, 
in Arabidopsis, HDAC genes from both the RPD3/HDA1 and 
the  HD2  families  of  HDACs  have  been  associated  with  the 
response to biotic and abiotic stress. AtHDA19 was suggested 
to  mediate  jasmonic  acid  (JA)  and  ethylene  signaling  during 
pathogen  defense  (Tian  and  Chen,  2001;  Tian  et  al.,  2005; 
Zhou  et  al.,  2005),  and  HDA6  was  shown  to  be  required 
for  jasmonate  response,  senescence,  and  flowering  (Wu 
et  al.,  2008).  In  addition,  histone  modifications  have  been 
suggested  to  play  a  major  role  in  ABA-mediated  response  to 
abiotic  stress  (Chinnusamy  et  al.,  2008).  ABA  treatment 
caused severe reduction in expression of the histone deacety-
lase, AtHD2C, whereas over-expression of AtHD2C resulted 
in enhanced abiotic stress tolerance to salt and drought stress, 
and both the repression of several ABA-responsive genes and 
the induction of others (Sridha and Wu, 2006).

In rice, cold, osmotic and salt stress, and external applica-
tion  of  hormones  such  as  JA,  ABA,  and  SA  were  shown  to 
increase the expression of certain HDA1 genes and reduce the 
expression of others (Fu et al., 2007). Recent work from our 
group in barley has identified and characterized HDAC, HAT, 
and  PcG  genes  (Demetriou  et  al.,  2009,  2010;  Kapazoglou 
et  al.,  2010;  Papaefthimiou  et  al.,  2010).  Members  of  the 
RPD3/HDA1 family of HDACs displayed differential expres-
sion in two barley cultivars differing in various characteristics, 
such as seed size and tolerance to stress, implying a possible 
association  of  these  genes  with  different  traits.  In  addition, 
HDA1  genes  representing  each  of  the  four  classes  of  the 
HDA1  family  were  found  to  be  induced  by  exogenous  JA 
application  of  seedlings.  Similarly,  two  representative  mem-
bers of the HD2 family were shown to respond both to exog-
enous JA and ABA. HAT genes from barley were also shown 
to  be  induced  by  treatment  with  ABA.  Furthermore,  addi-
tional studies with two members of a barley Polycomb group, 
E(Z)  and  FIE,  demonstrated  a  marked  induction  of  these 
genes as a response to exogenous ABA. The observed changes 
in expression of barley epigenetic genes upon treatment with 
stress-related hormones implied an association of these genes 
with biotic and abiotic stress in barley.

Accordingly,  as  was  previously  mentioned,  mechanisms 
engaging  chromatin  remodeling  complexes  are  involved  in 
responses  to  environmental  cues.  These  provide  a  cell  mem-
ory  for  past  environmental  events  such  as  vernalization  or 
stabilization of specific developmental phases and patterns of 
differentiation.  Chromatin  remodeling  mechanisms  also  par-
ticipate in the regulation of gene expression in differentiated 
cells in response to environmental cues, either when they rep-
resent  expected  regular  variations,  such  as  light–dark  cycles, 
or unpredictable stress conditions (Jarillo et al., 2009).

Most  of  these  stress-induced  modifications  are  reset  to 
the basal level once the stress is relieved, while some of the 

modifications  may  be  stable,  that  is,  may  be  carried  forward 
as  “stress  memory”  and  may  be  inherited  across  mitotic 
or  even  meiotic  cell  divisions.  Epigenetic  stress  memory 
may  help  plants  to  cope  more  effectively  with  subsequent 
stresses.  Developmental  and  environmental  signals  can 
induce  epigenetic  modifications  in  the  genome,  and  thus, 
the  single  genome  in  a  plant  cell  gives  rise  to  multiple  epig-
enomes  in  response  to  developmental  and  environmental 
cues.  Understanding  stress-induced  epigenetic  processes  in 
plant  stress  tolerance  requires  further  clarification  of  these 
questions:  How  much  of  the  stress-induced  gene  expression 
changes  are  associated  with  alterations  in  DNA  methylation 
and histone modification marks? Are stress-induced DNA and 
histone  modifications  during  acclimation,  or  during  the  first 
experience of stress, memorized and inherited mitotically and 
meiotically? What are the adaptive values of epigenetic stress 
memory (Chinnusamy and Zhu, 2009a)?

Epigenetic control of flowering

The transition from the vegetative to the reproduction phase 
in plants is a major developmental process, and proper flow-
ering  time  in  different  environments  is  crucial  for  repro-
ductive  success.  Plants  have  evolved  several  ways  to  control 
flowering  time  effectively,  such  as  perception  of  day  length, 
vernalization  —  during  which  exposure  to  prolonged  cold 
renders  meristems  competent  to  flower  and  prevents  flow-
ering  in  the  winter  —  and  the  juvenile  to  adult  phase  tran-
sition  (Amasino,  2010).  The  central  integrator  of  flowering 
regulation  in  Arabidopsis  is  the  gene  FLOWERING  LOCUS 
C (FLC). FLC is a MADS-box transcription factor that inhib-
its floral transition by reducing the expression of three master 
regulators  of  flowering  time,  FLOWERING  LOCUS  T  (FT), 
SUPPRESSION  OF  OVEREXPRESSION  OF  CONSTANS 
1(SOC1), and FD. FT acts as a floral promoter and is control-
led by CONSTANS (CO). SOC1 is also a floral promoter and 
is partly induced by FT. In turn, FT, FD, and SOC1 activate 
floral  identity  genes,  APETALA  1  (AP1)  and  LEAFY,  lead-
ing  to  flower  formation  (Turck  et  al.,  2008).  The  expression 
of  FLC  is  under  the  control  of  a  multitude  of  both  positive 
and negative chromatin regulatory pathways, both endogenous 
(developmental) and exogenous (environmental).

Upon  vernalization  in  Arabidopsis,  FLC  is  repressed  by  a 
series  of  histone  modifications  that  drive  FLC  chromatin  to 
a  repressive  state.  These  include  H3K27me2,  H3K27me3, 
and  H3K9me  histone  methylation,  H3K4  histone  demeth-
ylation,  and  H4R3sme2  (histone  4  arginine  3  symmet-
ric  dimethylation  (Sung  and  Amasino,  2006;  Finnegan  and 
Dennis, 2007; Greb et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2007; Schmitz 
et al., 2008). Prolonged exposure to cold induces expression 
of  the  gene  VERNALIZATION  INSENSITIVE  3  (VIN3) 
encoding a protein with a plant homeodomain (PHD) finger. 
VIN3 
interacts  physically  with  VIL1/VERNALIZATION 
5 (VRN5), a VIN3 homolog, and both are required for FLC 
repression  (Sung  and  Amasino,  2004;  Greb  et  al.,  2007).  It 
was  recently  shown  that  VIN3  and  VIL1/VRN5  belong  to  a 
PRC2-like  PcG  repressive  complex  consisting  of  four  PRC2 
subunits,  SWN,  VERNALIZATION  2  (VRN2),  FIE,  and 

219

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

MSI1 (homologs of the Drosophila E(Z), ESC, SU(Z)12, and 
p55,  respectively)  along  with  one  more  PHD-domain  pro-
tein, VERNALIZATION5/VIN3 LIKE 1 (VEL1; Wood et al., 
2006; De Lucia et al., 2008).

Repressive  histone  modifications  such  as  PRC2-mediated 
H3K72me3 have been suggested to be involved in FLC silenc-
ing, also in the absence of vernalization. Arabidopsis mutants 
defective  in  SWN  or  CLF  (EZ  homologs),  EMF2  (VRN2 
homolog),  FIE,  and  MSI1,  displayed  FLC  derepression  in 
young  seedlings,  implying  the  action  of  a  CLF-SWN/EMF2/
FIE/MSI1  complex  in  FLC  suppression  during  vegetative 
development (Wood et al., 2006; Jiang et al., 2008). Similarly, 
other repressive mechanisms such as H3K4me demethylation 
were shown to take place in FLC regulation. Loss-of-function 
of  FLD,  a  plant  homolog  of  the  human  LSD1,  resulted  in 
decreased levels of H3K4me2 and H3K4me3 in FLC chroma-
tin and subsequent FLC repression (Jiang et al., 2007).

Histone  modifications  leading  to  active  chromatin  have 
also  been  reported  for  the  FLC  locus.  ARABIDOPSIS 
TRITHORAX  1  (ATX1),  encoding  a  histone  methyltrans-
ferase  responsible  for  the  H3K4me3  chromatin  activation 
mark,  was  shown  to  be  associated  with  H3K4me3  on  FLC 
chromatin  and  consequently  FLC  expression  (Pien  et  al., 
2008).  Recently,  four  genes  responsible  for  histone  H2B 
monoubiquitination  were  found  to  promote  FLC  activation 
and  subsequent  repression  of  flowering  in  Arabidopsis  (Cao 
et al., 2008; Gu et al., 2009). Moreover, a recently identified 
Arabidopsis  homolog  of  the  yeast  SWR1c  complex,  which 
deposits  the  histone  H2A.Z  variant  in  chromatin,  has  been 
implicated  in  H2A.Z  deposition  into  FLC  chromatin,  and 
subsequent FLC activation and floral repression (Choi et al., 
2002; Deal et al., 2007).

Along  with  FLC,  other  flowering  genes  are  under  epi-
genetic  control.  A  CLF-containing  PRC2-like  complex 
was  proposed  to  mediate  H3K27me3  marking  at  both 
AGAMOUS-LIKE  19  (a  MADS-box  transcription  factor 
upregulated upon vernalization and promoting flowering) and 
FT chromatin, and cause repression of both genes (Schonrock 
et  al.,  2006;  Jiang  et  al.,  2008).  In  addition  a  plant- specific 
JmjC  domain  histone  demethylase  was  found  to  mediate 
H3K4me3 in FT and an FT homolog, TWIN SISTER OF FT 
(TSF),  chromatin  (Yang  et  al.,  2010).  Furthermore,  miRNAs 
have been mentioned already as important regulators of flow-
ering  (Poethig,  2009),  whereas  other  epigenetic  mechanisms 
such  as  RdDM  and  cold-induced  long  antisense  transcripts 
have been reported to silence chromatin at the FLC locus in 
Arabidopsis (Swiezewski et al., 2007, 2009).

Interestingly,  natural  variation  in  flowering  time  has  been 
associated with an epiallele of FLC, which was created by the 
action  of  siRNA-dependent  DNA  methylation  (Zhai  et  al., 
2008). In the Arabidopsis Landsberg erecta (Ler) ecotype an 
MPF (Methylated region near Promoter of FLC) element was 
found adjacent to the promoter of FLC. This produced a high 
abundance of 24 nt siRNAs that directed DNA methylation at 
the MPF in the Ler ecotype and resulted in FLC suppression. 
However,  in  the  Columbia  (Col)  ecotype  the  corresponding 
region  produces  low  levels  of  matching  siRNAs  that  cannot 
direct  DNA  methylation.  In  the  same  study,  a  large  number 
of  additional  loci  were  identified  with  complementarity  to 

220

siRNAs,  which  showed  a  more  significant  increase  in  DNA 
methylation in Ler than Col. Furthermore, a previous report 
revealed  that  DNA  methylation  in  transcribed  regions  of 
genes  is  highly  polymorphic  between  the  two  ecotypes 
(Vaughn et al., 2007). These observations suggested that epi-
genetic changes are likely to be a major contribution to pheno-
typic variation, and this could be exploited for understanding 
the molecular basis determining agricultural traits.

Integrating  the  responses  to  developmental  and  envi-
ronmental  cues  to  ensure  flowering  under  the  most  optimal 
conditions is critical for reproductive success. A variety of epi-
genetic molecular mechanisms participate in the regulation of 
such a vital step in plant development. Additional genes and 
regulatory  networks  involved  in  the  flowering  process  have 
been described (He, 2009; Amasino, 2010).

Along  with  the  wealth  of  information  on  regulatory  path-
ways and epigenetic molecular mechanisms governing flower-
ing  in  the  model-plant  Arabidopsis,  a  great  deal  of  progress 
has been made in the past few years in delineating the genetic 
and  epigenetic  molecular  mechanisms  of  the  floral  transition 
in crop species including rice, wheat, and barley. Floral transi-
tion was proven to hide behind the early or late cultivars iden-
tified in these crops; cultivars were bred alleviating the need 
for  vernalization  allowing  dispersal  into  new  environments. 
For  example,  the  genes  and  regulatory  pathways  involved 
in  the  process  of  photoperiod  and  vernalization  have  been 
described  in  detail  in  cereals  (Distelfeld  et  al.,  2009).  One 
of  the  key  genes  in  cereal  flowering,  VRN1  (different  from 
Arabidopsis VRN1) encoding a MADS-box transcription fac-
tor was found to be in an active chromatin state upon vernali-
zation,  which  was  induced  by  increased  levels  of  H3K4me3 
and  loss  of  H3K27me3  (Oliver  et  al.,  2009).  In  barley  and 
wheat cultivars without the need for vernalization, the VRN1 
gene  was  inactivated.  Thorough  molecular  understanding  of 
the  floral  transition  can  have  important  implications  in  plant 
breeding,  as  proper  flowering  time  has  an  important  impact 
on  crop  yield.  Epigenetic  changes  can  lead  to  the  formation 
of epialleles associated with optimal flowering under different 
environmental conditions.

Endosperm development and parental 
imprinting

In  flowering  plants,  the  seed  is  formed  through  the  proc-
ess  of  double  fertilization  (Olsen,  2004).  Bypass  of  double 
fertilization  is  observed  in  natural  apomicts  or  after  muta-
genesis  of  specific  gene  loci.  In  Arabidopsis  mutations  of 
the  FIS  (fertilization  independent  seed)  class  of  genes  — 
FERTILIZATION  INDEPENDENT  SEED  (FIE),  MEDEA 
(MEA),  FERTILIZATION  INDEPENDENT  SEED2  (FIS2), 
MULTICOPY  SUPRESSOR  OF  IRA1  (MSI1)  —  encod-
ing  members  of  a  PcG-histone  methyltransferase  complex 
(described earlier) result in the formation of seed-like struc-
tures in the absence of double fertilization that eventually col-
lapse (Gehring et al., 2004; Huh et al., 2008). The phenotype 
of fie, mea, fis2, and msi1 mutants is accompanied by another 
impressive  characteristic,  that  is,  endosperm  overprolifera-
tion (Kohler et al., 2003a; Guitton et al., 2004). Endosperm 

From epigenetics to epigenomics and their implications in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 4

overproduction  and  seed  size  increase  are  also  observed  in 
crosses  where  extra  paternal  genomes  or  hypomethylated 
maternal  genomes  are  used  (Adams  et  al.,  2000).  Another 
feature  of  the  fis  phenotype  is  that  when  the  female  game-
tophyte  carrying  a  mutation  in  a  fis  locus  is  fertilized  by 
a  wild-type  plant,  the  seed  finally  collapses  indicative  of 
a  lethal  maternal  effect  of  the  fis  mutation  and  a  gameto-
phytic maternal control over seed development by FIS genes 
(Gehring  et  al.,  2004;  Huh  et  al.,  2008).  This  is  partially 
attributed  to  parental  imprinting  of  FIE,  MEA,  and  FIS2. 
Parental genomic imprinting refers to preferential expression 
of  a  gene  from  only  the  maternal  or  paternal  allele  (unipa-
rental gene expression). So far, a number of imprinted genes 
have  been  identified  in  Arabidopsis  and  maize  (Berger  and 
Chaudhury,  2009;  Mosher  et  al.,  2009).  Most  of  these  are 
preferentially expressed in the endosperm and are controlled 
by one or more epigenetic mechanisms. The combined action 
of  DNA  methylation/demethylation  and  histone  modifica-
tions is exemplified in the phenomenon of parental imprinting 
of  the  PHERES1  (PHE1)  and  the  MEDEA  (MEA)  genes  in 
the Arabidopsis endosperm during seed development. Highly 
regulated spatiotemporal expression of only the paternal allele 
of  PHE1,  a  Type-I  MADS-box  gene,  is  crucial  for  proper 
seed development (Kohler et al., 2003b). Strict repression of 
PHE1 prior to fertilization and gene activation after fertiliza-
tion  is  under  the  control  of  both  DNA  cytosine  methylation 
and  histone  modifications.  Specifically,  the  requirement  for 
PHE1 repression prior to fertilization is accomplished, in part, 
by  the  unmethylated  status  of  both  paternal  and  maternal 
alleles in the sperm cell and in the central cell of the female 
gametophyte,  respectively.  Post-fertilization  methylation  of  a 
distantly  located  3  downstream  region  of  the  PHE1  pater-
nal allele is associated with gene activation after fertilization, 
whereas  the  unmethylated  maternal  PHE1  allele  remains 
transcriptionally  silent  (Makarevich  et  al.,  2008).  Notably, 
in this case DNA methylation is associated with gene activa-
tion and not repression as is usually the case, pointing to dif-
ferent  mechanisms  underlying  this  phenomenon.  In  addition 
to  DNA  methylation  there  is  H3K27me3  at  PHE1  histones, 
established  by  the  gene  MEA,  an  H3K27me3  methyltrans-
ferase  and  subunit  of  a  PcG  complex.  H3K27me3  mark-
ing  keeps  both  paternal  and  maternal  PHE1  alleles  silent 
until  fertilization  when  an  unknown  mechanism  removes 
H3K27me3  suppression  from  only  the  paternal  PHE1allele. 
MEA and FIS2 are also parentally imprinted, but unlike PHE1 
it  is  the  maternal  allele  that  is  expressed.  Prior  to  fertiliza-
tion, in the central cell of the female gametophyte, both MEA 
and FIS2 maternal alleles are repressed by methylation at 5 
upstream  and  3  downstream  elements,  most  likely  estab-
lished  by  MET1.  Likewise,  in  the  sperm  cell  both MEA  and 
FIS2 paternal alleles are repressed (Huh et al., 2008; Kohler 
and  Villar,  2008).  The  maternal  allele  of  the  DNA  glycosy-
lase  DME  only  expressed  in  the  central  cell  and  not  in  the 
sperm  cell,  and  acting  antagonistically  to  MET1,  demethyl-
ates  maternal  MEA  and  FIS2  and  allows  for  the  expression 
of the maternal MEA and FIS2 alleles and production of the 
MEA/FIE/FIS2/MSI1 complex (Gehring et al., 2006; Jullien 
et  al.,  2006;  Huh  et  al.,  2008).  After  fertilization,  this  com-
plex establishes H3K27me3 marks at paternal MEA histones 

within the zygote, further repressing the paternal MEA allele 
(as  well  as  the  maternal  PHE1  allele  mentioned  previously) 
and ensuring genomic imprinting at the MEA and PHE1 loci, 
a  condition  crucial  for  seed  viability  (Huh  et  al.,  2008).  In 
conclusion,  imprinting  at  these  loci  is  regulated  by  a  combi-
nation  of  DNA  methylation  by  MET1,  DNA  demethylation 
via  transcriptional  repression  of  MET1  through  the  RBR1/
MSI1  pathway,  by  active  DNA  demethylation  via  the  DNA 
glycosylase  DME,  and  by  histone  modifications,  in  particular 
H3K27me3 (Berger and Chaudhury, 2009).

Up to now DME-mediated DNA demethylation appeared 
to  target  individual  genes  of  the  maternal  genome,  but  two 
recent reports have demonstrated DME-dependent, genome-
wide  DNA  demethylation  during  female  gametogenesis  and 
seed  development.  These  studies  mapped  the  global  DNA 
methylation  pattern  of  both  the  embryo  and  endosperm 
genomes  in  Arabidopsis  through  deep  sequencing  of  methyl-
cytosine 
immunoprecipitated  DNA  and  high-throughput 
bisulfite  DNA  sequencing  (Gehring  et  al.,  2009;  Hsieh 
et al., 2009). Bulk methylation decrease in all sequence con-
texts  (CG,  CHG,  CHH)  was  observed  in  the  endosperm 
as  compared  to  the  embryo.  CG-methylation  was  reduced 
in  both  gene  bodies  and  repeats,  and  was  partially  restored 
in  dme  mutants.  The  most  prominent  loss  of  genic  methyla-
tion occurred at 5 of the transcriptional start site and genes 
with  reduced  5  upstream  methylation  were  preferentially 
expressed  in  the  endosperm.  Furthermore,  methylation  lev-
els  at  sequences  of  known  imprinted  genes  were  also  calcu-
lated, specifically the MEA 3 repeats, the FWA promoter and 
transcriptional start site, the FIS2 promoter and the PHE1 3 
repeats,  and  significant  methylation  reduction  was  evidenced 
in  the  endosperm.  Moreover,  CG-methylation  was  largely 
restored for all genes in dme endosperm. It was proposed that 
imprinting is not confined to specific genes but rather affects 
and reprograms the entire maternal genome in the endosperm 
(Hsieh et al., 2009). Unlike mammals, which have to establish 
imprinting  by  differential  methylation  of  specific  sequences 
in  their  gametes,  plants  seem  to  carry  out  global  demethyla-
tion of the central cell leading to a hypomethylated maternal 
endosperm  genome,  regardless  of  massive  transposon  dere-
pression.  The  endosperm  genome  is  not  transmitted  to  the 
next  generation;  therefore,  transient  transposon  activation 
may have little negative impact, and resetting the DNA meth-
ylation pattern of the endosperm genome is not required.

It  seems  that  DNA  methylation  and  parental  imprint-
ing  through  DME  demethylation  in  the  central  cell  and 
endosperm  have  critical  roles  in  seed  development  and 
seed  viability.  This  is  most  likely  because  maintaining  a  spe-
cific  ratio  between  maternal  and  paternal  genomes  is  vital 
for  proper  seed  development.  According  to  the  parental 
conflict  hypothesis,  maternal  and  paternal  genomes  have 
conflicting  roles.  The  maternal  genome  has  evolved  to  dis-
tribute  resources  equally  to  all  offspring,  whereas  the  pater-
nal  genome  has  evolved  to  maximize  resource  allocation  to 
the  best-fit  offspring  (Haig  and  Westoby,  1991).  In  support 
of this theory, interploidy studies in Arabidopsis have shown 
that crosses between a tetraploid mother and a diploid father 
produce smaller than wild-type seeds, and crosses between a 
tetraploid  father  and  a  diploid  mother  produced  larger  than 

221

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

wild-type  seeds  (Scott  et  al.,  1998).  Thus  excess  of  paren-
tal  genomes  has  an  impact  on  seed  size.  Similar  seed-size 
increase  was  demonstrated  when  hypomethylated  maternal 
genomes were used (Adams et al., 2000). It has been shown 
that  loss-of-function  mutations  in  MET1  and  CMT3  lead 
to  Arabidopsis  embryos  with  abnormal  development  and 
reduced viability (Xiao et al., 2006a). It has also been shown 
that  global  demethylation  in  met1  pollen  mutants  inhibits 
endosperm  growth  and  results  in  smaller  seeds  (Xiao  et  al., 
2006b).  On  the  other  hand,  crosses  between  wild-type  pol-
len  and  ovules  from  met1/met1  plants  or  ovules  carrying  the 
MET1  antisense  gene  produce  plants  with  larger  seeds.  This 
suggested that MET1 dosage in the maternal vegetative tissue 
has an impact on seed size.

Whereas  in  dicots  the  endosperm  is  consumed  by  the 
embryo during seed development, in monocots such as cere-
als,  the  endosperm  persists  after  embryo  development  is 
completed  and  constitutes  the  major  portion  of  the  mature 
kernel.  Since  the  endosperm  of  cereals  provides  the  world’s 
largest supply of caloric intake, understanding seed-dependent 
epigenetic  processes  such  as  imprinting  in  monocot  plants  is 
of  great  importance.  The  epigenetic  regulation  of  imprint-
ing  of  genes  associated  with  seed  development  and  seed 
size  and  yield  could  have  important  uses  in  plant  breeding, 
for  example,  by  driving  mono-allelic  expression  of  desir-
able genes in agriculturally important species. Recently genes 
such as HDACs, HATs, and PcG genes, involved in epigenetic 
regulation  in  seed  development  have  been  identified  in  bar-
ley  (Demetriou  et  al.,  2009,  2010;  Kapazoglou  et  al.,  2010; 
Papaefthimiou  et  al.,  2010).  Genes  encoding  members  of  a 
PcG complex exhibit significant differences in expression dur-
ing  seed  development  in  barley  cultivars  with  different  seed 
size.  In  addition,  they  have  been  mapped  on  barley  chromo-
somes and have been associated with seed-related traits such 
as malting quality.

Further understanding and manipulating of imprinting and 
other seed developmental epigenetic mechanisms in economi-
cally  important  monocots  could  have  significant  implications 
in plant breeding for improved varieties.

Conclusions and Prospects

The availability of the maize genome opens new horizons not 
only in further understanding a number of biological phenom-
ena  first  described  in  maize  and  having  an  epigenetic  basis 

References

like  paramutation,  parental  imprinting,  cycling  of  TEs,  and 
so  forth,  but  to  also  understand  genetic  diversity  and  varia-
tion from thousands of years during the domestication proc-
ess,  from  teosinte  to  different  maize  races.  Equally  relevant 
are  the  substantial  changes  made  by  breeders  the  last  hun-
dred  years  or  so,  including  the  exploitation  of  heterosis.  As 
was stressed in a recent review (Hollick and Springer, 2009), 
the  maize  epigenome  can  perceive  and  respond  in  heritable 
ways to stressful conditions, but the mode of this perception 
is  completely  unknown.  It  is  anticipated  that  further  under-
standing  of  the  maize  epigenome  and  its  control  system,  as 
well  as  in  other  crop  species,  will  eventually  illuminate  this 
connection between environmental perception and the herit-
able “genetic” changes.

Acknowledgments

We would like to acknowledge the members of our institute 
for  critically  reading  the  review  and  the  General  Secretariat 
for Research and Technology, Greece, for continuous support 
of our institute.

Abbreviations

5 methyl cytosine
5mC 
Methyltransferase
MTase 
Curly Leaf
CLF 
Chromomethyltransferase
CMT 
Dicer-like protein
DCL 
Demeter
DME 
Enhancer of Zeste
E(Z) 
Fertilization-independent endosperm
FIE 
Fertilization-independent seed
FIS 
Flowering Locus C
FLC 
Histone acetyltransferase
HAT 
Histone deacetylase
HDAC 
Histone demethylase
HDM 
HMT 
Histone methyltransferase
SU(Z)12  Suppressor of Zeste (12)
SAM 
RAM 
TE 
TCP 

Shoot apical meristem
Root apical meristem
Transposable Element
 TEOSINTE  BRANCHED1,  CYCLOIDEA,  and 
PCF

Adams, S., Vinkenoog, R., Spielman, M., 

Dickinson, H. G., & Scott, R. J. (2000). 
Parent-of-origin effects on seed development 
in Arabidopsis thaliana require DNA 
methylation. Development, 127, 2493–2502.

Agius, F., Kapoor, A., & Zhu, J. -K. (2006). 

Role of the Arabidopsis DNA glycosylase/
lyase ROS1 in active DNA demethylation. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 103, 11796–11801.

Aichinger, E., Villar, C. B., Farrona, S., Reyes, J. 
C., Hennig, L., & Kohler, C. (2009). CHD3 
proteins and polycomb group proteins 
antagonistically determine cell identity in 
Arabidopsis. PLoS Genetics, 5, e1000605.

Amasino, R. M. (2010). Seasonal and 

developmental timing of flowering. Plant 
Journal, 61, 1001–1013.

Aufsatz, W., Mette, M. F., van der Winden, J., 

Matzke, M., & Matzke, A. J. (2002). HDA6, 

a putative histone deacetylase needed to 
enhance DNA methylation induced by 
double-stranded RNA. Embo Journal, 21, 
6832–6841.

Backman, T. W. H., Sullivan, C. M., Cumbie, 

J. S., Miller, Z. A., Chapman, E. J., & 
Fahlgren, N., et al. (2008). Update of 
ASRP: The Arabidopsis small RNA project 
database. Nucleic Acids Research, 36, 
D982–D985.

222

From epigenetics to epigenomics and their implications in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 4

Baucom, R. S., Estill, J. C., Chaparro, C., 
Upshaw, N., Jogi, A., & Deragon, J. M., 
et al. (2009). Exceptional diversity, non-
random distribution, and rapid evolution 
of retroelements in the B73 maize genome. 
PloS Genetics, 5(11), e1000732.

Beck, S., & Rakyan, V. K. (2008). The 

methylome: Approaches for global DNA 
methylation profiling. Trends in Genetics, 
24, 231–237.

Berger, F., & Chaudhury, A. (2009). Parental 

memories shape seeds. Trends in Plant 
Science, 14, 550–556.

Bernatavichute, Y. V., Zhang, X., Cokus, S., 
Pellegrini, M., & Jacobsen, S. E. (2008). 
Genome-wide association of histone H3 
lysine nine methylation with CHG DNA 
methylation in Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS 
One, 3, e3156.

Bousios, A., Darzentas, N., Tsaftaris, A., & 
Pearce, S. R. (2010). Highly conserved 
motifs in non-coding regions of Sirevirus 
retrotransposons: The key for their pattern 
of distribution within and across plants? 
BMC Genomics, 11, 89.

Cao, Y., Dai, Y., Cui, S., & Ma, L. (2008). 

Histone H2B monoubiquitination in the 
chromatin of FLOWERING LOCUS C 
regulates flowering time in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Cell, 20, 2586.

Chan, S. W. L., Henderson, I. R., & Jacobsen, 
S. E. (2005). Gardening the genome: DNA 
methylation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 
Reviews Genetics, 6, 351–360.

Chanvivattana, Y., Bishopp, A., Schubert, D., 

Stock, C., Moon, Y. -H., & Sung, Z. R.,  
et al. (2004). Interaction of Polycomb-group 
proteins controlling flowering in Arabidopsis. 
Development, 131, 5263–5276.

Chapman, E. J., & Carrington, J. C. (2007). 

Specialization and evolution of endogenous 
small RNA pathways. Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 8, 884–896.

Chen, Z. J., & Tian, L. (2007). Roles of 

dynamic and reversible histone acetylation 
in plant development and polyploidy. 
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1769, 
295–307.

Chinnusamy, V., & Zhu, J. K. (2009a). 

Epigenetic regulation of stress responses in 
plants. Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 12, 
133–139.

Chinnusamy, V., & Zhu, J. -K. (2009b). 
RNA-directed DNA methylation and 
demethylation in plants. Science in China 
Series C: Life Sciences, 52, 331–343.

Chinnusamy, V., Gong, Z., & Zhu, J. K. (2008). 
Abscisic acid-mediated epigenetic processes 
in plant development and stress responses. 
Journal of Integrative Plant Biology, 50, 
1187–1195.

Choi, Y., Gehring, M., Johnson, L., Hannon, 
M., Harada, J. J., & Goldberg, R. B., et al. 
(2002). DEMETER, a DNA glycosylase 
domain protein, is required for endosperm 
gene imprinting and seed viability in 
Arabidopsis. Cell, 110, 33–42.

Cokus, S. J., Feng, S., Zhang, X., Chen, Z., 
Merriman, B., & Haudenschild, C. D.,  
et al. (2008). Shotgun bisulphite sequencing 
of the Arabidopsis genome reveals DNA 
methylation patterning. Nature, 452, 
215–219.

Cubas, P., Vincent, C., & Coen, E. (1999). An 
epigenetic mutation responsible for natural 
variation in floral symmetry. Nature, 401, 
157–161.

De Lucia, F., Crevillen, P., Jones, A. M., Greb, 

T., & Dean, C. (2008). A PHD-polycomb 
repressive complex 2 triggers the epigenetic 
silencing of FLC during vernalization. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
105, 16831–16836.

Deal, R. B., Topp, C. N., McKinney, E. C., 
& Meagher, R. B. (2007). Repression of 
flowering in Arabidopsis requires activation of 
FLOWERING LOCUS C expression by the 
histone variant H2A.Z. Plant Cell, 19, 74.

Demetriou, K., Kapazoglou, A., Bladenopoulos, 

K., & Tsaftaris, A. (2010). Epigenetic 
chromatin modifiers in barley: II. 
Characterization and expression analysis 
of the HDA1 family of barley histone 
deacetylases during development and in 
response to Jasmonic acid. Plant Molecular 
Biology Reporter, 28, 9–21.

Demetriou, K., Kapazolgou, A., Tondelli, A., 

Francia, E., Stanca, M. S., & Bladenopoulos, 
K., et al. (2009). Epigenetic chromatin 
modifiers in barley: I. Cloning, mapping and 
expression analysis of the plant specific HD2 
family of histone deacetylases from barley, 
during seed development and after hormonal 
treatment. Physiologia Plantarum, 136, 
358–368.

Distelfeld, A., Li, C., & Dubcovsky, J. (2009). 

Regulation of flowering in temperate cereals. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 12, 
178–184.

Dunoyer, P., Schott, G., Himber, C., Meyer, 
D., Takeda, A., & Carrington, J. C., et al. 
(2010). Small RNA duplexes function as 
mobile silencing signals between plant cells. 
Science, 328, 912–916.

Finnegan, E. J., & Dennis, E. S. (2007). 
Vernalization-induced trimethylation 
of histone H3 lysine 27 at FLC is not 
maintained in mitotically quiescent cells. 
Current Biology, 17, 1978–1983.

Fu, W., Wu, K., & Duan, J. (2007). Sequence 

and expression analysis of histone 
deacetylases in rice. Biochemical and 
Biophysical Research Communications, 356, 
843–850.

Fuks, F. (2005). DNA methylation and histone 
modifications: Teaming up to silence genes. 
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development, 
15, 490–495.

Gehring, M., Bubb, K. L., & Henikoff, 
S. (2009). Extensive demethylation 
of repetitive elements during seed 
development underlies gene imprinting. 
Science, 324, 1447–1451.

Gehring, M., Choi, Y., & Fischer, R. L. (2004). 

Imprinting and seed development. Plant 
Cell, 16(Suppl), S203–213.

Gehring, M., Huh, J. H., Hsieh, T. F., 

Penterman, J., Choi, Y., & Harada, J. J.,  
et al. (2006). DEMETER DNA glycosylase 
establishes MEDEA polycomb gene self-
imprinting by allele-specific demethylation. 
Cell, 124, 495–506.

Gendler, K., Paulsen, T., & Napoli, C. (2008). 

ChromDB: The chromatin database. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 36, D298–D302.

Gore, M. A., Chia, J. M., Elshire, R. J., Sun, Q., 
Ersoz, E. S., & Hurwitz, B. L., et al. (2009). 
A first-generation haplotype map of maize. 
Science, 326, 1115–1117.

Greb, T., Mylne, J. S., Crevillen, P., Geraldo, 

N., An, H., & Gendall, A. R., et al. (2007). 
The PHD finger protein VRN5 functions in 
the epigenetic silencing of Arabidopsis FLC. 
Current Biology, 17, 73–78.

Gu, X., Jiang, D., Wang, Y., Bachmair, A., & He, 
Y. (2009). Repression of the floral transition 
via histone H2B monoubiquitination. Plant 
Journal, 57, 422.

Guitton, A. E., Page, D. R., Chambrier, P., 

Lionnet, C., Faure, J. E., & Grossniklaus, U., 
et al. (2004). Identification of new members 
of fertilisation independent seed polycomb 
group pathway involved in the control of 
seed development in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Development, 131, 2971–2981.

Haig, D., & Westoby, M. (1991). Seed size, 
pollination costs and angiosperm success. 
Evolutionary Ecology, 5, 231–247.

He, Y. (2009). Control of the transition to 
flowering by chromatin modifications. 
Molecular Plant, 2, 554–564.

Henderson, I. R., & Jacobsen, S. E. (2007). 
Epigenetic inheritance in plants. Nature, 
447, 418–424.

Henderson, I. R., & Jacobsen, S. E. (2008). 

Tandem repeats upstream of the Arabidopsis 
endogene SDC recruit non-CG DNA 
methylation and initiate siRNA spreading. 
Genes & Development, 22, 1597–1606.

Ho, L., & Crabtree, G. R. (2010). Chromatin 
remodelling during development. Nature, 
463, 474–484.

Hollick, J. B. & Springer, N. (2009). Epigenetic 

Phenomena and Epigenomics in Maize. In 
Epigenomics (pp. 119–147).

Hollick, J. B. (2008). Sensing the epigenome. 

Trends in Plant Science, 13, 398–404.
Hong, E. -H., Jeong, Y. -M., Ryu, J. -Y., 

Amasino, R., Noh, B., & Noh, Y. -S. (2009). 
Temporal and spatial expression patterns of 
nine Arabidopsis genes encoding Jumonji 
C-domain proteins. Molecules and Cells, 27, 
481–490.

Hsieh, T. F., Ibarra, C. A., Silva, P., Zemach, A., 

Eshed-Williams, L., & Fischer, R. L.,  
et al. (2009). Genome-wide demethylation 
of Arabidopsis endosperm. Science, 324, 
1451–1454.

Huh, J. H., Bauer, M. J., Hsieh, T. F., & Fischer, 
R. L. (2008). Cellular programming of plant 
gene imprinting. Cell, 132, 735–744.
Ito, T., Sakai, H., & Meyerowitz, E. M. 
(2003). Whorl-specific expression of 
the SUPERMAN gene of Arabidopsis is 
mediated by cis elements in the transcribed 
region. Current Biology, 13, 1524–1530.
Jackson, J. P., Lindroth, A. M., Cao, X., & 

Jacobsen, S. E. (2002). Control of CpNpG 
DNA methylation by the KRYPTONITE 
histone H3 methyltransferase. Nature, 416, 
556–560.

Jarillo, J. A., Piñeiro, M., Cubas, P., & 

Martínez-Zapater, J. M. (2009). Chromatin 
remodeling in plant development. The 
International Journal of Developmental 
Biology, 53, 1581–1596.

Jeong, J. -H., Song, H. -R., Ko, J. -H., Jeong, 

Y. -M., Kwon, Y. E., & Seol, J. H., et al. 

223

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

(2009). Repression of FLOWERING 
LOCUS T Chromatin by functionally 
redundant histone H3 Lysine 4 
Demethylases in Arabidopsis. PLoS One, 4, 
e8033.

Jia, Y., Lisch, D. R., Ohtsu, K., Scanlon, M. 

J., Nettleton, D., & Schnable, P. S. (2009). 
Loss of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase 
2 (RDR2) function causes widespread and 
unexpected changes in the expression of 
transposons, genes, and 24-nt small RNAs. 
Plos Genetics, 5

Jiang, D., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., & He, Y. (2008). 

Repression of FLOWERING LOCUS 
C and FLOWERING LOCUS T by the 
Arabidopsis Polycomb repressive complex 2 
components. PLoS One, 3, e3404.

Jiang, D., Yang, W., He, Y., & Amasino, R. M. 
(2007). Arabidopsis relatives of the human 
lysine-specific Demethylase1 repress the 
expression of FWA and FLOWERING 
LOCUS C and thus promote the floral 
transition. Plant Cell, 19, 2975.

John, B., Enright, A. J., Aravin, A., Tuschl, 
T., Sander, C., & Marks, D. S. (2004). 
Human MicroRNA targets. Plos Biology, 2, 
1862–1879.

Johnson, D. S., Li, W., Gordon, D. B., 

Bhattacharjee, A., Curry, B., & Ghosh, 
J., et al. (2008). Systematic evaluation of 
variability in ChIP-chip experiments using 
predefined DNA targets. Genome Research, 
18, 393–403.

Jullien, P. E., Kinoshita, T., Ohad, N., & Berger, 
F. (2006). Maintenance of DNA methylation 
during the Arabidopsis life cycle is essential 
for parental imprinting. Plant Cell, 18, 
1360–1372.

Kapazoglou, A., Tondelli, A., Papaefthimiou, 

D., Ampatzidou, H., Francia, E., & Stanca, 
M., et al. (2010). Epigenetic chromatin 
modifiers in barley: IV. The study of barley 
Polycomb group (PcG) genes during seed 
development and in response to external 
ABA. BMC Plant Biology, 10, 73.

Kasschau, K. D.  e.  a. (2007). Genome-wide 

profiling and analysis of Arabidopsis siRNAs. 
PLoS Biology, 5, 0479–0493.

Khraiwesh, B., Arif, M. A., Seumel, G. I., 
Ossowski, S., Weigel, D., & Reski, R.,  
et al. (2010). Transcriptional control of 
gene expression by MicroRNAs. Cell, 140, 
111–122.

Kinoshita, T., Miura, A., Choi, Y., Kinoshita, 

Y., Cao, X., & Jacobsen, S. E., et al. (2004). 
One-way control of FWA imprinting 
in Arabidopsis endosperm by DNA 
methylation. Science, 303, 521–523.

Kinoshita, Y., Saze, H., Kinoshita, T., Miura, 
A., Soppe, W. J., & Koornneef, M., et al. 
(2007). Control of FWA gene silencing in 
Arabidopsis thaliana by SINE-related direct 
repeats. Plant Journal, 49, 38–45.
Kohler, C., & Villar, C. B. R. (2008). 

Programming of gene expression by 
Polycomb group proteins. Trends in Cell 
Biology, 18, 236–243.

Kohler, C., Hennig, L., Bouveret, R., 

Gheyselinck, J., Grossniklaus, U., & 
Gruissem, W. (2003a). Arabidopsis MSI1 
is a component of the E(Z)/FIE Polycomb 
group complex and required for seed 
development. Embo Journal, 22, 4804–4814.

224

Kohler, C., Hennig, L., Spillane, C., Pien, S.,  

Gruissem, W., & Grossniklaus, U. 
(2003b). The Polycomb-group protein 
MEDEA regulates seed development by 
controlling expression of the MADS-box 
gene PHERES1. Genes & Development, 17, 
1540–1553.

Kouzarides, T. (2007). Chromatin modifications 

and their function. Cell, 128, 693–705.

Krzywinski, M., Schein, J., Birol, I., Connors, 

J., Gascoyne, R., & Horsman, D., et al. 
(2009). Circos: An information aesthetic for 
comparative genomics. Genome Research, 
19, 1639–1645.

Lamb, J. C., Meyer, J. M., Corcoran, B., Kato, 

A., Han, F. P., & Birchler, J. A. (2007). 
Distinct chromosomal distributions of highly 
repetitive sequences in maize. Chromosome 
Research, 15, 33–49.

Law, J. A., & Jacobsen, S. E. (2010). 

Establishing, maintaining and modifying 
DNA methylation patterns in plants and 
animals. Nature Reviews Genetics, 11, 
204–220.

Li, X. Y., Wang, X. F., He, K., Ma, Y. Q., Su, 

N., & He, H., et al. (2008). High-resolution 
mapping of epigenetic modifications of the 
rice genome uncovers interplay between 
DNA methylation, histone methylation, and 
gene expression. Plant Cell, 20, 259–276.
Lister, R., O’Malley, R. C., Tonti-Filippini, J., 
Gregory, B. D., Berry, C. C., & Millar, A. 
H., et al. (2008). Highly integrated single-
base resolution maps of the epigenome in 
Arabidopsis. Cell, 133, 523–536.

Luo, M., Platten, D., Chaudhury, A., Peacock, 
W. J., & Dennis, E. S. (2009). Expression, 
imprinting, and evolution of rice homologues 
of the Polycomb group genes. Molecular 
Plant, 2, 711–723.

Lusser, A., Kolle, D., & Loidl, P. (2001). 

Histone acetylation: Lessons from the plant 
kingdom. Trends in Plant Science, 6, 59–65.
Makarevich, G., Villar, C. B. R., Erilova, A., & 

Kohler, C. (2008). Mechanism of PHERES1 
imprinting in Arabidopsis. Journal of Cell 
Science, 121, 906–912.

Malagnac, F., Bartee, L., & Bender, J. 

(2002). An Arabidopsis SET domain 
protein required for maintenance but not 
establishment of DNA methylation. The 
EMBO Journal, 21, 6842–6852.

March-Diaz, R., & Reyes, J. C. (2009). The 
beauty of being a variant: H2A.Z and the 
SWR1 complex in plants. Molecular Plant, 
2, 565–577.

Martienssen, R. (2010). Small RNA makes its 

move. Science, 328, 834–835.

Martin, R. C., Liu, P. -P., Goloviznina, N. A., & 
Nonogaki, H. (2010). microRNA, seeds, and 
Darwin? Diverse function of miRNA in seed 
biology and plant responses to stress. Journal 
of Experimental Botany, 61, 2229–2234.

Matzke, M. A., & Birchler, J. A. (2005). RNAi-
mediated pathways in the nucleus. Nature 
Reviews Genetics, 6, 24–35.

Matzke, M. A., Matzke, A. J. M., Pruss, G. J., 
& Vance, V. B. (2001). RNA-based silencing 
strategies in plants. Current Opinion in 
Genetics & Development, 11, 221–227.
McCarthy, E. M., Liu, J. D., Lizhi, G., & 

McDonald, J. F. (2002). Long terminal 

repeat retrotransposons of Oryza sativa. 
Genome Biology, 3(10), 0053.

Miranda, K. C., Huynh, T., Tay, Y., Ang, Y. 
S., Tam, W. L., & Thomson, A. M., et al. 
(2006). A pattern-based method for the 
identification of microRNA binding sites and 
their corresponding heteroduplexes. Cell, 
126, 1203–1217.

Molnar, A., Melnyk, C. W., Bassett, A., 

Hardcastle, T. J., Dunn, R., & Baulcombe, 
D. C. (2010). Small silencing RNAs in 
plants are mobile and direct epigenetic 
modification in recipient cells. Science, 328, 
872–875.

Mosher, R. A., Melnyk, C. W., Kelly, K. 

A., Dunn, R. M., Studholme, D. J., & 
Baulcombe, D. C. (2009). Uniparental 
expression of PolIV-dependent siRNAs 
in developing endosperm of Arabidopsis. 
Nature, 460, 283–286.

Mosher, R. A., Schwach, F., Studholme, 

D., & Baulcombe, D. C. (2008). PolIVb 
influences RNA-directed DNA methylation 
independently of its role in siRNA 
biogenesis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 105, 3145–3150.

Moxon, S., Schwach, F., Dalmay, T., MacLean, 

D., Studholme, D. J., & Moulton, V. (2008). 
A toolkit for analysing large-scale plant 
small RNA datasets. Bioinformatics, 24, 
2252–2253.

Nakano, M., Nobuta, K., Vemaraju, K., Tej, S. 
S., Skogen, J. W., & Meyers, B. C. (2006). 
Plant MPSS databases: Signature-based 
transcriptional resources for analyses of 
mRNA and small RNA. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 34, D731–D735.

Nobuta, K., Lu, C., Shrivastava, R., Pillay, M., 
De Paoli, E., & Accerbi, M., et al. (2008). 
Distinct size distribution of endogenous 
siRNAs in maize: Evidence from deep 
sequencing in the mop1-1 mutant. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
105, 14958–14963.

Oliver, S. N., Finnegan, E. J., Dennis, E. S., 

Peacock, W. J., & Trevaskis, B. (2009). 
Vernalization-induced flowering in cereals 
is associated with changes in histone 
methylation at the VERNALIZATION1 
gene. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 106, 8386–8391.

Olsen, O. A. (2004). Nuclear endosperm 

development in cereals and Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Plant Cell, 16, S214–S227.
Palauqui, J. -C., Elmayan, T., Pollien, J. 

-M., & Vaucheret, H. (1997). Systemic 
acquired silencing: Transgene-specific post-
transcriptional silencing is transmitted by 
grafting from silenced stocks to non-silenced 
scions. The EMBO Journal, 16, 4738–4745.
Papaefthimiou, D., Likotrafiti, E., Kapazoglou, 

A., Bladenopoulos, K., & Tsaftaris, A. 
(2010). Epigenetic chromatin modifiers in 
barley: III. Isolation and characterization 
of the barley GNAT-MYST family of 
histone acetyltransferases and responses 
to exogenous ABA. Plant Physiology and 
Biochemistry, 48, 98–107.

Park, P. J. (2008). Epigenetics meets next-
generation sequencing. Epigenetics, 3, 
318–321.

From epigenetics to epigenomics and their implications in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 4

Park, P. J. (2009). ChIP-seq: Advantages and 

challenges of a maturing technology. Nature 
Reviews Genetics, 10, 669–680.

Penterman, J., Uzawa, R., & Fischer, R. L. 
(2007a). Genetic interactions between 
DNA demethylation and methylation in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 145, 1549–
1557.

Penterman, J., Zilberman, D., Huh, J. H., 
Ballinger, T., Henikoff, S., & Fischer, R. 
L. (2007b). DNA demethylation in the 
Arabidopsis genome. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 104, 6752–
6757.

Pereira, V. (2004). Insertion bias and purifying 

selection of retrotransposons in the 
Arabidopsis thaliana genome. Genome 
Biology, 5(10), R79.

Pien, S., Fleury, D., Mylne, J. S., Crevillen, 

P., Inze, D., & Avramova, Z., et al. 
(2008). ARABIDOPSIS TRITHORAX1 
dynamically regulates FLOWERING 
LOCUS C activation via histone 3 lysine 4 
trimethylation. Plant Cell, 20, 580–588.

Poethig, R. S. (2009). Small RNAs and 

developmental timing in plants. Current 
Opinion in Genetics & Development, 19, 
374–378.

Probst, A. V., Fagard, M., Proux, F., Mourrain, 

P., Boutet, S., & Earley, K., et al. (2004). 
Arabidopsis histone deacetylase HDA6 is 
required for maintenance of transcriptional 
gene silencing and determines nuclear 
organization of rDNA repeats. Plant Cell, 
16, 1021–1034.

Rigoutsos, I., & Floratos, A. (1998). 

Combinatorial pattern discovery in biological 
sequences: The TEIRESIAS algorithm. 
Bioinformatics, 14, 55–67.

Rossi, V., Locatelli, S., Lanzanova, C., Boniotti, 

M. B., Varotto, S., & Pipal, A., et al. 
(2003). A maize histone deacetylase and 
retinoblastoma-related protein physically 
interact and cooperate in repressing gene 
transcription. Plant Molecular Biology, 51, 
401–413.

Rossi, V., Locatelli, S., Varotto, S., Donn, G., 

Pirona, R., & Henderson, D. A.,  
et al. (2007). Maize histone deacetylase 
hda101 is involved in plant development, 
gene transcription, and sequence-specific 
modulation of histone modification of genes 
and repeats. Plant Cell, 19, 1145–1162.
Saze, H., & Kakutani, T. (2007). Heritable 

epigenetic mutation of a transposon-
flanked Arabidopsis gene due to lack of the 
chromatin-remodeling factor DDM1. Embo 
Journal, 26, 3641–3652.

Schatlowski, N., Creasy, K., Goodrich, J., 
& Schubert, D. (2008). Keeping plants 
in shape: Polycomb-group genes and 
histone methylation. Seminars in Cell & 
Developmental Biology, 19, 547–553.

Schmitz, R. J., Sung, S., & Amasino, R. M. 

(2008). Histone arginine methylation 
is required for vernalization-induced 
epigenetic silencing of FLC in winter-annual 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 105, 411–416.

Schnable, P. S., Ware, D., Fulton, R. S., Stein, J. 
C., Wei, F. S., & Pasternak, S., et al. (2009). 
The B73 maize genome: Complexity, 

diversity, and dynamics. Science, 326, 
1112–1115.

Schonrock, N., Bouveret, R., Leroy, O., Borghi, 

L., Kohler, C., & Gruissem, W., et al. 
(2006). Polycomb-group proteins repress 
the floral activator AGL19 in the FLC-
independent vernalization pathway. Genes & 
Development, 20, 1667–1678.

Schubert, D., Primavesi, L., Bishopp, A., 
Roberts, G., Doonan, J., & Jenuwein, 
T., et al. (2006). Silencing by plant 
Polycomb-group genes requires dispersed 
trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27. 
The EMBO Journal, 25, 4638–4649.
Scott, R. J., Spielman, M., Bailey, J., & 

Dickinson, H. G. (1998). Parent-of-origin 
effects on seed development in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Development, 125, 3329–3341.

Sexton, T., Schober, H., Fraser, P., & Gasser, S. 
M. (2007). Gene regulation through nuclear 
organization. Nature Structural & Molecular 
Biology, 14, 1049–1055.

Shen, W. -H., & Xu, L. (2009). Chromatin 
remodeling in stem cell maintenance in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Molecular Plant, 2, 
600–609.

Shi, Y., Lan, F., Matson, C., Mulligan, P., 

Whetstine, J. R., & Cole, P. A., et al. (2004). 
Histone demethylation mediated by the 
nuclear amine oxidase homolog LSD1. Cell, 
119, 941–953.

Shibuya, K., Fukushima, S., & Takatsuji, H. 
(2009). RNA-directed DNA methylation 
induces transcriptional activation in plants. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106, 1660–1665.

Singh, J., Freeling, M., & Lisch, D. (2008). 

A position effect on the heritability of 
epigenetic silencing. PLoS Genetics, 4, 
e1000216.

Slack, F. J. (2010). Time for the epigenome. 

Nature, 463, 587.

Soppe, W. J. J., Jacobsen, S. E., Alonso-

Blanco, C., Jackson, J. P., Kakutani, T., 
& Koornneef, M., et al. (2000). The late 
flowering phenotype of fwa mutants is 
caused by gain-of-function epigenetic alleles 
of a homeodomain gene. Molecular Cell, 6, 
791–802.

Sridha, S., & Wu, K. (2006). Identification of 

AtHD2C as a novel regulator of abscisic acid 
responses in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 46, 
124–133.

Strahl, B. D., & Allis, C. D. (2000). The 

language of covalent histone modifications. 
Nature, 403, 41–45.

Sung, S., & Amasino, R. M. (2004). 

Vernalization in Arabidopsis thaliana is 
mediated by the PhD finger protein VIN3. 
Nature, 427, 159–164.

Sung, S., & Amasino, R. M. (2006). Molecular 

genetic studies of the memory of winter. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 57, 3369–
3377.

Suzuki, M. M., & Bird, A. (2008). DNA 

methylation landscapes: Provocative insights 
from epigenomics. Nature Reviews Genetics, 
9, 465–476.

Swiezewski, S., Crevillen, P., Liu, F., Ecker, J. 
R., Jerzmanowski, A., & Dean, C. (2007). 
Small RNA-mediated chromatin silencing 
directed to the 3 region of the Arabidopsis 

gene encoding the developmental regulator, 
FLC. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
104, 3633–3638.

Swiezewski, S., Liu, F., Magusin, A., & Dean, 
C. (2009). Cold-induced silencing by long 
antisense transcripts of an Arabidopsis 
Polycomb target. Nature, 462, 799–802.

Tamaru, H., & Selker, E. U. (2001). A histone 

H3 methyltransferase controls DNA 
methylation in Neurospora crassa. Nature, 
414, 277–283.

Tanaka, M., Kikuchi, A., & Kamada, H. (2008). 
The Arabidopsis histone deacetylases HDA6 
and HDA19 contribute to the repression 
of embryonic properties after germination. 
Plant Physiology, 146, 149–161.

Tariq, M., & Paszkowski, J. (2004). DNA and 

histone methylation in plants. Trends in 
Genetics, 20, 244–251.

Tian, L., & Chen, Z. J. (2001). Blocking 

histone deacetylation in Arabidopsis induces 
pleiotropic effects on plant gene regulation 
and development. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 98, 200–205.

Tian, L., Fong, M. P., Wang, J. J., Wei, N. 

E., Jiang, H., & Doerge, R. W., et al. 
(2005). Reversible histone acetylation 
and deacetylation mediate genome-wide, 
promoter-dependent and locus-specific 
changes in gene expression during plant 
development. Genetics, 169, 337–345.
Tsaftaris, A., Polidoros, A., Kapazoglou, A., 

Tani, E., Kovacevic, N. (2008). Epigenetics 
and plant breeding In Plant breeding reviews 
(Vol. 30, pp. 49–179).

Turck, F., Fornara, F., & Coupland, G. (2008). 

Regulation and identity of Florigen: 
FLOWERING LOCUS T moves center 
stage. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 59, 
573–594.

Turck, F., Roudier, F.  o., Farrona, S., Martin-

Magniette, M. -L., Guillaume, E., & Buisine, 
N., et al. (2007). Arabidopsis TFL2/LHP1 
specifically associates with genes marked by 
trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27. PLoS 
Genetics, 3, e86.

Vaillant, I., & Paszkowski, J. (2007). Role of 

histone and DNA methylation in gene 
regulation. Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 
10, 528–533.

Vaucheret, H. (2008). Plant ARGONAUTES. 

Trends in Plant Science, 13, 350–358.

Vaughn, M. W., Tanurdzic, M., Lippman, Z., 
Jiang, H., Carrasquillo, R., & Rabinowicz, 
P. D., et al. (2007). Epigenetic natural 
variation in Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS 
Biology, 5, e174.

Vicient, C. M., Suoniemi, A., Anamthawat-

Jonsson, K., Tanskanen, J., Beharav, A., & 
Nevo, E., et al. (1999). Retrotransposon 
BARE-1 and its role in genome evolution 
in the genus Hordeum. Plant Cell, 11, 
1769–1784.

Vitte, C., & Panaud, O. (2005). LTR 

retrotransposons and flowering plant genome 
size: Emergence of the increase/decrease 
model. Cytogenetic and Genome Research, 
110, 91–107.

Voinnet, O., Vain, P., Angell, S., & Baulcombe, 
D. C. (1998). Systemic spread of sequence-

225

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

specific transgene RNA degradation in 
plants is initiated by localized introduction 
of ectopic promoterless DNA. Cell, 95, 
177–187.

Wang, X. F., Elling, A. A., Li, X. Y., Li, N., 
Peng, Z. Y., & He, G. M., et al. (2009). 
Genome-wide and organ-specific landscapes 
of epigenetic modifications and their 
relationships to mRNA and Small RNA 
Transcriptomes in Maize. Plant Cell, 21, 
1053–1069.

Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Ma, Q., Zhang, Z., Xue, 

Y., & Bao, S., et al. (2007). SKB1-mediated 
symmetric dimethylation of histone H4R3 
controls flowering time in Arabidopsis. Embo 
Journal, 26, 1934–1941.

Wassenegger, M., Heimes, S., Riedel, L., & 

Sδnger, H. L. (1994). RNA-directed de novo 
methylation of genomic sequences in plants. 
Cell, 76, 567–576.

Wolfgruber, T. K., Sharma, A., Schneider, K. L., 

Albert, P. S., Koo, D. H., & Shi, J. H.,  
et al. (2009). Maize centromere structure and 
evolution: Sequence analysis of centromeres 
2 and 5 reveals dynamic loci shaped primarily 
by retrotransposons. Plos Genetics, 5

Wood, C. C., Robertson, M., Tanner, G., 

Peacock, W. J., Dennis, E. S., & Helliwell, 
C. A. (2006). The Arabidopsis thaliana 
vernalization response requires a polycomb-
like protein complex that also includes 
VERNALIZATION INSENSITIVE 3. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 103, 14631–14636.

Wu, G., Park, M. Y., Conway, S. R., Wang, J. 
-W., Weigel, D., & Poethig, R. S. (2009). 
The sequential action of miR156 and 
miR172 regulates developmental timing in 
Arabidopsis. Cell, 138, 750–759.

Wu, K., Tian, L., Malik, K., Brown, D., & 
Miki, B. (2000). Functional analysis of 

HD2 histone deacetylase homologues in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal, 22, 
19–27.

Wu, K., Zhang, L., Zhou, C., Yu, C. W., & 
Chaikam, V. (2008). HDA6 is required 
for jasmonate response, senescence and 
flowering in Arabidopsis. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 59, 225–234.

Xiao, W., Brown, R. C., Lemmon, B. E., 

Harada, J. J., Goldberg, R. B., & Fischer, 
R. L. (2006b). Regulation of seed size by 
hypomethylation of maternal and paternal 
genomes. Plant Physiology, 142, 1160–1168.

Xiao, W., Custard, K. D., Brown, R. C., 

Lemmon, B. E., Harada, J. J., & Goldberg, 
R. B., et al. (2006a). DNA methylation is 
critical for Arabidopsis embryogenesis and 
seed viability. Plant Cell, 18, 805–814.

Yang, W., Jiang, D., Jiang, J., & He, Y. (2010). 

A plant-specific histone H3 lysine 4 
demethylase represses the floral transition in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 62, 663–673.

Zhai, J., Liu, J., Liu, B., Li, P., Meyers, B. C., & 
Chen, X., et al. (2008). Small RNA-directed 
epigenetic natural variation in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. PLoS Genetics, 4, e10000056.

Zhang, X., & Jacobsen, S. E. (2006). Genetic 

analyses of DNA methyltransferases in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Cold Spring Harbor 
Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 71, 
439–447.

Zhang, X., Bernatavichute, Y., Cokus, S., 
Pellegrini, M., & Jacobsen, S. (2009). 
Genome-wide analysis of mono-, di- and 
trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 4 in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Genome Biology, 10, 
R62.

Zhang, X., Clarenz, O., Cokus, S., 

Bernatavichute, Y. V., Pellegrini, M., & 
Goodrich, J., et al. (2007a). Whole-
genome analysis of histone H3 lysine 27 

trimethylation in Arabidopsis. PLoS Biology, 
5, e129.

Zhang, X., Henderson, I. R., Lu, C., Green, 
P. J., & Jacobsen, S. E. (2007b). Role of 
RNA polymerase IV in plant small RNA 
metabolism. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 104, 4536–4541.

Zhang, Y. J. (2005). miRU: An automated plant 

miRNA target prediction server. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 33, W701–W704.

Zhou, C., Labbe, H., Sridha, S., Wang, L., 
Tian, L., & Latoszek-Green, M., et al. 
(2004). Expression and function of HD2-
type histone deacetylases in Arabidopsis 
development. Plant Journal, 38, 715–724.

Zhou, C., Zhang, L., Duan, J., Miki, B., & Wu, 
K. (2005). HISTONE DEACETYLASE19 
is involved in jasmonic acid and ethylene 
signaling of pathogen response in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 17, 1196–1204.

Zhu, J., Kapoor, A., Sridhar, V. V., Agius, F., & 
Zhu, J. -K. (2007). The DNA Glycosylase/
Lyase ROS1 functions in pruning DNA 
methylation patterns in Arabidopsis. 
Current Biology, 17, 54–59.

Zhu, J. -K. (2008). Epigenome sequencing 

comes of age. Cell, 133, 395–397.

Zhu, J. -K. (2009). Active DNA demethylation 

mediated by DNA glycosylases. Annual 
Review of Genetics, 43, 143–166.

Zilberman, D. (2008). The evolving functions 
of DNA methylation. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology, 11, 554–559.

Zilberman, D., Gehring, M., Tran, R. K., 

Ballinger, T., & Henikoff, S. (2007). 
Genome-wide analysis of Arabidopsis 
thaliana DNA methylation uncovers an 
interdependence between methylation and 
transcription. Nature Genetics, 39, 61–69.

226

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, 
protoplasts, cell selection) and their 
applications

10

Tanya Tapingkae1  Zul Zulkarnain2  Masayo Kawaguchi3
Takashi Ikeda3  Acram Taji4
1Chiang Mai Rajabhat University, Thailand
2University of Jambi, Indonesia
3Meiji University, Japan
4Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia

TABLE OF CONTENTS
General Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 141
Somatic Embryogenesis   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 141
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .141
Patterns of somatic embryogenesis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .142
Factors affecting somatic embryo induction . . . . . . . .142
Plant maturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .143
Plant regeneration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .144
Gene expression during somatic embryogenesis . . . .144
Mass propagation and somaclonal variation . . . . . . . .144
Haploid Technology  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 144
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .144
Cytological basis underlying haploid  
plant induction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .145
Factors affecting the induction of  
microspore embryos  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .146
Haploid induction via ovary and ovule cultures . . . . . .147
Protoplast and Somatic Hybridization .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 148
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .148
Types of somatic hybrids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .148
Protoplast fusion methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .148
Selection of somatic hybrids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .150
Identification of somatic hybrids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .150
Factors affecting regeneration of hybrid plants . . . . . .151

Screening and Development of Stress-Resistant  
Plants Using in vitro Selection Techniques  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 151
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .151
General methods of screening and  
breeding using in vitro selection techniques . . . . . . . .151
Biotic stress resistance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .152
Abiotic stress tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .152
Future perspective of screening and  
breeding using in vitro selection techniques . . . . . . . .155

Conclusions and Future Directions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 155
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 155

General Introduction

In  angiosperms,  double  fertilization  generates  the  embryo 
and  the  endosperm  simultaneously,  the  joint  development  of 
which  leads  to  a  viable  seed.  Somatic  embryos,  however,  are 
formed from plant cells that are not normally involved in the 
development of embryos (fertilization or gamete fusion). The 
term somatic refers to embryos developing asexually from veg-
etative (or somatic) tissue. Somatic plant cells are terminally 
differentiated and can regain totipotency and initiate embryo 
development under appropriate conditions. The development 
of techniques and protocols to produce plant embryos asexu-
ally  has  had  a  huge  technological  and  economical  impact  on 
agricultural  systems,  and  these  biotechnologies  represent  an 
integral part of the breeding programs of important crops.

In  this  chapter,  recent  advances  in  somatic  (asexual)  pro-
cedures and their applications are reviewed, including somatic 
embryogenesis,  haploid  technologies,  protoplast  and  somatic 
hybridization, and use of somatic procedures in screening and 
development of stress-resistant plants. This method is now a 
well-established  technology  that  has  made  significant  contri-
butions to plant improvement and mass propagation in horti-
culture, agriculture, and to some extent in forestry, as a means 
of rapidly multiplying elite varieties or clones.

Somatic Embryogenesis

Introduction

Over  the  past  fifty  years,  somatic  embryogenesis  has  been 
the subject of increasing research in a large number of mono-
cotyledonous  and  dicotyledonous  plant  species.  Somatic 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00010-9

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

embryogenesis has become one of the most desired pathways 
in  the  regeneration  of  plants  via  tissue  culture,  because  it 
bypasses  the  necessity  of  time-consuming  and  costly  manip-
ulation of individual explants, which is a problem with orga-
nogenesis  (Folta  and  Dhingra,  2006;  Carneros  et  al.,  2009). 
Somatic embryogenesis might also overcome difficulties with 
micropropagation  procedures  in  species  that  are  difficult  to 
root, such as chickpea (reviewed by Anwar et al., 2010) and 
rubber (reviewed by Nayanakantha and Seneviratne, 2007).

Patterns of somatic embryogenesis

Two patterns of somatic embryogenesis are recognized: direct 
embryogenesis,  where  the  embryo  develops  directly  on  the 
explant,  and  indirect  embryogenesis,  in  which  the  embryo 
arises  from  a  callus.  Direct  somatic  embryogenesis  is  the 
desirable approach to obtaining genetically stable regenerated 
plants, because callus formation could cause somaclonal varia-
tion (Mizukami et al., 2008).

Direct  somatic  embryogenesis  has  been  developed  for 
numerous  species,  including  alfalfa  (Rudus  et  al.,  2009), 
Arabidopsis  (Kurczynska  et  al.,  2007),  broccoli  (Yang  et  al., 
2010), camphor tree (Du et al., 2007; Shi et al., 2009), carrot 
(Mizukami  et  al.,  2008),  chickpea  (Kiran  et  al.,  2005;  Kiran 
Ghanti et al., 2010), coffee (reviewed by Ducos et al., 2007; 
Santana-Buzzy et al., 2007), cotton (Zhang et al., 2009), euca-
lyptus (Prakash and Gurumurthi, 2010), legumes (reviewed by 
Lakshmanan and Taji, 2000), millet (Ceasar and Ignacimuthu, 
2010),  rice  (reviewed  by  Silva,  2010),  rubber  (Lardet  et  al., 
2009), saffron (Demeter et al., 2010), and sugarcane (Snyman 
et  al.,  2006).  It  has  been  used  to  obtain  genetically  stable 
regenerated  plants  and  has  been  reported  to  be  useful  in  the 
regeneration  of  recombinant  plants  (Yang  et  al.,  2009).  Most 
studies applied direct somatic embryogenesis to the regenera-
tion of valuable plants.

Factors affecting somatic embryo induction

Explant and genotype
The  choice  of  explant  is  considered  to  be  an  important  fac-
tor  in  the  induction  of  somatic  embryogenesis.  Genotype, 
explant  source,  and  developmental  stage  (age)  of  explant  all 
affect  somatic  embryogenesis  (Choudhury  et  al.,  2008).  In 
guava, most workers have used immature zygotic embryos as 
the  primary  explants  for  the  induction  of  somatic  embryo-
genesis.  Other  explants,  such  as  leaf,  node,  internode,  petal, 
and  mesocarp,  have  also  been  tested.  These  explants  failed 
to  induce  somatic  embryos,  with  the  exception  of  meso-
carp,  where  there  was  some  success  (reviewed  by  Rai  et  al., 
2010).  In  kodo  millet,  somatic  embryogenesis  was  obtained 
from  explants,  such  as  immature  inflorescences,  immature 
and  mature  zygotic  embryos,  mature  caryopses,  immature 
inflorescences, leaf segments, root, mesocotyl, and shoot apex 
(reviewed  by  Ceasar  and  Ignacimuthu,  2010).  Shoot  apical 
meristems have been used effectively to develop regeneration 
systems across the other cereals, and apical meristem explants 

142

have  been  successfully  employed  as  starting  material  to 
recover stably transformed maize, wheat, rice, oat, barley, sor-
ghum, and millet (reviewed by Sticklen and Orabya, 2005).

Somatic  embryogenesis  is  highly  species-  or  genotype-
dependent. A recent study by Binott et al. (2008) confirmed 
that  callus  induction,  somatic  embryo  formation,  and  plant 
regeneration  in  maize  were  found  to  be  genetically  linked, 
and hybrids showed better tissue culture response compared 
with  their  inbred  lines  counterparts.  Somatic  embryogenesis 
in conifers is often highly genotype-dependent; consequently, 
an increased number of genotypes capable of somatic embryo-
genesis can be made available through breeding (reviewed by 
Bonga  et  al.,  2010).  Fu  et  al.  (2008)  found  that  the  highest 
levels  of  embryogenic  callus  induction  of  Dianthus  chinen­
sis  were  achieved  when  the  donor  buds  had  been  cold  pre-
treated  and  the  subsequent  anther  culture  was  maintained 
in darkness. Furthermore, there appeared to be a correlation 
between genotype and culture conditions.

Chemical factors
Somatic  embryogenesis  is  controlled  by  a  number  of  dif-
ferent  chemical  factors.  The  agents  used  to  induce  in  vitro 
somatic embryogenesis are highly variable, ranging from vari-
ous plant hormones to stress treatments (Fehér et al., 2003). 
Involvement  of  plant  hormones  and  plant  growth  regulators 
with  in  vitro  somatic  embryogenesis  has  been  intensively 
reviewed by Jiménez (2001, 2005), Fehér et al. (2003), and 
Jiménez  and  Thomas  (2005),  while  molecular  and  genetic 
studies  of  hormonal  regulation  were  reviewed  by  Rose  and 
Nolan  (2006).  Molecular  development  studies  with  plant 
hormones  and  apical  meristems  might  also  be  expected  to 
aid in the interpretation of the role of auxin and cytokinins in 
somatic embryogenesis induction (Ikeda et al., 2006).

In  most  species  studied  in  which  growth  regulators  are 
needed  for  induction  of  somatic  embryogenesis,  auxins  and 
cytokinins  are  key  factors  determining  the  embryogenic 
response.  This  is  probably  due  to  their  participation  in  the 
regulation  of  cell  cycling,  division,  and  differentiation  (Fehér 
et  al.,  2003).  Auxin  2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic  acid  (2,4-D), 
in  isolation  or  combined  with  other  growth  regulators, 
mainly cytokinins, has been used for the induction of somatic 
embryo genesis via tissue culture of seeds and zygotic embryos 
for  several  species  (Fehér  et  al.,  2003;  Ikeda  et  al.,  2006; 
Raghavan,  2006;  Fehér,  2008).  Somatic  embryogenesis  may 
proceed  on  a  single  medium  or  may  require  medium  altera-
tions  specific  for  a  specific  developmental  stage  (reviewed 
by Anwar et al., 2010). Thidiazuron (TDZ), a synthetic phe-
nylurea,  has  been  reported  to  be  the  most  active  cytokinin-
like  substance  for  shoot  induction  in  plant  tissue  culture 
(reviewed by Lakshmanan and Taji, 2000). TDZ induces high-
frequency somatic embryogenesis in some plant species when 
used  alone  or  in  combination  with  other  growth  regulators 
(reviewed by Anwar et al., 2010).

In addition, somatic embryogenesis can be induced by vari-
ous stresses, specific hormone treatments, and over-expression 
of specific genes (Rose and Nolan, 2006). Rudus et al. (2009) 
demonstrated that stress-related phytohormones, abscisic acid 

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

(ABA),  and  jasmonic  acid  (JA)  are  synthesized  in  tissues  of 
Medicago sativa cultured in vitro during the whole process of 
indirect somatic embryogenesis, but the biosynthetic capacity 
changes substantially in distinct somatic embryogenesis phases.

Other inductive factors
The mineral composition of the media, type, and concentra-
tion  of  carbon  sources,  amino  acids,  heavy  metal  ions,  light-
dark  regime,  and  temperature  can  play  vital  roles  in  somatic 
embryogenesis (Mohamed et al., 2004). The type and concen-
tration of carbon source has been found to affect the induc-
tion  of  somatic  embryos.  The  superiority  of  maltose  over 
sucrose  on  somatic  embryogenesis  was  proved  in  kodo  mil-
let,  rice,  wheat,  barley,  and  rubber  (reviewed  by  Ceasar  and 
Ignacimuthu,  2010).  An  increase  in  sucrose  concentrations 
in  the  embryogenesis  medium  enhanced  the  frequency  of 
somatic embryogenesis in sugarcane (Gandonou et al., 2005) 
and melon (Nakagawa et al., 2001). Zhang et al. (2008) sug-
gested that sugars function as both a carbon source and as an 
osmotic regulator in culture media.

There  are  a  number  of  reports  indicating  that  the  three 
main aliphatic polyamines (PAs) — putrescine (put-diamine), 
spermidine (spd-triamine), and spermine (spm-tetraamine) — 
which are organic polycations, particularly in their free form, 
play a crucial role in somatic embryo formation, development, 
and  conversion  to  plant  (Nakagawa  et  al.,  2006;  De  la  Peña 
et al., 2008). High concentrations of PAs are often observed 
in  tissues  undergoing  somatic  embryogenesis  (Monteiro 
et  al.,  2002).  The  specific  role  of  PAs  during  embryogenesis 
has been reviewed by Baron and Stasolla (2008) and Mattoo 
et  al.  (2010).  Genotypic  differences  in  cellular  PA  con-
centrations  or  ratios  serve  as  indicators  of  regeneration  — 
embryogenic  potential  in  both  angiosperm  and  gymnosperm 
species  and  transgenic  manipulation  of  polyamine  biosynthe-
sis has proven successful in enhancing somatic embryogenesis 
(reviewed by Baron and Stasolla, 2008).

Somatic  embryos  are  very  sensitive  to  toxic  substances  and 
volatiles  produced  during  in  vitro  culturing  (da  Silva  et  al., 
2009).  Several  anti-browning  compounds  (ascorbic  acid,  char-
coal, DTE, DTT, PVP, PVPP, and silver nitrate) were tested in 
Eucalyptus globulus by adding them to the expression medium 
(MS),  but  all  decreased  somatic  embryogenesis  potential  and 
only DTE, charcoal, and silver nitrate reduced explant browning.  
When  added  only  during  the  induction  period,  anti-browning 
agents  reduced  accumulation  of  phenolics,  but  also  severely 
reduced somatic embryogenesis potential (Pinto et al., 2008b). 
The number of somatic embryos of Myrciaria aureana was sig-
nificantly  reduced  in  activated  charcoal- supplemented  medium 
(Motoike et al., 2007). Conversely, Bahgat et al. (2008) reported 
that the addition of ascorbic and citric acids to media enhanced 
the production of somatic embryos of Vicia faba. Positive results 
in  induction  of  somatic  embryogenesis  by  supplementation  of 
the  culture  medium  with  activated  charcoal  were  reported  for 
Bixa  orellana  (Paiva  Neto  et  al.,  2003)  and  Bactris  gasipaes 
(Steinmacher et al., 2007).

The  presence  of  light  promoted  somatic  embryogenesis 
in  some  species,  such  as  finger  millet  (Corrêa  et  al.,  2009) 

and  camphor  tree  (Shi  et  al.,  2009).  However,  induction  of 
direct somatic embryogenesis from Phalaenopsis leaf explants 
required  a  60  day  induction  period  in  darkness  (Gow  et  al., 
2009).  In  general,  red  light  promotes  and  blue  light  inhib-
its  the  induction  of  somatic  embryogenesis  (Bach  and  Krol, 
2001; Takanori and Cuello, 2005; Hoshino and Cuello, 2006). 
However,  blue  light  stimulated  the  germination  of  mature 
somatic embryos of Freesia refracta (Bach et al., 2000). The 
effect of light quality on the growth of embryogenic tissue can 
be genotype-dependent (Latkowska et al., 2000). Until now, 
the  literature  relating  to  the  relationship  between  light  and 
somatic  embryogenesis  provided  inadequate  and/or  conflict-
ing information, preventing a clear understanding of the role 
of light in somatic embryogenesis.

Histodifferentiation
Auxins  are  generally  involved  in  cell  division  and  expansion 
and  differentiation  of  the  vascular  system.  Auxins  are  also 
associated  with  regulation  of  the  embryonic  patterns  of  his-
todifferentation (Bassuner et al., 2007). Cangahuala-Inocente 
et al. (2009) studied the accumulation of protein, total sugars, 
starch,  amino  acids,  polyamines,  indole-3-acetic  acid  (IAA), 
and ABA in different stages of Acca sellowiana zygotic embry-
ogenesis. Starch is the predominant storage compound during 
zygotic embryo development. All amino acids are synthesized 
during embryogenesis, with an increased accumulation in the 
heart and cotyledonary stages. Asparagine is the major amino 
acid  observed.  Free  polyamine  synthesis  during  early  devel-
opmental  stages,  as  well  as  the  accumulation  of  polyamine 
conjugates  in  the  cotyledonary  stage,  may  be  considered  as 
reliable  biochemical  markers  of  embryonal  development  in  
A.  sellowiana.  IAA  and  ABA  levels  were  inversely  propor-
tional in the heart-shaped and cotyledonary stages, suggesting 
their  involvement  with  histodifferentiation  patterns,  mainly 
the establishment of embryonal symmetries.

Plant maturation

The  morphology  of  somatic  embryogenesis  is  affected  by  a 
number  of  factors,  such  as  plant  growth  regulators,  medium 
composition,  subculture  time,  or  frequency.  The  media  of 
somatic  embryo  development  are  different  from  the  media 
used  for  somatic  embryo  induction.  Auxins  in  any  medium 
play  a  key  role  during  the  induction  stage,  but  inhibit  plant-
let formation. Hence, somatic embryos should be transferred 
into a medium without plant growth regulator during plantlet 
formation. The use of hormone-free medium was very fruitful 
in maturing somatic embryos and obtaining plantlets in many 
species,  such  as  V.  faba  (Bahgat  et  al.,  2008),  triticale  (Atak 
et al., 2008), eucalyptus (Pinto et al., 2008a), and waxflowers 
(Ratanasanobon  and  Seaton,  2010).  However,  it  is  reported 
that the addition of L-proline, maltose, and TDZ to the mat-
uration  medium  increased  the  frequency  of  somatic  embryo 
maturation  and  plantlet  formation  (Ceasar  and  Ignacimuthu, 
2010). Several studies report that decreasing sucrose content 
induces  maturation  of  somatic  embryos  in  plant  tissue  cul-
tures (Lee et al., 2001; Demeter et al., 2010).

143

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

Plant regeneration

Establishment  of  an  efficient  somatic  embryogenesis  and 
regeneration system has become an integral part of plant bio-
technology, as regeneration of transgenic plants in most of the 
important  crops  is  dependent  on  the  formation  of  somatic 
embryos (reviewed by Vasil, 2008a,b). An efficient, rapid, and 
dependable regeneration system is required for transformation 
and  other  genetic  improvement.  Plant  regeneration  through 
somatic  embryogenesis  is  generally  preferred  over  other  in 
vitro developmental processes, such as organogenesis, because 
it offers more target cells (Ogita et al., 2002) to develop into 
whole  plants.  Furthermore,  somatic  embryos  are  believed 
to  be  of  single  cell  origin,  any  regenerated  transformed  cell 
would give rise to a transformed plant without unwanted chi-
meric  events  often  associated  with  transformed  meristems, 
which results in organogenesis (Sakhanokho et al., 2009).

Regeneration  efficiency  varies  among  species  and  often 
among  cultivars  of  the  same  species,  and  genotype-specific 
regeneration  protocols  will  need  to  be  established  for  best 
results (Jauhar, 2006). Bahgat et al. (2008) reported that cul-
tivar differences and explant differences play important roles 
in  determining  both  callus  formation  and  regeneration  rate 
in  the  faba  bean  (Vicia  faba  L.).  Some  of  the  most  impor-
tant  factors  for  successful  plant  regeneration  are  the  culture 
medium  and  environmental  incubation  conditions.  Recently, 
Ceasar and Ignacimuthu (2008, 2010) reported a highly effi-
cient  somatic  embryogenesis  and  plant  regeneration  system 
for kodo millet and finger millet by using a two-step culture. 
They  suggested  that  this  two-step  culture  procedure  might 
be adopted in the future for efficient somatic embryogenesis 
and regeneration of the rest of the millets. A two-step culture 
process  has  also  been  proved  successful  in  carrot  (Mizukami 
et  al.,  2008)  and  potato  (Seabrook  and  Douglass,  2001)  for 
efficient somatic embryogenesis and regeneration. Feng et al. 
(2010) found that 70% of embryos with abnormal cotyledons 
developed into plantlets in Koelreuteria bipinnata. This indi-
cates  that  somatic  embryos  with  abnormalities  during  early 
developmental stages do not always affect plantlet formation.

Gene expression during somatic 
embryogenesis

Somatic  embryogenesis  is  the  developmental  restructuring 
of  somatic  cells  toward  the  embryogenic  pathway  that  forms 
the basis of cellular totipotency in higher plants. Various mod-
els  have  been  widely  investigated  to  gain  an  understanding  of 
the  mechanisms  of  gene  regulation  during  this  developmen-
tal  process,  and  an  array  of  genes  activated  or  differentially 
expressed  during  somatic  embryogenesis  has  been  isolated 
employing  various  molecular  techniques  (reviewed  by  Ikeda 
et  al.,  2006;  Raghavan,  2006;  Rose  and  Nolan,  2006;  Jenik  
et  al.,  2007;  Bonga  et  al.,  2010).  Somatic  embryogenesis 
involves many molecular events encompassing differential gene 
expression, as well as various signal transduction pathways for 
activating/repressing  numerous  gene  sets,  many  of  which  are 
yet to be identified and characterized (reviewed by Berleth and 

144

Chatfield,  2002;  Chugh  and  Khurana,  2002;  Quiroz-Figueroa  
et al., 2006; Rose and Nolan, 2006; Namasivayam, 2007; Curtis 
and  Grossniklaus,  2008;  Fehér,  2008;  Karami  et  al.,  2009; 
Aquea  et  al.,  2010).  Thus,  future  trends  involve  characteriza-
tion of development-specific genes during somatic embryogen-
esis to provide a deeper insight into the mechanisms involved 
during  differentiation  of  somatic  cells  and  phenotypic  expres-
sion of cellular totipotency in higher plants.

Mass propagation and somaclonal 
variation

In  vitro  somatic  embryogenesis  is  an  important  prerequi-
site  for  the  use  of  many  biotechnological  tools  for  mass 
propagation.  Large-scale  liquid  cultures  have  been  used  for 
micropropagation  through  organogenesis  or  somatic  embryo-
genesis  pathways  in  both  agitated  vessels  and  in  bioreactors 
(reviewed  by  Ziv,  2005;  Akin-Idowu  et  al.,  2009;  Ducos 
et  al.,  2009).  Research  directed  at  improving  bioreactors  for 
somatic  embryogenesis  has  been  reported  for  several  plant 
species  (reviewed  by  Ziv,  2000;  Ducos  et  al.,  2008).  For 
example,  coffee  somatic  embryogenesis  is  used  in  industry 
for  large-scale,  rapid  propagation  of  selected  heterozygous 
varieties, such as Robusta clones or F1 hybrid Arabica (Ducos 
et al., 2007). Pilot bioreactor units producing up to a million 
somatic  seedlings  per  year  are  currently  being  implemented 
by various teams (reviewed by Ducos et al., 2008).

Genetic  variation  is  very  important  in  crop  improvement, 
because  it  forms  the  basis  of  development  of  new  varie-
ties. Somaclonal variation is a valuable tool in plant breeding, 
wherein  variation  in  tissue  culture  regenerated  plants  from 
somatic  cells  can  be  used  in  the  development  of  crops  with 
novel traits. The molecular basis of somaclonal variation is not 
precisely known; however, both genetic and epigenetic mecha-
nisms are thought to play a role (Gao et al., 2009). Somaclonal 
variation  has  been  associated  with  changes  in  chromosome 
number and structure, point mutations, and DNA methylation 
(reviewed  by  Cardoza  and  Steward,  2004;  Baenziger  et  al., 
2006; Bartoszewski et al., 2007; Santana-Buzzy et al., 2007).

Haploid Technology

Introduction

Haploid technology is of significant interest for developmen-
tal and genetic research, as well as for plant breeding and bio-
technology. Haploid plants are useful in understanding cellular 
totipotency because they develop from single male or female 
gametes without fertilization (Powell, 1990). Haploid individ-
uals also provide an excellent example when studying induced 
mutagenesis,  where  recessive  traits  can  be  easily  detected 
(Seguí-Simarro  and  Nuez,  2008b).  Tolerance  to  unfavorable 
conditions, such as drought, cold, heavy metals, or low nutri-
ents, are among recessive traits that can be detected promptly 
in  haploid  plants.  Homozygous  lines  can  be  generated  more 
rapidly  via  haploid  development  compared  to  conventional 

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

means  (Tomasi  et  al.,  1999).  Taji  et  al.  (2002)  claimed  that 
such  lines  could  be  generated  in  only  one  generation,  while 
conventional methods need at least five generations.

Since  it  was  first  demonstrated  by  Guha  and  Maheshwari 
(1964)  on  Datura  inoxia  and  Nitsch  and  Nitsch  (1969)  on 
tobacco,  haploids  have  been  used  to  produce  homozygous 
genotypes  in  a  number  of  economically  important  species: 
tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), wheat (Triticum aestivum), bar-
ley (Hordeum  vulgare), canola (Brassica  napus), rice (Oryza 
sativa),  and  maize  (Zea  mays;  Aryan,  2002;  Maluszynsky 
et al., 2003; Maraschin et al., 2005b). Success has also been 
reported  on  legumes:  pigeon  pea  (Cajanus  cajan),  soybean 
(Glycine  max),  cowpea  (Vigna  unguiculata),  winged  bean 
(Psophocarpus  tetragonolobus),  East  Indian  Walnut  (Albizia 
lebbeck)  and  Yellow  Flame  Tree  (Peltophorum  pterocarpum; 
Crosser et al., 2006).

However, haploid individuals tend to be smaller in size, less 
vigorous,  more  sensitive  to  disease  and  environmental  stress 
and,  most  important,  they  are  sterile  (Seguí-Simarro  and 
Nuez,  2008b).  Therefore,  for  practical  purposes  it  is  usually 
desirable to obtain doubled haploids. Regardless of the mode 
of  development,  doubling  of  haploid  plants  either  spontane-
ously via endoreduplication (DNA duplication without mito-
sis), nuclear fusion (merging of coalescing nuclei into a larger 
nuclei,  mixing  both  DNA  contents),  endomitosis  (mitosis  in 
the  absence  of  mitotic  spindle  and  nuclear  envelope  break-
down),  or  by  chemical  means  such  as  colchicine  or  oryzalin, 
leads  to  a  homozygous  doubled  haploid  individual  with  two 
identical  copies  of  each  chromosome  (Crosser  et  al.,  2006). 
For  many  families  of  angiosperms,  doubled  haploidy  has 
been used as a routine tool in breeding programs because this 
technique  provides  pure  lines  in  a  single  generation,  which 
may  save  considerable  time  in  the  breeding  of  new  cultivars 
(Tuvesson et al., 2000; Maluszynsky et al., 2003).

Cytological basis underlying haploid plant 
induction

The  term  androgenesis  refers  to  plant  regeneration  directly 
from  microspore  culture  under  in  vitro  conditions.  The 
underlying  principle  of  androgenesis  is  to  stop  the  develop-
ment  of  pollen  cells,  which  normally  become  sexual  cells, 
and to force their development directly into a complete plant 
(Nitsch, 1981). This process inhibits typical gametophytic dif-
ferentiation  and  instead  allows  cell  division  and  regeneration 
to occur (Dunwell, 1986).

As  gametogenesis  (microspore  development)  takes  place, 
mature  pollen  grains  are  formed  via  mitosis.  Since  the 
developmental  route  is  not  yet  determined  during  micro-
gametogenesis,  there  is  a  chance  to  interrupt  the  normal 
gametophytic  pathway  and  to  induce  sporophytic  develop-
ment.  As  the  result  of  sporophytic  divisions,  multicellular 
microspores  develop  within  the  anthers.  Differentiation  of 
these multicellular units may result in pollen embryos, which 
then develop into haploid plants.

In  certain  conditions,  microspores  may  undergo  sporo-
phytic development instead of entering the gamete-producing 

pathway.  Touraev  et  al.  (2001)  suggested  that  there  are  a 
variety  of  microspore  developmental  fates  upon  exposure  to 
inductive  conditions.  Many  of  the  microspores  arrest  and/
or  die,  some  develop  pollen-like  structures  prior  to  death  or 
arrest, and others develop a multinucleate, haploid callus-like 
structure. Meanwhile, other microspores are directly commit-
ted  to  embryogenesis  and  undergo  numerous  changes  at  dif-
ferent  levels  to  become  microspore-derived  embryos.  From 
this,  the  microspores  enlarge  significantly,  the  nucleus  repo-
sitions to the cell center, the cytoplasm clears, and the large 
vacuole breaks apart into smaller fragments. Maraschin et al. 
(2005a) suggested that these cytological rearrangements pro-
vide  a  transient  early  morphological  marker  of  embryogenic 
commitment,  a  star-like  microspore.  In  addition  to  morpho-
logical  alterations,  the  microspore  also  undergoes  numerous 
biochemical changes (Seguí-Simarro and Nuez, 2008a). Pauls 
et al. (2006) proposed that these changes include cytoplasmic 
pH alteration, wherein alkalinization occurs upon embryogen-
esis  induction,  as  opposed  to  acidification  during  pollen-like 
development.

Changes  in  the  microspore  development  pathway  are  also 
shown by the alteration of cytokinesis pattern. Gervais et al. 
(2000)  suggested  that  during  the  induction  of  microspore 
embryogenesis,  phragmoplast  microtubules  take  a  more  par-
allel  orientation  and  a  preprophase  band  that  is  normally 
absent  during  pollen  mitosis  is  now  developed.  Additionally, 
there  is  a  shift  in  the  division  plane  from  asymmetrical  and 
lens-shaped  (typical  of  first  pollen  division)  to  asymmetrical 
and  equatorial,  similar  to  that  of  somatic  cell  development 
(Seguí-Simarro and Nuez, 2008a). All of these coincide with 
upregulation of a number of cytoskeleton and vesicle traffick-
ing related genes, as proposed by Pauls et al. (2006) and Hosp 
et al. (2007b).

Other  cytological  markers  of  microspore  embryogenic 
development  are  shown  by  the  nucleus.  Typically,  the  game-
tophytic  pathway  leads  to  the  differentiation  of  generative 
and vegetative nuclei, which are significantly different in size, 
shape,  status  of  chromatin  condensation,  and  transcriptional 
activity.  Meanwhile,  sporophytic  development  of  micro-
spores is similar to that found in vacuolated microspores and 
significantly different from that found in generative and veg-
etative  nuclei.  Testillano  et  al.  (2000)  found  that  in  canola 
(B. napus), pepper (Capsicum annuum), and tobacco (N. tab­
acum) nuclei, two- to four-celled embryogenic microspores all 
exhibited features of cycling. Further, the chromatin was also 
similar to that of cycling cells, and the immunogold labeling of 
embryogenic nuclei revealed a clustered pattern of the prolif-
erating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), a typical pattern of rep-
licative status (Testillano et al., 2000). In addition to this, the 
nucleolus  was  highly  active  in  ribosome  biogenesis,  the  typi-
cal architecture of proliferating cells (Testillano et al., 2005). 
Other  ultrastructural  characteristics  of  microspore  embryo-
genic development include the presence of high levels of peri-
chromatin fibrils in the interchromatin region and condensed 
chromatin borders, as well as an increase in number per cell 
and  the  percentage  of  cells  containing  Cajal  bodies,  together 
with a decrease in Cajal body size (Seguí-Simarro et al., 2006; 
Seguí-Simarro and Nuez, 2008a).

145

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

Factors affecting the induction of 
microspore embryos

Microspore embryogenesis has considerable potential in plant 
breeding due to its potential to produce haploid plants from 
immature  microspores,  which  can  be  doubled  to  obtain  fer-
tile  and  true-to-type  doubled-haploid  individuals  (Tuvesson 
et al., 2000; Zamani et al., 2000; Crosser et al., 2006; Guzy-
Wróbelska  et  al.,  2007).  For  it  to  be  successfully  applied  in 
plant  breeding,  a  high  yield  of  plants  must  be  obtained  con-
sistently  from  anther  or  microspore  culture.  There  are  a 
number of factors that influence the embryogenic response of 
cultured microspores (Smykal and Pechan, 2000; Wang et al., 
2000; Datta, 2005; Seguí-Simarro et al., 2006; Seguí-Simarro 
and Nuez, 2008b), as reviewed below.

Plant genotype
It is obvious that the response of anthers during in vitro cul-
ture  is  dependent  upon  the  genotype  of  the  donor  plants. 
It  is  not  only  different  species,  but  also  different  cultivars 
within  species  and,  even  individuals  of  the  same  cultivar 
that  may  show  differences  in  embryogenic  responses  (Seguí-
Simarro and Nuez, 2008a). The genotype of the donor plant 
affects  the  frequency  of  embryogenesis,  as  well  as  the  qual-
ity  of  the  embryo  produced  (Palmer  and  Keller,  1997).  The 
significant  genotype  dependence 
in  androgenic  response 
is  reported  by  Mitykó  et  al.  (1996)  on  pepper  anther  cul-
ture.  They  found  that  large-fruited  genotypes  produced  the 
highest  number  of  plantlets  per  cultured  anther  compared 
to  small-  and  medium-fruited  genotypes,  which  proved 
to  be  poor  or  non-responsive.  Genotypic-dependence  is  
also  reported  in  Raphanus  sativus  (Takahata  et  al.,  1996), 
T. aestivum (Bitsch et al., 1998), Linum usitatissimum (Chen 
et  al.,  1998),  Scabiosa  columbaria  (Romeijn  and  Lammeren, 
1999), and Phleum pratense (Guo et al., 1999). Although the 
basis  of  genetic  control  remains  unexplained,  it  is  clear  that 
genetic  factors  interact  with  other  factors  to  control  pollen 
embryogenesis (Palmer and Keller, 1997; Rudolf et al., 1999; 
Smykal and Pechan, 2000).

Developmental stage of the microspore
The particular stage of microspore development at the time of 
culture initiation plays an important role in achieving success 
with  microspore  embryogenesis.  This  is  because  only  micro-
spores  at  certain  developmental  stages  can  be  redirected  to 
undergo embryogenesis. Once maturation gene products begin 
to accumulate after the first mitosis, the gametophytic devel-
opment of the microspore has been determined and embryo-
genesis cannot take place (Pechan and Smykal, 2001).

The exact stage of microspore development, which is more 
readily diverted to a sporophytic pathway, seems to vary with 
species. For most species, the optimal developmental stage for 
induction  of  embryogenesis  is  around  the  first  mitosis,  from 
vacuolate  microspore  to  early  bicellular  pollen  (Pechan  and 
Smykal, 2001; Touraev et al., 2001). However, in some species, 
narrower time frames, including vacuolate stage or early bicel-
lular, are usually reported (Crosser et al., 2006; Seguí-Simarro 

146

and Nuez, 2008a). Although many workers proposed that the 
optimum  period  for  pollen  response  lies  in  between  the  first 
pollen  mitosis  and  early  bicellular,  an  exact  determination  of 
microspore  stage  before  being  introduced  to  culture  requires 
a  cytological  analysis.  As  such,  for  practical  programs  many 
workers  rely  on  morphological  parameters  such  as  the  length 
of floral buds and petals (Mitykó et al., 1996; Takahata et al., 
1996; Tomasi et al., 1999; Laura et al., 2006; Bal et al., 2009). 
Furthermore, da Silva Lauxen et al. (2003) demonstrated that 
microspores within the anther of the same flower were at dif-
ferent developmental stages; and also, different bud sizes were 
found to contain microspores at different stages depending on 
plant genotype (Crosser et al., 2006). Although the optimum 
bud  size  varies  among  genotypes,  the  microspore  populations 
represented in these buds are mostly in the range of uninucle-
ate and binucleate stages.

In  conjunction  with  the  best  response  in  culture,  Dodds 
and  Roberts  (1985)  proposed  three  categories  of  microspore 
developmental  stages:  premitotic,  mitotic,  and  postmitotic. 
Plants  in  the  premitotic  category  show  best  embryoid  for-
mation  when  microspores  have  completed  meiosis  but  have 
not  yet  started  the  first  pollen  division  (e.g.,  Hyoscyamus 
niger  and  H.  vulgare).  Plants  belonging  to  the  mitotic  group 
respond best about the time of the first pollen division (e.g., 
N. tabacum, Datura innoxia, and Paeonia spp.). Meanwhile, 
plants  in  the  postmitotic  category  show  the  best  response 
when  microspores  are  in  the  early  binucleate  stage  (e.g., 
Atropa belladonna).

Stress pre-treatment
Culture conditions, particularly stress pre-treatment applied to 
microspores prior to culture initiation, play an important role in 
the  success  of  embryogenesis  induction.  It  is  well  known  that 
cultures must be subjected to a stress pre-treatment to be com-
mitted to embryogenesis. Various types of stress pre-treatment 
have  been  found  to  improve  microspore  embryogenesis  in  a 
wide  range  of  species.  These  stresses  include  low  temperature 
(Bishnoi et al., 2000; Pauk et al., 2000; Tuvesson et al., 2000), 
high  temperature  (Kiviharju  and  Pehu,  1998;  Pechan  and 
Smykal, 2001), carbon starvation (Caredda et al., 2000; Kasha 
et al., 2001; Cistué et al., 2006; Labbani et al., 2007), colchicine 
(Smykal  and  Pechan,  2000;  Seguí-Simarro  et  al.,  2003;  Obert 
and  Barnabas,  2004),  and  combinations  of  these  (reviewed  by 
Shariatpanahi et al., 2006).

These stress pre-treatments of anthers are critically impor-
tant for blocking gametophytic development and for triggering 
pollen embryogenesis in competent microspores. Under stress 
conditions,  microspores  enlarge  and  cytoplasm  undergoes 
structural reorganization (Touraev et al., 1997). Scant amylo-
plasts and liposomes and abundant vacuoles are found (Hofer 
et  al.,  1999;  Wojciechowicz  and  Kikowska,  2009).  In  addi-
tion, Hosp et al. (2007a) claimed that microspores exposed to 
stressful conditions often exhibit signs of cellular component 
degradation, such as a decrease in the number of amyloplasts, 
lipid  bodies,  and  ribosomes.  These  microspores  are  capable 
of  switching  from  their  gametophytic  to  sporophytic  devel-
opmental  pathways,  giving  rise  to  embryos  or  embryogenic 
callus.

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

Culture medium
Successful  embryoid  production  of  different  species 
is 
achieved  on  media  of  different  compositions.  The  common 
medium  employed  in  most  tissue  culture  systems  includ-
ing  anther  culture  is  MS  medium  (Murashige  and  Skoog, 
1962).  However,  other  media,  such  as  WH  (White,  1962), 
LS (Linsmaier and Skoog, 1965), B5 (Gamborg et al., 1968), 
Nitsch’s (Nitsch, 1969), SH (Schenk and Hildebrandt, 1972), 
and  Woody  Plant  Medium  (Lloyd  and  McCown,  1980),  are 
also  used.  The  nutritional  requirements  of  isolated  micro-
spores  are  more  complex  than  those  of  excised  anthers.  In 
isolated microspores, certain factors responsible for the induc-
tion of androgenesis, which might have been provided by the 
anther,  are  missing,  and  these  have  to  be  provided  through 
the culture medium (Reinert and Bajaj, 1977). For example, 
tobacco-excised anthers can be successfully cultured on a sim-
ple basal medium, whereas the isolated microspores require a 
higher amount of nitrogen in the form of amino acids (Reinert 
et al., 1975).

In addition to the nutrient composition, the physical prop-
erties  of  the  medium  have  to  be  considered  before  starting 
the culture. Agar-solidified media have been extensively used 
in many anther culture systems, but the use of liquid medium 
is  also  becoming  popular,  particularly  in  microspore  culture. 
Androgenesis in T. aestivum (Trottier et al., 1993) and H. vul­
gare  (Trottier  et  al.,  1993;  Cistué  et  al.,  1998)  involved  the 
use of liquid media. Meanwhile, microspore embryogenesis in 
anther culture of O. sativa (Bishnoi et al., 2000; Aryan, 2002) 
was successfully induced on a solid medium. A new approach 
in  anther  culture  is  the  use  of  a  double-phase  medium.  The 
anther is grown in a thin layer of liquid medium, which is on 
top of solid agar in the agar plate. This method has proven to 
be  useful  in  the  anther  culture  of  triticale  (  Triticosecale; 
Immonen  and  Robinson,  2000).  Another  way  of  improving 
the yield of microspore-derived plants has included culture in 
a liquid medium supplemented with Ficoll 400™, a non-ionic 
copolymer of sucrose and epichlorohydrin, which functions as 
a  buoyancy-increasing  component  to  allow  anthers  and  calli 
to  float.  The  detrimental  anaerobic  conditions  of  the  liquid 
media  are  believed  to  cause  the  reduction  in  plant  regenera-
tion because anthers and calli develop under the medium sur-
face.  However,  the  results  have  not  been  consistent  among 
studies or with different species or cultivars.

Growth regulators
The  application  of  plant  growth  regulators  to  the  culture 
medium  is  necessary  for  the  successful  induction  of  micro-
spore  embryogenesis.  Auxin  and  cytokinin  are  the  two  most 
extensively  used  growth  regulators  in  the  anther  culture 
of  a  wide  range  of  plant  species.  In  the  anther  culture  of 
Poaceae  and  Brassicaceae,  2,4-D  is  usually  applied  (Bishnoi 
et  al.,  2000).  Mitykó  et  al.  (1996)  used  2,4-D  and  kinetin 
to induce haploid embryo formation in the anther culture of  
C.  annuum,  and  the  same  growth  regulators  were  also  used 
by Metwally et al. (1998b) to produce haploid plantlets from 
the anther culture of Cucurbita pepo. Vigorous green plantlets 
are  regenerated  from  the  microspore  culture  of  H.  vulgare 
in  the  presence  of  auxins  such  as  IAA  or  naphthaleneacetic 

acid  (NAA;  Castillo  et  al.,  2000).  Although  the  application 
of growth regulators is found to enhance microspore embryo-
genesis  in  most  species,  their  removal  from  the  culture 
medium,  coupled  with  simultaneous  lowering  of  the  sucrose 
concentration,  resulted  in  the  initiation  of  embryogenesis  or 
shoot  organogenesis  in  the  anther  culture  of  Speciosa  colum­
baria  (Romeijn  and  Lammeren,  1999).  These  observations 
support  the  assumption  that  the  requirement  of  exogenous 
auxin and cytokinin depends on their endogenous level within 
the anther (Reinert and Bajaj, 1977). An adequate auxin bal-
ance is important for microspore embryogenesis to take place, 
particularly during the transition period from the radial sym-
metry of globular embryos to the bilateral symmetry of later 
stages  (Ramesar-Fortner  and  Yeung,  2006).  Although  it  is 
crucial  for  the  transition,  a  high  level  of  auxin  may  inhibit 
embryos  from  further  elongation  (Seguí-Simarro  and  Nuez, 
2008a).

Many  plants  and  microspores  exposed  to  environmental  
stress  are  known  to  produce  abscisic  acid  (ABA).  Seguí-
Simarro  and  Nuez  (2008a)  suggested  that  ABA  signaling 
caused  activation  in  some  genes.  They  suggested  that  the 
internalization  of  stress  signals  by  ABA  signaling  pathways 
would  be  an  intermediate  step  in  the  activation  of  gene 
expression  programs  leading,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  micro-
spore  embryogenesis  (Maraschin  et  al.,  2005b;  Tsuwamoto 
et al., 2007). Besides its previously mentioned role, ABA has 
a  morphogenetic  importance  in  maintaining  morphological 
integrity during early embryo growth, especially in the devel-
opment  of  shoot  apical  meristem  (Seguí-Simarro  and  Nuez, 
2008a).

Haploid induction via ovary and ovule 
cultures

Ovaries  and  unfertilized  ovules  are  also  possible  alternative 
sources  for  haploid  or  doubled-haploid  production  (Miyoshi 
and Asakura, 1996; Metwally et al., 1998a; Sato et al., 2000; 
Thomas, 2004; Shalaby, 2007). Thus far, the success of ovary 
and ovule culture in the production of haploid and doubled-
haploids has been reported on a laboratory scale for a number 
of taxa (Miyoshi and Asakura, 1996; Alan et al., 2003, 2004 
Tang  et  al.,  2006;  Bhat  and  Murthy,  2008).  No  commercial 
application  of  ovary  or  ovule  cultures  has  been  found  thus 
far, therefore research on the use of ovary and ovule culture 
in induction of haploids should be encouraged in the future. 
A number of papers have revealed factors associated with the 
response of ovaries or ovules cultured in vitro. Plant genotype 
was found to be important in ovule culture of Cucumis sati­
vus  (Suprunova  and  Shmykova,  2008),  while  in  the  Morus 
alba  ovule  culture,  Thomas  (2004)  found  that  the  stage  at 
which  the  explants  were  cultured  was  critical  for  the  gyno-
genic  response.  In  addition,  the  type  of  basal  medium  and 
plant  growth  regulators  used  also  play  important  roles,  as 
reported  by  Kouassi  et  al.  (2008)  in  ovule  culture  of  Hevea 
brasiliensis.  Despite  progress,  this  approach  is  faced  with 
many  constraints  impeding  its  widespread  application;  con-
sequently the gynogenic response of ovaries and ovules under 
various in vitro conditions needs further exploration.

147

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

Protoplast and Somatic Hybridization

Introduction

Somatic  hybridization  and  cybridization  have  great  potential 
in  plant  improvement.  Somatic  hybridization  through  proto-
plast  fusion  provides  the  ability  to  combine  parent  genes  in 
higher plants to overcome sexual incompatibility among plant 
species or genera. Protoplast fusion enables transfer of desir-
able  qualities,  for  example,  resistance  to  diseases  (bacterial, 
fungal, viral), pests, herbicides, and other stress factors.

Hundreds of reports on somatic hybridization have been 
published  during  the  past  four  decades.  A  recent  review 
of  somatic  hybrids  was  provided  by  Liu  et  al.  (2005a). 
Grosser  and  Gmitter  (2005)  and  Singh  and  Rajam  (2009) 
reviewed  applications  of  somatic  hybridization  and  cybridi-
zation  in  citrus  improvement.  Wang  et  al.  (2009)  reviewed 
progress  in  somatic  hybridization  in  banana  (Musa  spp.). 
Application  to  genetics  and  breeding  in  somatic  hybrids  of 
potato (Solanum tuberosum) was reviewed by Orczyk et al. 
(2003).  Somatic  hybridization  in  the  family  Brassicaceae 
was  reviewed  by  Navratilova  (2004).  Reddy  et  al.  (2008) 
reviewed developments in seaweed protoplast research and 
their potential in genetic improvement. This section prima-
rily focuses on literature published in the past decade, with 
particular emphasis on types of somatic hybrids, protoplast 
fusion  methods,  selection  and  identification  of  somatic 
hybrids, and the recent efforts in somatic hybridization are 
reviewed.

Types of somatic hybrids

Somatic  hybrids  can  be  classified  into  three  types:  symmet-
ric somatic hybrids, asymmetric somatic hybrids, and cybrids 
(cytoplasmic  hybrids).  Symmetric  somatic  hybridization  is 
defined as the combination of nuclear and cytoplasmic genetic 
information from both parental species. Asymmetric somatic 
hybridization  is  incomplete,  with  the  loss  of  some  cytoplas-
mic or nuclear DNA, and this type of hybridization has been 
used to introduce fragments of the nuclear genome from one 
donor species into the intact genome of another recipient spe-
cies.  Cybrids  harbor  only  one  parental  nuclear  genome  and 
either the cytoplasmic genome of the other (non-nuclear) par-
ent or that of a combination of both parental species (see Guo 
et al., 2004 for a review). Asymmetric hybrids and cybrids are 
widely used for crop improvement because one or more traits 
can be added while maintaining cultivar integrity (Wang et al., 
2008).

Protoplast fusion methods

Protoplast  surfaces  bear  strong  negative  charges,  and  intact 
protoplasts  in  suspension  repel  each  other,  hence  fusion  is 
accomplished  by  the  addition  of  calcium  ions  or  polyethyl-
ene glycol (PEG), or by using electric fields. Electrofusion is 

148

preferred over chemical fusion, as fusion conditions are much 
easier to control (Duquenne et al., 2007). According to work 
by  Trigiano  and  Gray  (2000),  the  yield  of  fusion  products 
increases  20-fold  when  electrofusion  is  used.  Even  though 
binary  chemical  fusion  is  more  efficient  in  some  plants,  it 
allows  more  efficient  cell  division  and  plant  regeneration 
afterwards (Assani et al., 2005).

In  recent  years,  somatic  hybridization  has  been  accom-
plished by electrofusion of protoplast, and characterizing the 
regenerated plantlets by flow cytometry and isozyme or DNA 
marker analysis. Electrochemical protoplast fusion is a process 
that  combines  the  merits  of  both  somatic  hybridization  and 
chemical  methods  (Olivares-Fuster  et  al.,  2005).  Olivares-
Fuster  et  al.  (2005)  reported  production  of  citrus  somatic 
hybrids  and  cybrids  via  electrochemical  protoplast  fusion, 
where  protoplasts  of  sweet  orange  and  Mexican  lime  were 
induced to undergo fusion in the presence of PEG and elec-
tric  impulses  of  direct  current.  High  rates  of  embryogenesis 
were exhibited.

Since  most  of  the  hybrids  obtained  via  symmetric  pro-
toplast  fusion  may  contain  numerous  undesirable  genes, 
repeated backcrossing and selection are required for elimina-
tion of undesirable traits. The obtained somatic hybrids often 
show chromosome loss, weakness, or sterility, probably due to 
somatic incompatibility (Fu et al., 2009). Chromosome elimi-
nation is an important issue and a complicated process influ-
enced by many factors, such as genotype, type of irradiation 
rays, irradiation dose, and phylogenetic relatedness (Liu et al., 
2005a; Yang et al., 2007).

In  asymmetric  fusion,  metabolism  inhibitors  inactivate 
recipient protoplasts and simplify the selection of the regen-
erants. Iodoacetate (IOA) has been used to inactivate proto-
plasts of parents for fusion and has been found to be efficient 
in  selectively  producing  somatic  hybrids  (Shimonaka  et  al., 
2002).  For  transferring  a  part  of  the  genome  or  cytoplasm, 
the donor protoplasts are usually irradiated with X- or γ-rays 
prior to fusion (Fu et al., 2009), but these two kinds of irra-
diating rays are dangerous and inconvenient to use. Therefore, 
UV has been increasingly used to break and fragment chromo-
somes of donors for production of asymmetric hybrids (Yang 
et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2008).

Effects of UV on donor chromosome elimination and frag-
mentation  are  dose  dependent  (Xiang  et  al.,  2003).  Using 
the  viability,  division  percentage,  and  plating  efficiency  of 
UV-irradiated protoplasts as indicators, Fu et al. (2009) were 
able  to  enhance  chromosome  elimination  by  increasing  the 
irradiation dose. Xiao et al. (2009) found that when UV dos-
age  increased,  the  differentiation  ability  of  colony  formation 
and  the  frequency  of  plant  regeneration  decreased  in  proto-
plast fusion in banana. In addition, the UV treatment given to 
the donor protoplast influenced the growth and development 
of fused products, suggesting that optimal UV irradiation is a 
key factor for asymmetric protoplast fusion.

Many plant species have been used in intergeneric somatic 
hybridization,  as  shown  in  Table  10.1.  Some  important  eco-
nomic  characteristics  transferred  through  protoplast  fusion, 
such as tolerance to disease, herbicides, and salt are shown in 
Table 10.2.

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

Table 10.1  Intergeneric symmetric and asymmetric fusions

A

Atropa

Brassica

Citrus

Parents

B

Nicotiana

Arabidopsis

Camelina

Crambe

Fusions

Symmetric fusions

Asymmetric fusions 
or microfusions

Yemets et al. (2000)

Yemets et al. (2000)

Yamagishi et al. (2002)

Jiang et al. (2009)

Wang et al. (2003)

Orychophragmus

Hu et al. (2002b)

Hu et al. (2002b)

Isatis

Sinapis

Fortunella

Poncirus

Clausena

Zhao et al. (2008)

Du et al. (2009)

Hu et al. (2002a)

Du et al. (2009)

Tu et al. (2008)

Takami et al. (2004)

Guo et al. (2002)

Liu and Deng (2000)

Fu et al. (2003)

Microcitrus

Liu and Deng (2002)

Severinia

Xu et al. (2004)

Grosser and Chandler 
(2000)

Dendranthema

Artemisia

Furuta et al. (2004)

Daucus

Panax

Helianthus

Cichorium

Hyoscyamus

Nicotiana

Lathyrus

Raphanus

Triticum

Pisum

Isatis

Avena

Durieu and Ochatt (2000)

Tu et al. (2008)

Aeleuropus

Agropyron

Bupleurum

Lolium

Cui et al. (2009)

Gao et al. (2010)

Psathyrostachys

Xing et al. (2001)

Han et al. (2009)

Varotto et al. (2001)

Zubko et al. (2002)

Xiang et al. (2003)

Xiang et al. (2010)

Yue et al. (2001)

Xia et al. (2003)

Liu et al. (2009)

Zhou et al. (2006)

Cheng and Xia (2004)

Xiang et al. (2004)

Setaria

Haynaldia

Zea

Zhou et al. (2001)

Zhou et al. (2001)

Szarka et al. (2002)

Xu et al. (2003)

149

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

Table 10.2  Important economic characteristics transferred through protoplast fusion

Somatic hybrids

Characters

Musa acuminata cv. Mas    M. silk cv. Guoshanxiang

Disease resistance (Fusarium)

Brassica napus    Isatis indigotica

Helianthus annuus L.    H. maximiliani

Triticum aestivum    Aeleuropus littorulis T. aestivum    Agropyron 
elongatum

Disease resistance

Disease resistance

Salt tolerance

B. napus    Crambe abyssinica

Oryza meyeriana    O. sativa ssp. Japonica

Higher erucic acid content

Bacterial blight resistance

Dendranthema    grandiflorum    Artemisia sieversiana

Rust resistance

Sinapsis arvensis    Arabidopsis thaliana

Nicotiana plumbaginifolia    Atropa belladonna

Citrus reticulata cv. Red Tangerine    Poncirus trifoliata

Stem canker resistance

Amiprophos methyl resistance

Tolerant to CTV (citrus tristeza virus) and CEV 
(citrus exocortis virus)

T. aestivum    A. elongatum

Higher protein content

References

Xiao et al. (2009)

Du et al. (2009)

Taski-Ajdukovic et al. (2006)

Yue et al. (2001)

Xia et al. (2003)

Wang et al. (2003)

Yan et al. (2004)

Furuta et al. (2004)

Hu et al. (2002a)

Yemets et al. (2000)

Guo et al. (2002)

Gao et al. (2010)

Cui et al. (2009)

Higher level of linolenic and eicosanoic acids

Jiang et al. (2009)

B. napus    Camelina sativa

Citrus reticulata    C. limon

R. sativus    B. rapa

Daucus carota    Panax quinquefolius

Ipomoea batatas    I. triloba

Carotenoid compounds

Medicinal components

Ginsenoside

Storage root-bearing

Bassene et al. (2009)

Tu et al. (2008)

Han et al. (2009)

Yang et al. (2009)

Cai et al. (2010)

An et al. (2008)

Murcott tangor (Citrus reticulata Blanco    C. sinensis (L.) Osbeck)    
Hirado Buntan Pink pummelo (HBP) (C. grandis (L.) Osbeck)

Citrus sinensis Osbeck cv. Yoshida navel orange    Citrus unshiu Marc cv. 
Okitsu satsuma mandarin

Seedless

Seedless

Bingtang orange (Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck)    Calamondin (C. microcarpa 
Bunge)

Asiatic citrus canker-tolerant and ornamental 
citrus breeding

Cai et al. (2010)

Selection of somatic hybrids

Identification of somatic hybrids

It is necessary to select the hybrid products from the unfused 
and  homo-fused  protoplast  populations.  Without  a  strategy 
for  identification  and  selection  of  hybrid  cells,  a  very  time-
consuming  and  tedious  identification  of  somatic  hybrids 
among large numbers of regenerated calli or plants must occur. 
Several  techniques  have  been  used  for  selecting  hybrid  cell 
lines,  including  manual  selection,  selective  media,  metabolic 
inhibitors, and complementation systems, such as chlorophyll 
deficiency  complementation,  auxotroph  complementation, 
resistance markers and double mutants, and culture and appli-
cation  of  the  green  fluorescent  protein  (GFP)  marker  gene 
(reviewed by Guo et al., 2004; Navratilova, 2004).

Hybrid plants developed from post-fused protoplast cultures 
can  be  identified  based  on  morphological,  cytological  (chro-
mosome  counting,  flow  cytometry  analysis,  and  isozyme 
analysis),  and  molecular  analysis  (DNA  markers).  Genetic 
analysis  can  be  undertaken  only  if  the  hybrid  plants  are  fer-
tile. Many hybrid plants of distant related species are sterile. 
Thus  there  has  been  a  constant  effort  to  exploit  molecular 
markers, especially to characterize the organellar genomes of 
somatic  hybrids  and  cybrids.  Modern  molecular  technologies 
used  to  characterize  the  nature  of  somatic  hybrids  include 
random  amplified  polymorphic  DNA  (RAPD),  restriction 
fragment  length  polymorphism  (RFLP),  amplified  fragment 

150

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

length polymorphism (AFLP), simple sequence repeat (SSR), 
inter-simple sequence repeat (ISSR), genomic in situ hybridi-
zation (GISH), chloroplast simple sequence repeat (cpSSR), 
and cleaved amplified polymorphism sequence (CAPS) analy-
ses.  A  number  of  excellent  comprehensive  reviews  are  avail-
able (Guo et al., 2004; Navratilova, 2004; Liu et al., 2005a). 
Multiple techniques are often used because results from one 
method  are  not  sufficient  to  draw  unequivocal  conclusions 
about hybridity. For example, RAPD and ISSR analysis were 
used  to  identify  somatic  hybrids  of  disease-resistant  banana 
(Xiao et al., 2009). Two new citrus somatic hybrids identified 
by  flow  cytometry  analysis  showed  that  all  plants  from  pre-
selected lines of the two combinations were tetraploid. Using 
SSR  analysis  confirmed  their  hybrid  nature,  with  nuclear 
DNA  from  both  fusion  parents  and  an  absence  of  parental-
specific  bands.  Furthermore,  cytoplasmic  genomes  of  the 
recovered  plants  were  further  revealed  by  CAPS  and  cpSSR 
analysis (Cai et al., 2010).

Factors affecting regeneration of hybrid 
plants

Successful gene transfer via protoplast fusion depends on the 
ability  to  regenerate  a  mature  plant  from  the  fusion  prod-
uct.  Many  factors  affecting  regeneration  of  plants,  such  as 
the  nature  of  protoplast  (Nassour  and  Dorion,  2002),  cul-
ture  method  (Thomas,  2009),  culture  medium  (Sonntag 
et  al.,  2009),  protoplast  density  (Khentry  et  al.,  2006),  and 
external  conditions  (Qin  et  al.,  2005)  have  been  reported. 
Selection of parents is very important in using hybridization to 
create new variation. Despite the obvious importance of this 
issue,  more  research  has  been  done  on  methods  of  selection 
in  breeding  populations  than  on  selection  of  parents  to  cre-
ate  these  populations  (Baenziger  et  al.,  2006).  The  somatic 
hybrids  between  remotely  related  species  were,  in  general, 
more  difficult  to  root  and  culture  to  mature  plants  outside  
in vitro conditions (Tu et al., 2008). Du et al. (2009) reported 
that most of the hybrids between B. napus and Isatis indigo­
tica  developed  shoots  and  roots  very  slowly,  and  even  some 
rooted plants failed to survive after being transferred to soil or 
stopped growing and died during the flowering stage, although 
care  was  taken  with  soil  and  humidity  conditions.  The  poor 
performance of these hybrids may be related to the incorpo-
ration of excessive genomes of the two very distantly related 
species  and  strong  genetic  incompatibilities.  Somatic  hybrids 
from  parents  of  a  widely  divergent  genetic  background  may 
have low fertility and viability (Navratilova, 2004).

Efficient  protoplast  isolation,  fusion,  and  regeneration  of 
fusion  products  are  all  indispensable  steps  toward  the  crea-
tion of a somatic hybrid and therefore demand an integrated 
approach  of  techniques  (Duquenne  et  al.,  2007;  Pati  et  al., 
2008).  To  date,  no  standardized  method  has  been  proposed 
that  is  suitable  for  a  wide  range  of  species.  Using  a  specific 
crop  as  a  testing  model  will  have  wider  implications.  Citrus 
is one of a few plants where somatic hybridization via proto-
plast fusion is reaching its predicted potential. Citrus somatic 
hybrid plants have been produced from more than 250 paren-
tal combinations, covering a wide range of germplasm, and an 

extensive  review  of  the  subject  has  recently  been  published 
(Grosser  and  Gmitter,  2005;  Peña  et  al.,  2008;  Singh  and 
Rajam,  2009;  Castle,  2010).  Somatic  hybridization  has  been 
successful within the Brassicaceae family, which is very ame-
nable to protoplast fusion. A wide range of interspecific, inter-
generic,  and  intertribal  hybrids  have  been  synthesized  with  
B. napus as one fusion parent (Du et al., 2009).

Screening and Development of 
Stress-Resistant Plants Using in vitro 
Selection Techniques

Introduction

Screening  of  plant  germplasms  to  obtain  desired  characteris-
tics and to create novel plants has been undertaken for millen-
nia. Since in vitro selection techniques became available, they 
have  played  important  roles  in  plant  screening  and  breed-
ing  programs.  Compared  to  traditional  methods,  handling  of 
larger  plant  populations,  increased  mutation  induction  effi-
ciency,  more  precisely  controlled  environmental  conditions, 
and higher frequency of mutant recovery are possible by using 
in vitro selection techniques (Predieri and Di Virgilio, 2007). 
These  techniques  have  been  intensively  used  especially  for 
obtaining  stress-resistant  plants  (Suprasanna  et  al.,  2009).  In 
this section, biotic and abiotic stress-resistant plants screened 
and  developed  using  in  vitro  selection  techniques  in  the  last 
decade are discussed.

General methods of screening and 
breeding using in vitro selection techniques

Screening and breeding methods using in vitro selection tech-
niques  are  described  here.  These  methods  include  induction 
of variants or mutants, in vitro selection of plants with desired 
traits,  and  assessment  of  the  plants.  Tissue  culture  gener-
ates a wide range of somaclonal variation, which can express 
useful  traits  for  breeders  (Larkin  and  Scowcroft,  1981). 
Although the frequency of genetic variation is reasonably high 
(Hammerschlag  et  al.,  2006),  it  can  be  increased  by  using 
physical and chemical mutagens, such as γ-ray and ethylmeth-
ane  sulfonate.  To  screen  for  plants  with  target  traits  from  a 
large number of variants, mutants or germplasm under in vitro 
conditions,  efficient  selection  agents  need  to  be  employed 
(Kumar  et  al.,  2008a,b).  The  agents  differ  depending  on  the 
target traits. If the target trait is resistance to a certain envi-
ronmental  stress,  the  stress  must  be  added  to  the  in  vitro 
conditions at the time of selection. For example, to select salt-
tolerant plants, media containing salt can be used. Generally, 
a  sublethal  dose  of  the  particular  selective  agent  is  used, 
and  plants  that  survive  under  these  conditions  are  selected 
as  resistant  plants.  If  calli,  cells,  or  protoplasts  are  used  for 
selection, they need to be regenerated through organogenesis 
or  somatic  embryogenesis  after  the  selection.  Finally,  in  vivo 
assessment  of  selected  plants,  as  well  as  their  progenies,  is 
required to examine the stability of the obtained traits.

151

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

Biotic stress resistance

Table  10.3  shows  disease-resistant  plants  recently  obtained 
using in vitro selection systems. Although physical or chemi-
cal  mutagens  may  be  used,  it  was  revealed  that  mutation 
depends mainly on somaclonal variations to select and develop 
disease-resistant  plants  (Table  10.3).  As  a  selective  agent, 
culture  filtrates  of  pathogens  are  often  used  (Table  10.3). 
Culture filtrates contain the metabolites secreted from patho-
gen to medium, including toxins. The kind of toxins may vary 
depending  on  the  type  of  diseases  and  plant  pathogens.  For 
many plant diseases well-characterized toxins may be unavaila-
ble, hence culture filtrates can be used effectively (Suprasanna 
et  al.,  2009).  If  a  specific  toxin  is  known  to  be  involved  in 
the cause of disease, the toxin can be employed as a selective 
agent.  Several  fungi  of  the  genus  Fusarium  produce  fusaric 
acid (5-n-butylpicolinic acid), causing wilt of some plant spe-
cies.  This  toxin  has  been  successfully  used  for  the  develop-
ment of disease-resistant plants (Table 10.3). Oxalic acid was 
also employed for the development of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 
resistant plant in B. napus (Table 10.3).

Selection  is  popularly  carried  out  with  callus,  with  great 
success  in  development  of  disease-resistant  plants  (Table 
10.3). In general, callus surviving on the selection media will 
develop  into  resistant  plants.  This  is  because  for  many  host-
specific  toxins,  a  good  correlation  has  been  demonstrated 
between  resistance  to  the  pathogen  at  the  plant  level  and 
insensitivity  to  the  toxin  at  the  cellular  level  (van  den  Bulk, 
1991).  However,  Gonzalez  et  al.  (2006)  reported  that  a 
resistant bean cultivar of halo-blight pathogen showed a signif-
icantly smaller percentage of callus formation than a suscep-
tible cultivar on a medium with the pathogen culture filtrates 
including  a  certain  toxin.  The  authors  assumed  that  the 

resistant  bean  cultivars  triggered  a  hypersensitivity  reaction 
including cell death. When the in vitro grown bud shoots of 
the same bean cultivars were subjected to the selection agent, 
the resistant cultivar showed higher growth than the suscepti-
ble cultivars (Gonzalez et al., 2006).

Resistance  is  a  quantitative  characteristic  and,  conse-
quently,  through  selection,  more  resistant  varieties  can 
be  obtained  (Schiva  et  al.,  1985;  Thakur  et  al.,  2002). 
Hammerschlag  et  al.  (2006)  confirmed  this  by  assessing  the 
degree of anthracnose resistance in in vitro grown strawberry 
plants that were regenerated from the explants of various cul-
tivars  with  different  degrees  of  resistance.  It  was  concluded 
that  increased  levels  of  resistance  can  be  generated  from  a 
susceptible cultivar, but to obtain the highest levels of resist-
ance,  it  is  best  to  start  with  germplasm  already  exhibiting 
some degree of resistance (Hammerschlag et al., 2006).

Abiotic stress tolerance

In  vitro  screening  and  development  of  salt-tolerant  plants 
recently obtained is shown in Table 10.4. Various mutagens, as 
well  as  somaclonal  variations,  have  been  employed  to  obtain 
salt-tolerant plants. Sodium chloride with the concentrations 
of 100–200 mM is often used as a selective agent. The selec-
tion  is  usually  applied  to  callus,  although  in  some  cases  it  is 
applied to in vitro shoots.

It  is  difficult  to  assess  whether  the  salt-tolerant  plants 
obtained  from  in  vitro  selection  techniques  have  adapted 
to  high  salt  concentration  (i.e.,  a  temporary  or  epigenetic 
change vs. a permanent or heritable change). Hasegawa et al. 
(1994)  suggested  that  virtually  all  plant  species  could  adapt 
to salt stress if the stress is imposed gradually. The salt-stress 
adapted  plants  are  of  great  use  if  the  plants  are  propagated 

Table 10.3  Recently obtained disease-resistant plants using in vitro selection systems

Plant species

Aim

Mutagens

B. napus

Development of 
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 
resistant plant.

Somaclonal variation 
or haploid calli treated 
with ethylmethane 
sulfonate.

Cauliflower (B. 
oleracea)

Development of black 
rot disease resistant 
plant.

Calli treated with ethyl 
methane sulfonate or 
gamma ray.

Safflower 
(Carthamus 
tinctorius)

Development of 
Alternaria carthami 
resistant plant.

Somaclonal variation.

Turmeric 
(Curcuma longa )

Development of root rot 
disease resistant.

Somaclonal variation.

Type of culture and 
selective agents

Calli were grown on media 
containing 3–8 mM of oxalic 
acid.

Calli were grown on media 
containing culture filtrate of 
Xanthomonas campestris pv. 
campestris.

Embryogenic calli were grown 
on medium containing culture 
filtrate of Alternaria carthami.

Calli were treated with 
culture filtrate of Pythium 
graminicolum.

Assessment

References

Plants regenerated 
from selected calli 
showed resistance to the 
pathogen in both field and 
greenhouse.

In vivo plants regenerated 
from selected calli showed 
resistance to the pathogen.

Regenerated plants and 
their progenies showed 
resistance to the pathogen 
in the field.

Plants regenerated from 
selected calli showed 
resistance to the pathogen 
under in vivo conditions.

Liu et al. (2005b)

Mangal and 
Sharma (2002)

Kumar et al. 
(2008a)

Gayatri et al. 
(2005)

(Continued )

152

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

Assessment

References

Table 10.3  (Continued)

Plant species

Aim

Mutagens

Chrysanthemum 
(Dendranthema 
grandiflorum)

Development of leaf 
spot disease resistant 
plant.

Somaclonal variation.

Carnation 
(Dianthus 
caryophyllus)

Development of 
Fusarium resistant 
plant.

Somaclonal variation.

Type of culture and 
selective agents

Callus was grown on medium 
containing culture filtrate of 
Septoria obesa.

Calli were grown on media 
containing culture filtrate of 
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
dianthi.

Development of 
Fusarium yellows 
resistant plant.

In vitro grown shoot 
clumps irradiated by 
gamma ray.

Shoots were cultured on 
media containing fusaric acid 
(1–1.5 mM).

Plants regenerated from 
selected cell lines and 
cuttings of the generated 
plants acquired disease 
resistance in the field.

Plants regenerated from 
the resistant calli had 
acquired considerable 
resistance against the 
pathogen in the field.

In vitro selected mutants 
acquired resistance to the 
pathogen under in vivo 
conditions.

Gladiolus

Gladiolus

Development of 
Fusarium yellows 
resistant plant.

In vitro grown shoot 
clumps irradiated by 
gamma ray.

Sugarcane 
(Saccharum sp.)

Development of red rot 
disease resistant plant.

Somaclonal variation.

Grapevine (Vitis 
vinifera)

Development of 
anthracnose disease 
resistant plant.

Somaclonal variation.

Pineapple (Ananas 
comosus)

Screening of fusariosis 
resistant plant.

Pineapple (Ananas 
comosus)

Screening of fusariosis 
resistant plant.

Yam (Dioscorea 
spp.)

Screening of resistant 
clones of anthracnose 
diseases.

Strawberry 
(Fragaria    
ananassa)

Screening of 
anthracnose disease 
resistant plant.

Cassava (Manihot 
spp.)

Screening of resistant 
clones of anthracnose 
diseases.

—

—

—

—

—

Kumar et al. 
(2008b)

Thakur et al. 
(2002)

Pathania and 
Misra (2003)

Pathania and 
Misra (2003)

Sengar et al. 
(2009)

Jayasankar  
et al. (2000)

Shoots were cultured on media 
containing culture filtrate of 
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
gladioli

In vitro selected mutants 
acquired resistance to the 
pathogen under in vivo 
conditions.

Callus was grown on medium 
containing culture filtrate of 
Colletotrichum falcatum Went.

Somaclones regenerated 
from selected calli 
exhibited resistance to the 
pathogen in the field.

Proembryogenic masses were 
grown in media containing 
culture filtrate of Elsinoe 
ampelina (deBary) Shear.

Plants regenerated from 
selected lines exhibited 
resistance to the pathogen 
in a greenhouse.

Leaf segments of in vitro 
plantlets were spotted with 
culture filtrate of Fusarium 
subglutinas.

Leaf segments of in vitro 
plantlets were spotted with 
0.75 g/L of fusaric acid.

Excised leaves were spotted 
with extracted metabolites of 
culture filtrate of Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides.

In vitro leaves were incubated 
in a spore suspension of 
Colletotrichum acutatum isolate 
Goff.

Stem cuttings and excised 
leaves were spotted with 
extracted metabolites of 
culture filtrate of Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides f. sp. Manihotis.

Plants exhibiting various 
levels of pathogen 
resistance were obtained.

Borras et al. 
(2001)

Plants exhibiting various 
levels of pathogen 
resistance were obtained.

Plants exhibiting various 
levels of pathogen 
resistance were obtained.

Borras et al. 
(2001)

Amusa (2000)

Plants exhibiting various 
levels of pathogen 
resistance were obtained.

Hammerschlag 
et al. (2006)

Plants exhibiting various 
levels of pathogen 
resistance were obtained.

Amusa (2000)

(Continued )

153

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

Table 10.4  Recently obtained NaCl tolerant plants using in vitro selection systems

Plant species

Mutagens

Type of culture and selective agents

Assessment

Sugar beet (Beta vulgaris)

In vitro grown bud clumps 
irradiated by gamma ray.

Bud clumps were grown on media 
supplemented with 171, 257, 342, or 
428 mM of NaCl.

Progenies obtained from self-pollination 
of regenerated selected lines showed 
resistance to NaCl in the field.

Cauliflower (B. oleracea)

Greater yam (Dioscorea alata)

Microshoots treated with 
N-nitroso-N-ethylurea and N-
nitroso-N-methyl-urea.

Adaptation or somaclonal 
variation.

Microshoots were grown with media 
containing 3 mM of hydroxyproline.

Nodal segments from in vitro plantlets 
were placed on media containing 
100 mM of NaCl.

Regenerated in vitro and in vivo plants 
obtained resistance to NaCl, however, the 
resistance was not heritable.

Selected in vitro plantlets showed enzyme 
activity profiles reflecting the biochemical 
adjustments of the plantlets to cope with 
the saline conditions.

Strawberry (Fragaria    
ananassa Duch.)

Somaclonal variation.

Medium containing 200 mM of NaCl was 
used at the seed germination and early 
growth phase of seedlings.

Progenies of regenerated selected lines 
showed resistance to NaCl under in vitro 
conditions.

Sweet potato (Ipomoea 
batatas)

Calli treated with ethyl 
methanesulfonate.

Calli were cultured on medium 
supplemented with 200 mM of NaCl.

Sweet potato (I. batatas)

Cell aggregates from 
embryogenic suspension cultures 
were irradiated with gamma ray.

Cell aggregates were cultured in a 
medium containing 342 mM of NaCl.

Rice (Oryza sativa)

Somaclonal variation.

Robinia pseudoacacia

Somaclonal variation.

Calli were cultured on medium 
supplemented with 300 mM of NaCl.

Calli were grown on media including 
0.15 or 0.2 M of NaCl.

Plants regenerated from selected calli 
showed resistance to NaCl under in vitro 
conditions.

Plants regenerated from selected cell lines 
showed resistance to NaCl under in vitro 
and in vivo conditions.

Progenies of regenerated selected lines 
showed resistance to NaCl under in vivo 
conditions.

Plants regenerated from selected calli 
showed resistance to NaCl under in vitro 
conditions.

Sugarcane (Saccharum sp.)

Calli irradiated with gamma ray.

Sugarcane (Saccharum sp.)

Calli irradiated with gamma ray 
or somaclonal variants.

Sweet potato (I. batatas)

Mulberry (Morus spp.)

Mulberry (Morus spp.)

Mulberry (Morus spp.)

Sugarcane (Saccharum sp.)

—

—

—

—

—

154

Calli were grown on media with 85.6 or 
171.1 mM NaCl.

Radiated calli were more tolerant to NaCl 
than non-radiated calli.

Calli were grown on media containing 
42.8, 85.6, 128.3, and 171.1 mM of 
NaCl.

The RAPD profiles of putatively salt-tolerant 
regenerants differed from those of others 
under in vitro conditions.

Shoot apexes were inoculated in test 
tubes containing media supplemented 
with 0.5 or 1.0% (w/v) of NaCl.

Based on the levels of tolerance to NaCl 
under in vitro conditions, 15 genotypes 
were separated into 3 different categories.

Axillary buds were cultured on medium 
supplemented with 0.25–1.00% of NaCl.

Seeds were germinated on medium 
containing 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, and 
1.25% of NaCl.

A wide variation in the response to NaCl 
was observed among 63 genotypes under 
in vitro conditions. Correlations were found 
in the NaCl tolerance levels between the  
in vitro test and ex vitro test.

Seeds from 43 different genotypes showed 
wide variability of tolerance to salinity 
under in vitro conditions, some of which 
showed considerable tolerance to salinity.

Seeds were germinated on medium 
containing 1.25% of NaCl.

Selected plants showed resistance to NaCl 
in the field.

Calli were grown on media including 17, 
34, 68, and 102 mM of NaCl.

Two genotypes of GT54-9 and NCo310 
were found to be more tolerant to NaCl 
than a genotype of Co413 under in vitro 
conditions.

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

asexually  (Wheatley  et  al.,  2003).  However,  if  the  plants  go 
through  sexual  propagation,  assessment  of  the  traits  in  their 
progenies  is  necessary.  Table  10.4  summarizes  both  herit-
able traits of salt tolerance and salt tolerance developed as a 
result  of  adaptation.  Biswas  et  al.  (2002)  simulated  drought 
conditions in vitro by using PEG, which induces water stress 
in  the  medium  by  acting  as  a  non-penetrating  osmotic  agent 
that lowers the water potential of the medium. Rice selected 
with  this  chemical  proved  to  have  drought  tolerance  in  the 
field,  and  the  traits  showed  a  monogenic  inheritance  pat-
tern (Biswas et al., 2002). Drought-tolerant plants of Tagetes 
minuta  were  obtained  when  60 mM  mannitol  was  used  as  a 
selective agent (Mohamed et al., 2000).

McClinchey  and  Kott  (2008)  successfully  selected  cold-
tolerant  spring  canola  plants  by  using  salicylic  acid,  jasmonic 
acid,  3,4-dehydro-D,L-proline,  azetidine-2-carboxylate,  and  
hydroxyproline.  In  winter  barley,  embryogenic  calli  derived  
from  anther  cultures  were  placed  on  media 
includ-
ing  10–20 mM  of  hydroxyproline  (Tantau  et  al.,  2004). 
Regenerated  plants  from  the  selected  calli  proved  to  have 
frost resistance, and the resistance was confirmed to be herit-
able (Tantau et al., 2004). A heritable frost resistance was also 
obtained in cauliflowers by selecting microshoots with media 
containing  hydroxyproline  before  the  shoots  were  stored  at 
5°C for 2 years (Fuller et al., 2006). High temperature toler-
ant potato plants were obtained when microtubers were pro-
duced at a high temperature of 28°C from γ-irradiated shoots 
(Das et al., 2000).

In vitro selection techniques are also used to produce her-
bicide-tolerant plants with a combination of gene transforma-
tion  techniques.  Herbicides  have  also  been  used  as  selective 
agents  (Guosheng  et  al.,  2002;  Venkataiah  et  al.,  2005; 
Shizukawa and Mii, 2008).

Future perspective of screening and 
breeding using in vitro selection techniques

In vitro selection techniques are now taking the place of tra-
ditional  methods  in  plant  screening  and  breeding  programs 
because  of  their  convenience.  However,  the  lack  of  well-
established in vitro techniques often prevents it from practical 
use. A complete operation of in vitro screening and breeding 
involves  variant  or  mutant  induction,  in  vitro  selection,  in 
vitro plant regeneration, acclimatization of in vitro plants, and 
assessment  of  in  vivo  plants.  In  chili  pepper,  cell  and  tissue 
cultures have been applied successfully to the selection of var-
iant cells exhibiting increased resistance to abiotic stress, but 
no plants exhibiting the selected traits have been regenerated 
(Ochoa-Alejo and Ramirez-Malagon, 2001). Ben-Hayyim and 

Moore (2007) also reported that attempts to regenerate salt-
tolerant  citrus  plants  via  in  vitro  production  of  salt-tolerant 
callus or mutagenesis have been rather limited and are not in 
use. Extensive research in the establishment of each in vitro 
technique is required in the future.

Conclusions and Future Directions

Much  has  been  achieved  using  the  technologies  described  in 
this section for the selection of useful traits in plants. While 
some  problems  remain,  techniques  such  as  somatic  embryo-
genesis,  haploid  techniques,  protoplast,  and  cell  and  cal-
lus  culture  are  now  routinely  used  in  the  selection  of  traits 
important  in  agriculture.  For  example,  somatic  hybridiza-
tion is applied to increase the capacity of plants to cope bet-
ter  with  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses,  which  may  become  a 
key  focus  in  the  future  for  sustainable  agriculture.  These 
techniques  can  be  applied  to  improving  plants  for  ornamen-
tal  purposes  and  nutritional  quality,  creating  unique  and 
highly desirable plants that can meet market demand. Future 
research  needs  to  focus  on  development  of  somatic  hybridi-
zation  techniques  to  improve  plant  capabilities  for  use  in 
biofuel  and  bioremediation.  In  vitro  selection  techniques 
are now complementing traditional methods in plant screen-
ing  and  breeding  programs  because  of  their  convenience  and 
because of the potential they have for reducing the duration 
of  the  breeding  cycle.  However,  the  lack  of  well-established  
in  vitro  techniques  often  prevents  its  practical  use.  A  com-
plete  operation  of  in  vitro  screening  and  breeding  involves 
variant  or  mutant  induction,  selection,  plant  regeneration, 
acclimatization,  and  assessment  of  in  vivo  plants.  Extensive 
research  into  the  establishment  of  each  in  vitro  technique 
protocol for the success of plant screening and breeding pro-
grams  is  required.  Recently,  climate  change  has  been  affect-
ing the growth and yield of plants all over the world. Growers 
may  be  forced  to  change  to  a  new  crop  that  is  suitable  for 
new  environmental  conditions  such  as  extreme  tempera-
tures,  drought,  or  chemical  accumulated/contaminated  soil. 
The  endless  possibilities  for  developing  improvements  in 
plants through technologies described in this chapter have the 
potential  to  help  solve  world  hunger  and  problems  faced  in 
agriculture as a result of climate change.

Acknowledgments

The  authors  wish  to  thank  Mr.  Youske  Sato  from  Meiji 
University for his help in retrieving many of the references for 
this chapter.

References

Akin-Idowu, P. E., Ibitoye, D. O., & 

Ademoyegun, O. T. (2009). Tissue 
culture as a plant production technique 
for horticultural crops. African Journal of 
Biotechnology, 8, 3782–3788.

Alan, A. R., Brants, A., Cobb, E., Goldschmied, 

P. A., Mutschler, M. A., & Earle, E. D. 
(2004). Fecund gynogenic lines from onion 
(Allium cepa L.) breeding materials. Plant 
Science, 167, 1055–1066.

Alan, A. R., Mutschler, M. A., Brants, A., Cobb, 

E., & Earle, E. D. (2003). Production of 
gynogenic plants from hybrids of Allium 
cepa L. and A. roylei Stern. Plant Science, 
165, 1201–1211.

155

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

Amusa, N. A. (2000). Screening of cassava and 
yam cultivars for resistance to anthracnose 
using toxic metabolites of colletotrichum 
species. Mycopathologia, 150, 137–142.

An, H., Jin, S. -B., Kang, B., & Park, H. (2008). 

Production of somatic hybrids between 
satsuma mandarin (Citrus unshiu) and navel 
orange (Citrus sinensis) by protoplast fusion. 
Journal of Plant Biology, 51, 186–191.

Anwar, F., Sharmila, P., & Saradhi, P. P. (2010). 
No more recalcitrant: Chickpea regeneration 
and genetic transformation. African Journal 
of Biotechnology, 9, 782–797.

Aquea, F., Johnston, A. J., Canon, P., 
Grossniklaus, U. Arce-Johnson, P. 
(2010). TRAUCO, a Trithorax-group 
gene homologue, is required for early 
embryogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, erp396.
Aryan, A. P. (2002). Production of double 
haploids in rice: Anther vs. microspore 
culture. Proceedings of the importance of 
plant tissue culture and biotechnology in 
plant sciences (pp. 201–208). Armidale.

Assani, A., Chabane, D., & Haicour, R.,  

et al. (2005). Protoplast fusion in banana 
(Musa spp): Comparison of chemical 
(PEG: Polyethylene glycol) and electrical 
procedure. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 83, 145–151.

Atak, M., Kaya, M., Khawar, M. M., Saglam, S., 
Özcan, S., & Ciftci, Y. (2008). Effect of age 
on somatic embryogenesis from immature 
zygotic embryos of 5 Turkish triticale 
genotypes. African Journal of Biotechnology, 
7, 1765–1768.

Bach, A., & Krol, A. (2001). Effect of light 

quality on somatic embryogenesis in 
Hyacinthus orientalis L. ‘‘Delft’s Blue.’’ 
Biological Bulletin Poznan, 38, 103–107.
Bach, A., Malik, M., Ptak, A., & Kedra, M. 

(2000). Light effects on ornamental 
microplant shoots and bulbs quality. Acta 
Horticulturae, 530, 173–179.

Baenziger, P. S., Russell, W. K., Graef, G. L., 

& Campbell, B. T. (2006). Improving lives: 
50 years of crop breeding, genetics, and 
cytology (C-1). Crop Science, 46, 2230–
2244.

Bahgat, S., Shabban, O. A., El-Shihy, O., 

Lightfoot, D. A., & El-Shemy, H. A. (2008). 
Establishment of the regeneration system 
for Vicia faba L. Current Issues in Molecular 
Biology, 11, i47–54.

Bal, U., Ellialtioglu, S., & Abak, K. (2009). 
Induction of symetrical nucleus division  
and multi-nucleate structures in microspores 
of eggplant (Solanum melongena L.) 
cultured in vitro. Scientia Agricultura, 66, 
535–539.

Baron, K., & Stasolla, C. (2008). The role 

of polyamines during in vivo and in 
vitro development. In Vitro Cellular & 
Developmental Biology–Plant, 44, 384–395.
Bartoszewski, G., Havey, M. J., Ziólkowska, A., 

Dlugosz, M., & Malepszy, S. (2007). The 
selection of mosaic (MSC) phenotype after 
passage of cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) 
through cell culture – a method to obtain 
plant mitochondrial mutants. Journal of 
Applied Genetics, 48, 1–9.

et al. (2009). Non-additive phenotypic 
and transcriptomic inheritance in a citrus 
allotetraploid somatic hybrid between C. 
reticulata and C. limon: The case of pulp 
carotenoid biosynthesis pathway. Plant Cell 
Reports, 28, 1689–1697.

Bassuner, B. M., Lam, R., Lukowitz, W., 

& Yeung, E. C. (2007). Auxin and root 
initiation in somatic embryos of Arabidopsis. 
Plant Cell Reports, 26, 1–11.

Ben-Hayyim, G., & Moore, G. A. (2007). 
Recent advances in breeding citrus for 
drought and saline stress tolerance. In M. A. 
Jenks (Ed.), Advances in molecular breeding 
toward drought and salt tolerant crops 
(pp. 627–642). Dordrecht, Netherlands: 
Springer.

Berleth, T., & Chatfield, S. (2002). 

Embryogenesis: Pattern formation from 
a single cell. In The arabidopsis book: 
American Society of Plant Biologists, ed.

Bhat, J. G., & Murthy, H. N. (2008). Haploid 
plant regeneration from unpollinated ovule 
cultures of niger (Guizotia abyssinica (L.f.) 
Cass). Russian Journal of Plant Physiology, 
55, 241–245.

Binott, J. J., Songa, J. M., Ininda, J., Njagi, 

E. M., & Machuka, J. (2008). Plant 
regeneration from immature embryos 
of Kenyan maize inbred lines and their 
respective single cross hybrids through 
somatic embryogenesis. African Journal of 
Biotechnology, 7, 981–987.

Bishnoi, U., Jain, R. K., Rohilla, J. S., 
Chowdhury, V. K., Gupta, K. R., & 
Chowdury, J. B. (2000). Anther culture of 
recalcitrant indica x Basmati rice hybrids. 
Euphytica, 114, 93–101.

Biswas, J., Chowdhury, B., Bhattacharya, A., & 
Mandal, A. B. (2002). In vitro screening for 
increased drought tolerance in rice. In Vitro 
Cellular Development Biology­ Plant, 38, 
525–530.

Bitsch, C., Gröger, S., & Lelley, T. (1998). Effect 
of parental genotypes on haploid embryo and 
plantlet formation in wheatmaize crosses. 
Euphytica, 103, 319–323.

Bonga, J. M., Klimaszewska, K. K., & von 

Aderkas, P. (2010). Recalcitrance in clonal 
propagation, in particular of conifers. Plant 
Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 100, 
241–254.

Borras, O., Santos, R., Matos, A. P., Cabral, R. 
S., & Arzola, M. (2001). A first attempt to 
use a Fusarium subglutinans culture filtrate 
for the selection of pineapple cultivars 
resistant to fusariose disease. Plant Breeding, 
120, 435–438.

Cai, X., Duan, Y., Fu, J., & Guo, W. (2010). 

Production and molecular characterization 
of two new Citrus somatic hybrids for scion 
improvement. Acta Physiologiae Plantarum, 
32(1), 215–221.

Cangahuala-Inocente, G., Silveira, V., 

Caprestano, C., Ducroquet, J., Floh, 
E., & Guerra, M. (2009). Dynamics of 
biochemical and morphophysiological 
changes during zygotic embryogenesis in 
Acca sellowiana (Berg.) Burr. Plant Growth 
Regulation, 59, 103–115.

Bassene, J., Froelicher, Y., Dhuique-Mayer, 

C., Mouhaya, W., Ferrer, R., & Ancillo, G., 

Cardoza, V., & Steward, C. N. (2004). Brassica 

biotechnology: Progress in cellular and 

156

molecular biology. In Vitro Cellular & 
Developmental Biology–Plant, 40, 542–551.

Caredda, S., Doncoeur, C., Devaux, P., 

Sangwan, R. S., & Clément, C. (2000). 
Plastid differentiation during androgenesis in 
albino and non-albino producing cultivars of 
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 13, 95–104.

Carneros, E., Celestino, C., Klimaszewska, 
K., Park, Y. S., Toribio, M., & Bonga, J. 
(2009). Plant regeneration in Stone pine 
(Pinus pinea L.) by somatic embryogenesis. 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 98, 
165–178.

Castillo, A. M., Vallés, M. P., & Cistué, L. 

(2000). Comparison of anther and isolated 
microspore cultures in barley. Effects of 
culture density and regeneration medium. 
Euphytica, 113, 1–8.

Castle, W. S. (2010). A career perspective on 
Citrus rootstocks, their development, and 
commercialization. HortScience, 45, 11–15.
Ceasar, S., & Ignacimuthu, S. (2010). Effects 

of cytokinins, carbohydrates and amino 
acids on induction and maturation of 
somatic embryos in kodo millet (Paspalum 
scorbiculatum Linn.). Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 102, 153–162.

Ceasar, S. A., & Ignacimuthu, S. (2008). 

Efficient somatic embryogenesis and plant 
regeneration from shoot apex explants of 
different Indian genotypes of finger millet 
(Eleusine coracana (L.) Gaertn.). In Vitro 
Cellular & Developmental Biology­Plant, 44, 
427–435.

Chen, Y., Kenaschuk, E. O., and Procunier,  

D. J. (1998). Plant regeneration from anther 
culture in Canadian cultivars of flax (Linum 
usitatissimum L.). Euphytica, 102.

Cheng, A. X., & Xia, G. M. (2004). Somatic 

hybridization between common wheat 
and Italian ryegrass. Plant Science, 166, 
1219–1226.

Choudhury, H., Kumaria, S., & Tandon, P. 

(2008). Induction and maturation of somatic 
embryos from intact megagametophyte 
explants in Khasi pine (Pinus kesiya Royle 
ex. Gord.). Current Science, 95, 1433–1438.

Chugh, A., & Khurana, P. (2002). Gene 

expression during somatic embryogenesis 
– recent advances. Current Science, 83, 
715–730.

Cistué, L., Ramos, A., & Castillo, A. M. (1998). 
Influence of anther pretreatment and culture 
medium composition on the production of 
barley doubled haploids from model and low 
responding cultivars. Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 55, 159–166.

Cistué, L., Soriano, M., Castillo, A. M., Vallés, 
M. P., Sanz, J. M., & Echavarri, B. (2006). 
Production of doubled haploid in durum 
wheat (Triticum turgidum L.) through 
isolated microspore culture. Plant Cell 
Reports, 25, 257–264.

Corrêa, C. M., de Oliveira, G. N., Astarita, 

L. V., & Santarém, E. R. (2009). Plant 
regeneration through somatic embryogenesis 
of yacón [Smallanthus sonchifolius (Poepp. 
and Endl.) H. Robinson]. Brazilian Archives 
of Biology and Technology, 52, 549–554.
Crosser, J. S., Lülsdorf, L. L., Davies, P. A., 

Clarke, H. J., Bayliss, K. L., & Mallikarjuna, 
N., et al. (2006). Toward doubled haploid 

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

production in the Fabaceae: Progress, 
constraints, and opportunities. Critical 
Review in Plant Sciences, 25, 139–157.

Cui, H., Yu, Z., Deng, J., Gao, X., Sun, Y., & 

Xia, G. (2009). Introgression of bread wheat 
chromatin into tall wheatgrass via somatic 
hybridization. Planta, 229(2), 323–330.

Curtis, M., & Grossniklaus, U. (2008). 

Molecular control of autonomous embryo 
and endosperm development. Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 21, 79–88.

da Silva, M., Pinto, D., Guerra, M., Floh, E., 
Bruckner, C., & Otoni, W. (2009). A novel 
regeneration system for a wild passion fruit 
species (Passiflora cincinnata Mast.) based 
on somatic embryogenesis from mature 
zygotic embryos. Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 99, 47–54.

da Silva Lauxen, M., Kaltchuk-Santos, E., Hu, 

C., Callegari-Jaques, S. M., & Bodanese-
Zanetti, M. H. (2003). Association between 
floral loud size and developmental stage in 
soybean microspores. Brazilian Archieves of 
Biology and Technology, 46, 515–520.

Das, A., Gosal, S. S., Sidhu, J. S., & Dhaliwal, 

H. S. (2000). Induction of mutations for 
heat tolerance in potato by using in vitro 
culture and radiation. Euphytica, 114, 
205–209.

Datta, S. (2005). Androgenic haploids: Factors 
controlling development and its application 
in crop improvement. Current Science, 89, 
1870–1878.

De la Peña, C., Galaz-Ávalos, R., & Loyola-
Vargas, V. (2008). Possible role of light 
and polyamines in the onset of somatic 
embryogenesis of Coffea canephora. 
Molecular Biotechnology, 39, 215–224.

Demeter, Z., Surányi, G., Molnár, V., Sramkó, 

G., Beyer, D., & Kónya, Z., et al. (2010). 
Somatic embryogenesis and regeneration 
from shoot primordia of Crocus heuffelianus. 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 100, 
349–353.

Dodds, J. H., & Roberts, L. W. (1985). 
Experiments in plant tissue culture. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Du, L., Zhou, S., & Bao, M. Z. (2007). Effect 

of plant growth regulators on direct somatic 
embryogenesis in camphor tree  
(Cinnamomum camphora L.) from immature 
zygotic embryos and embryogenic calli 
induction. Forestry Studies in China, 9, 
267–271.

Du, X. Z., Ge, X. H., Yao, X. C., Zhao, Z.G., & 
Li, Z. Y. (2009). Production and cytogenetic 
characterization of intertribal somatic 
hybrids between Brassica napus and Isatis 
indigotica and backcross progenies. Plant 
Cell Reports, 28(7), 1105–1113.

Ducos, J., Terrier, B., Courtois, D., & Pétiard, 

V. (2008). Improvement of plastic-based 
disposable bioreactors for plant science 
needs. Phytochemistry Reviews, 7, 607–613.
Ducos, J. P., Lambot, C., & Petiard, V. (2007). 

Bioreactors for coffee mass propagation 
by somatic embryogenesis. International 
Journal of Plant Developmental Biology, 1, 
1–12.

Ducos, J. P., Terrier, B. & Courtois, D. 

(2009). Disposable bioreactors for plant 
micropropagation and mass plant cell 

culture. In Disposable Bioreactors, Vol. 
115: Advances in biochemical engineering/
Biotechnology (pp. 89–115).

Dunwell, J. M. (1986). Pollen, ovule and 

embryo culture as tools in plant breeding. In 
P. G. Alderson (Ed.), Plant Tissue Culture 
and its Agricultural Application (pp. 375–
404). London: Butterworths.

Duquenne, B., Eeckhaut, T., Werbrouck, S., 

& Van Huylenbroeck, J. (2007). Effect 
of enzyme concentrations on protoplast 
isolation and protoplast culture of 
Spathiphyllum and Anthurium. Plant Cell, 
Tissue and Organ Culture, 91(2), 165–173.

Durieu, P., & Ochatt, S. J. (2000). Efficient 
intergeneric fusion of pea (Pisum sativum 
L.) and grass pea (Lathyrus sativus L.) 
protoplasts. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
51, 1237–1242.

Fehér, A. (2008). The initiation phase of 

somatic embryogenesis: What we know and 
what we don’t. Acta Biologica Szegediensis, 
52, 53–56.

Fehér, A., Pasternak, T. P., & Dudits, D. (2003). 

Transition of somatic plant cells to an 
embryogenic state. Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 74, 201–228.

Feng, D. L., Meng, Q. R., Li, W. P., Hu, Y. H., 

Li, M., & Gu, A.X. (2010). Morphology 
of somatic embryogenesis and plantlet 
formation in tissue cultures of lantern tree 
(Koelreuteria bipinnata var. integrifoliola). 
Forestry Studies in China, 12, 31–36.

Folta, K., & Dhingra, A. (2006). Transformation 

of strawberry: The basis for translational 
genomics in Rosaceae. In Vitro Cellular & 
Developmental Biology–Plant, 42, 482–490.

Fu, C. H., Guo, W. W., Liu, J. H., & Deng, 

X. X. (2003). Regeneration of Citrus 
sinensis    Clausena lansium intergeneric 
triploid and tetraploid somatic hybrids 
and their molecular identification. In Vitro 
Cellular & Developmental Biology Plant, 39, 
360–364.

Fu, L. L., Yang, X. Y., Zhang, X. L., Wang, 
Z. W., Feng, C. H., & Liu, C. X., et al. 
(2009). Regeneration and identification of 
interspecific asymmetric somatic hybrids 
obtained by donor-recipient fusion in 
cotton. Chinese Science Bulletin, 54(17), 
3035–3044.

Fu, X., Yang, S., & Bao, M. (2008). Factors 

affecting somatic embryogenesis in anther 
cultures of Chinese pink (Dianthus chinensis 
L.). In Vitro Cellular & Developmental 
Biology–Plant, 44, 194–202.

Fuller, M. P., Metwali, E. M. R., Eed, M. H., & 
Jellings, A. J. (2006). Evaluation of abiotic 
stress resistance in mutated populations of 
cauliflower (Brassica oleracea var. botrytis). 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 86, 
239–248.

Furuta, H., Shinoyama, H., Nomura, Y., 

Maeda, M., & Makara, K. (2004). 
Production of intergeneric somatic hybrids 
of chrysanthemum [Dendranthema  
grandiflorum (Ramat.) Kitamura] and 
wormwood (Artemisia sieversiana J. F. 
Ehrh. ex. Willd) with rust (Puccinia horiana 
Henning) resistance by electrofusion of 
protoplasts. Plant Science, 166, 695–702.
Gamborg, O. L., Millers, R. A., & Ojima, K. 

(1968). Nutrient requirements of suspension 

cultures of soybean root cells. Experimental 
Cell Research, 50, 151–158.

Gandonou, C., Errabii, T., Abrini, J., Idaomar, 

M., Chibi, F., & Senhaji, N. S. (2005). 
Effect of genotype on callus induction and 
plant regeneration from leaf explants of 
sugarcane (Saccharum spp.). African Journal 
of Biotechnology, 4, 1250–1255.

Gao, X., Liu, S., Sun, Q., & Xia, G. (2010). 

High frequency of HMW-GS sequence 
variation through somatic hybridization 
between Agropyron elongatum and common 
wheat. Planta, 231(2), 245–250.

Gao, X., Yang, D., Cao, D., Ao, M., Sui, 

X., Wang, Q., et al. (2010) In vitro 
micropropagation of Freesia hybrida and 
the assessment of genetic and epigenetic 
stability in regenerated plantlets. Journal of 
Plant Growth Regulation, 29, 257–267.

Gayatri, M. C., Roopa-darshini, V. R., & 
Kavyashree., R. (2005). Selection of 
turmeric callus for tolerant to culture filtrate 
of Pythium graminicolum and regeneration 
of plants. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 83, 33–40.

Gervais, C., Newcomb, W., & Simmonds, D. H. 
(2000). Rearrangement of the actin filament 
and microtubule cytoskeleton during 
induction of microspore embryogenesis in 
Brassica napus L. cv. Topas. Protoplasma, 
213, 194–202.

Gonzalez, A. I., Polanco, C., & Ruiz, M. L. 

(2006). In vitro culture response of common 
bean explants to filtrate from Pseudomonas 
syringae pv. phaseolicola and correlation 
with disease resistance. In Vitro Cellular 
Development Biology–Plant, 42, 160–164.

Gow, W.P., Chen, J. T. Chang, W. C. 

(2009. Enhancement of direct somatic 
embryogenesis and plantlet growth from leaf 
explants of Phalaenopsis by adjusting culture 
period and explant length. Acta Physiologiae 
Plantarum.

Grosser, J. W., & Chandler, J. L. (2000). 

Somatic hybridization of high yield, cold-
hardy and disease resistant parents for 
citrus rootstock improvement. Journal of 
Horticultural Science and Biotechnology, 75, 
641–644.

Grosser, J. W., & Gmitter, F. G., Jr. (2005). 

2004 SIVB Congress symposium 
proceedings “Thinking outside the cell:” 
Applications of somatic hybridization 
and cybridization in crop improvement, 
with citrus as a model. In Vitro Cellular 
& Developmental Biology–Plant, 41(3), 
220–225.

Guha, S., & Maheshwari, S. C. (1964). In vitro 

production of embryos from anthers of 
Datura. Nature, 204, 497.

Guo, W. W., Cai, X. D., & Grosser, J. W. 

(2004). Somatic cell cybrids and hybrids  
in plant improvement. In H. Daniell &  
C. D. Chase (Eds.), Molecular Biology and 
Biotechnology of Plant Organelles (pp. 635–
659). The Netherlands: Springer.

Guo, W. W., Cheng, Y. J., & Deng, X. X. 
(2002). Regeneration and molecular 
characterization of intergeneric somatic 
hybrids between Citrus reticulata and 
Poncirus trifoliata. Plant Cell Reports, 20, 
829–834.

157

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

Guo, Y. -D., Sewón, P., & Pulli, S. (1999). 

Improved embryogenesis from anther culture 
and plant regeneration in timothy. Plant Cell, 
Tissue and Organ Culture, 57, 85–93.

Guosheng, L., Qingwei, Z., Juren, Z., Yuping, 

B., & Lei, S. (2002). Establishment of 
multiple shoot clumps from maize (Zea 
mays L.) and regeneration of herbicide-
resistant transgenic plantlets. Science in 
China Series C. Life Sciences, 45, 40–49.
Guzy-Wróbelska, J., Labocha-Pawlowska, A., 
Kwasniewski, M., & Szarejko, I. (2007). 
Different recombination frequencies in 
wheat doubled haploid population obtained 
through maize pollination and anther 
culture. Euphytica, 156, 173–183.

Hammerschlag, F., Garces, S., Koch-Dean,  

M., Ray, S., Lewers, K., & J. Maas, J.,  
et al. (2006). In vitro response of strawberry 
cultivars and regenerants to Colletotrichum 
acutatum. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 84, 255–261.

Han, L., Zhou, C., Shi, J., Zhi, D., & Xia, G. 

(2009). Ginsenoside Rb1 in asymmetric 
somatic hybrid calli of Daucus carota with 
Panax quinquefolius. Plant Cell Reports, 
28(4), 627–638.

Hasegawa, P. M., Bressan, R. A., Nelson, D. E., 

Samaras, Y., & Rhodes, D. (1994). Tissue 
culture in the improvement of salt tolerance 
in plants. In A. R. Yeo & T. J. Flower (Eds.), 
Soil mineral stresses: Approaches to crop 
improvement. (pp. 83–125). Berlin: Springer-
Verlag.

Hofer, M., Touraev, A., & Haberle-Bors, E. 

(1999). Induction of embryogenesis from 
isolated apple microspores. Plant Cell 
Reports, 18, 1012–1017.

Hoshino, T., & Cuello, J. (2006). Environmental 

design considerations for somatic 
embryogenesis. In A. Mujib & J. Samaj 
(Eds.), Somatic embryogenesis (pp. 25–34). 
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.

Hosp, J., Maraschin, S. F., Touraev, A., & 

Boutilier, K. (2007a). Functional genomic of 
microspore embryogenesis. Euphytica, 158, 
275–285.

Hosp, J., Tashpulatov, A., Rossner, U., Barsova, 

E., Katholnigg, H., & Steinborn, R.,  
et al. (2007b). Transcriptional and metabolic 
profiles of stress-induced, embryogenic 
tobacco microspores. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 63, 137–149.

Hu, Q., Anderson, S. B., Dixelius, C., & 
Hansen, L. N. (2002a). Production of 
fertile intergeneric somatic hybrids between 
Brassica napus and Sinapis arvensis for the 
enrichment of the rapeseed gene pool. Plant 
Cell Reports, 21, 147–152.

Hu, Q., Hansen, L. N., Laursen, J., Dixelius, 

C., & Andersen, S. B. (2002b). Intergeneric 
hybrids between Brassica napus and 
Orychophragmus violaceus containing traits 
of agronomic importance for oilseed rape 
breeding. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
105, 834–840.

Ikeda, M., Umehara, M., & Kamada, H. (2006). 
Embryogenesis-related genes: Its expression 
and roles during somatic and zygotic 
embryogenesis in carrot and Arabidopsis. 
Plant Biotechnology, 23, 153–161.

Immonen, S., & Robinson, J. (2000). Stress 
treatment and ficoll for improving green 

158

plant regeneration in triticale anther culture. 
Plant Science, 150, 77–84.

Jauhar, P. P. (2006). Modern biotechnology as 

an integral supplement to conventional plant 
breeding: The prospects and challenges. 
Crop Science, 46, 1841–1859.

Jayasankar, S., Li, Z., & Gray, D. J. (2000). In 

vitro selection of Vitis vinifera “Chardonnay” 
with Elsinoe ampelina culture filtrate is 
accompanied by fungal resistance and 
enhanced secretion of chitinase. Planta, 211, 
200–208.

Jenik, P. D., Gillmor, C. S., & Lukowitz, W. 

(2007). Embryonic patterning in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Annual Review in Cell and 
Developmental Biology, 23, 207–236.

Jiang, J. J., Zhao, X. X., Tian, W., Li, T. B., 
& Wang, Y. P. (2009). Intertribal somatic 
hybrids between Brassica napus and 
Camelina sativa with high linolenic acid 
content. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 99(1), 91–95.

Jiménez, V. M. (2001). Regulation of in vitro 
somatic embryogenesis with emphasis on 
the role of endogenous hormones. Revista 
Brasileira de Fisiologia Vegetale, 13, 196–223.

Jiménez, V. M. (2005). Involvement of plant 

hormones and plant growth regulators on in 
vitro somatic embryogenesis. Plant Growth 
Regulation, 47, 91–110.

Jiménez, V. M., & Thomas, C. (2005). 
Participation of plant hormones in 
determination and progression of somatic 
embryogenesis. Plant Cell Monographs, 2, 
103–118.

Karami, O., Aghavaisi, B., & Mahmoudi Pour, 
A. (2009). Molecular aspects of somatic-to-
embryogenic transition in plants. Journal of 
Chemical Biology, 2, 177–190.

Kasha, K. J., Simion, E., Oro, R., Yao, Q. A., 

Hu, T. C., & Carlson, A. R. (2001). An 
improved in vitro technique for isolated 
microspore culture of barley. Euphytica, 
120, 379–385.

Khentry, Y., Paradornuvat, A., Tantiwiwat, 

S., Phansiri, S., & Thaveechai, N. (2006). 
Protoplast isolation and culture of 
Dendrobium Sonia “Bom 17.” Kasetsart 
Journal (Natural Science), 40, 361–369.

Kiran, G., Kaviraj, C. P., Jogeswar, G., Kishor, 
K. V. K., & Rao, S. (2005). Direct and high 
frequency somatic embryogenesis and plant 
regeneration from hypocotyls of chickpea 
(Cicer arietinum L.), a grain legume. 
Current Science, 89, 1012–1018.

Kiran Ghanti, S., Sujata, K., Srinath Rao, M., 

& Kavi Kishor, P. (2010). Direct somatic 
embryogenesis and plant regeneration from 
immature explants of chickpea. Biologia 
Plantarum, 54, 121–125.

Kiviharju, E., & Pehu, E. (1998). The effect 
of cold and heat pretreatment on anther 
culture response of Avena sativa and 
A. sterilis. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 54, 97–104.

Kouassi, K. M., Koffi, K. E., Gnagne, Y. M.,  

O. N’nan, Y., Coulibaly, , & Sangare, A. 
(2008). Production of Hevea brassiliensis 
embryos from in vitro culture of unpollinated 
ovules. Biotechnology, 7, 793–797.

Kumar, J. V., Kumari, B. D. R., Sujatha, G., 

& Castano, E. (2008a). Production of 

plants resistant to Alternaria carthami via 
organogenesis and somatic embryogenesis 
of safflower cv. NARI-6 treated with fungal 
culture filtrates. Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 93, 85–96.

Kumar, S., Kumer, S., Negi, S. P., & 

Kanwar, J. K. (2008b). In vitro selection 
and regeneration of chrysanthemum 
(Dendranthema grandiflorum Tzelev) plants 
resistant to culture filtrate of Septoria obesa 
Syd. In Vitro Cellular Development Biology­ 
Plant, 44, 474–479.

Kurczynska, E. U., Gaj, M. D., Ujczak, A., & 
Mazur, E. (2007). Histological analysis of 
direct somatic embryogenesis in Arabidopsis 
thaliana (L.) Heynh. Planta, 226, 619–628.

Labbani, Z., De Buyser, J., & Picard, E. 

(2007). Effect of mannitol pretreatment to 
improve green plant regeneration on isolated 
microspore culture in Triticum turgidum ssp. 
durum cv. “Jennah Khetifa.” Plant Breeding, 
126, 565–568.

Lakshmanan, P., & Taji, A. (2000). Somatic 

embryogenesis in leguminous plants. Plant 
Biology, 2, 136–148.

Lardet, L., Dessailly, F., Carron, M. P., 

Rio, M. A., Ferriere, N., & Montoro, P. 
(2009). Secondary somatic embryogenesis 
in Hevea brasiliensis (Mull. Arg.): An 
alternative process for long-term somatic 
embryogenesis. Journal of Rubber Research, 
12, 215–228.

Larkin, P. J., & Scowcroft, W. R. (1981). 

Somaclonal variation – a novel source of 
variability from cell cultures for plant 
improvement. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 60, 197–214.

Latkowska, M. J., Kvaalen, H., & Appelgren, M. 

(2000). Genotype dependent blue and red 
light inhibition of the proliferation of the 
embryogenic tissue or Norway spruce.  
In Vitro Cellular and Developmental Biology­
Plant, 36, 57–60.

Laura, M., Safaverdi, G., & Allavena, A. (2006). 

Androgenetic plants of Anemone coronaria 
derived through anther culture. Plant 
Breeding, 125, 629–634.

Lee, E. K., Cho, D. Y., & Soh, W. Y. (2001). 
Enhanced production and germination of 
somatic embryos by temporary starvation in 
tissue cultures of Daucus carota. Plant Cell 
Reports, 20, 408–415.

Linsmaier, E. M., & Skoog, F. (1965). Organic 

growth factor requirements of tobacco 
tissue cultures. Physiologia Plantarum, 18, 
100–127.

Liu, H., Liu, S., & Xia, G. (2009). Generation 

of high frequency of novel alleles of the 
high molecular weight glutenin in somatic 
hybridization between bread wheat and 
tall wheatgrass. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 118(6), 1193–1198.

Liu, J., Xu, X., & Deng, X. (2005a). Intergeneric 

somatic hybridization and its application to 
crop genetic improvement. Plant Cell, Tissue 
and Organ Culture, 82(1), 19–44.

Liu, J. H., & Deng, X. X. (2000). Regeneration 

of intergeneric hybrid embryoids via 
protoplast asymmetric fusion (in Chinese). 
Acta Hortic Sin, 27, 207–209.

Liu, J. H., & Deng, X. X. (2002). Regeneration 
and analysis of citrus interspecific mixoploid 

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

hybrid plants from asymmetric somatic 
hybridization. Euphytica, 125, 13–20.

Liu, S., Wang, H., Zhang, J., Fitt, B. D. L., 
Xu, Z., & Evans, N., et al. (2005b). In 
vitro mutation and selection of doubled-
haploid Brassica napus lines with improved 
resistance to Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. Plant 
Cell Reports, 24, 133–144.

Lloyd, G. B., & McCown, B. H. (1980). 

Commercially feasible micropropagation 
of mountain laurel (Kalmia latifolia) by 
use of shoot tip culture. Proceedings of the 
International Plant Propagators’ Society, 30, 
412–427.

Maluszynsky, M., Kasha, K. J., Forster, B. P., 
& Szarejko, I. (2003). Doubled Haploid 
Production in Crop Plants. Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Mangal, M., & Sharma, D. R. (2002). In 

vitro mutagenesis and cell selection for 
the induction of black rot resistance in 
cauliflower. Journal of Horticultural Science 
and Biotechnology, 77, 268–272.

Maraschin, S. D., Vennik, M., Lamers, G. E. 

M., Spaink, H. P., & Wang, M. (2005a). 
Time-lapse tracking of barley androgenesis 
reveals position-determined cell death 
within pro-embryos. Planta, 220, 531–540.
Maraschin, S. F., de Priester, W., Spaink, H. P., 

& Wang, M. (2005b). Androgenic switch: An 
example of plant embryogenesis from the 
male gametophyte perspective. Journal of 
Bxperimental Botany, 56, 1711–1726.

Mattoo, A., Minocha, S., Minocha, R., 

& Handa, A. (2010). Polyamines and 
cellular metabolism in plants: Transgenic 
approaches reveal different responses to 
diamine putrescine versus higher polyamines 
spermidine and spermine. Amino Acids, 38, 
405–413.

McClinchey, S. L., & Kott, L. S. (2008). 
Production of mutants with high cold 
tolerance in spring canola (Brassica napus). 
Euphytica, 162, 51–67.

Metwally, E. I., Moustafa, S. A., El-Sawy, B. I.,  

Haroun, S. A., & Shalaby, T. A. (1998a). 
Production of haploid plants from in vitro 
culture of unpollinated ovules of Cucurbita 
pepo. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 
52, 117–121.

Metwally, E. I., Moustafa, S. A., El-Sawy, B. I., 
& Shalaby, T. A. (1998b). Haploid plantlets 
derived by anther culture of Cucurbita pepo. 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 52, 
171–176.

Mitykó, J., Andrásfalvy, A., & Fári, M. (1996). 
Hungarian pepper cultivar breaks through 
traditional barriers in breeding practices. 
Hungarian Agricultural Research, 1, 18–22.

Miyoshi, K., & Asakura, N. (1996). Callus 

induction, regeneration of haploid plants and 
chromosome doubling in ovule cultures of 
pot gerbera (Gerberra jamesonii). Plant Cell 
Reports, 16, 1–5.

Mizukami, M., Takeda, T., Satonaka, H., & 
Matsuoka, H. (2008). Improvement of 
propagation frequency with two-step 
direct somatic embryogenesis from carrot 
hypocotyls. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 
38, 55–60.

Mohamed, M. A. H., Harris, P. J. C., & 

Henderson, J. (2000). In vitro selection 
and characterisation of a drought tolerant 

clone of Tagetes minuta. Plant Science, 159, 
213–222.

Genetic modification of coffee plants. 
Journal of Plant Biotechnology, 3, 91–94.

Mohamed, S. V., Wang, C. S., Thiruvengadam, 

M., & Jayabalan, N. (2004). In vitro plant 
regeneration via somatic embryogenesis 
through cell suspension cultures of 
horsegram [Macrotyloma uniflorum (Lam.) 
Verdc.]. In Vitro Cellular & Developmental 
Biology–Plant, 40, 284–289.

Monteiro, M., Kevers, C., Dommes, J., & 
Gasper, T. (2002). A specific role for 
spermidine in the initiation phase of somatic 
embryogenesis in Panax ginseng CA meyer. 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 68, 
225–232.

Motoike, S. Y., Saraiva, E. S., Ventrella, M. C., 

Silva, C. V., & Salomaõ, L. C. C. (2007). 
Somatic embryogenesis of Myrciaria 
aureana (Brazilian grape tree). Plant Cell, 
Tissue and Organ Culture, 89, 75–81.

Murashige, T., & Skoog, F. (1962). A revised 
medium for rapid growth and bio assays 
with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 15, 473–497.

Nakagawa, H., Saijyo, T., Yamauchi, N., Shigyo, 

M., Kako, S., & Ito, A. (2001). Effects 
of sugars and abscisic acid on somatic 
embryogenesis from melon (Cucumis 
melo L.) expanded cotyledon. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 90, 85–92.

Nakagawa, R., Ogita, S., Kubo, T., & Funada, 

R. (2006). Effect of polyamines and 
L-ornithine on the development of 
proembryogenic masses of Cryptomeria 
japonica. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 85, 229–234.

Namasivayam, P. (2007). Acquisition of 

embryogenic competence during somatic 
embryogenesis. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 90, 1–8.

Nassour, M., & Dorion, N. (2002). Plant 

regeneration from protoplasts of 
micropropagated Pelargonium  hortorum 
“Alain:” Effect of some environmental 
and medium factors on protoplast system 
efficiency. Plant Science, 163, 169–176.

Navratilova, B. (2004). Protoplast cultures and 
protoplast fusion focused on Brassicaceae–A 
review. HortScience (Prague), 31, 140–157.

Nayanakantha, N. M. C., & Seneviratne, P. 
(2007). Tissue culture of rubber: Past, 
present and future prospects. Ceylon 
Journal of Science (Biological Sciences), 36, 
116–125.

Nitsch, C. (1981). Production of isogenic lines: 

Basic technical aspects of androgenesis. In 
T. A. Thorpe (Ed.), Plant tissue culture: 
Methods and application in agriculture (pp. 
241–252). New York: Academic Press, Inc.
Nitsch, J. P. (1969). Experimental androgenesis 
in Nicotiana. Phytomorphology, 19, 389–404.
Nitsch, J. P., & Nitsch, C. (1969). Haploid plants 

from pollen grains. Science, 163, 85–87.

Obert, B., & Barnabas, B. (2004). Colchicine 

induced embryogenesis in maize. Plant Cell, 
Tissue and Organ Culture, 77, 283–285.

Ochoa-Alejo, N., & Ramirez-Malagon, R. 

(2001). In vitro chili pepper biotechnology. 
In Vitro Cellular Development Biology­ 
Plant, 37, 701–729.

Ogita, S., Uefuji, H., Choi, Y., Hatanaka, T., 

Ogawa, M., & Yamaguchi, Y., et al. (2002). 

Olivares-Fuster, O., Duran-Vila, N., & Navarro, 
L. (2005). Electrochemical protoplast fusion 
in citrus. Plant Cell Reports, 24, 112–119.

Orczyk, W., Przetakiewicz, J., & Nadolska-
Orczyk, A. (2003). Somatic hybrids of 
Solanum tuberosum – application to genetics 
and breeding. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 74(1), 1–13.

Paiva Neto, V. B., Botelho, M. N., Aguiar, R., 

Silva, E. A. M., & Otoni, W. C. (2003). 
Somatic embryogenesis from immature 
zygotic embryos of Annato (Bixa orellana 
L.). In Vitro Cellular & Developmental 
Biology–Plant, 39, 629–634.

Palmer, C. E., & Keller, W. A. (1997). Pollen 
Embryos. In V. K. Sawhney (Ed.), Pollen 
Biotechnology for Crop Production and 
Improvement (pp. 392–422). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Pathania, N. S., & Misra, R. L. (2003). In 
vitro mutagenesis studies in Gladiolus 
for induction of resistance to Fusarium 
oxysporum f. sp. gladioli. Acta Horticulturae, 
624, 487–494.

Pati, P. K., Sharma, M., & Ahuja, P. S. (2008). 

Rose protoplast isolation and culture and 
heterokaryon selection by immobilization 
in extra thin alginate film. Protoplasma, 
233(1), 165–171.

Pauk, J., Paulimatka, M., Toth, K. L., & 

Monostori, T. (2000). In vitro androgenesis of 
triticale in isolated microspore culture. Plant 
Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 61, 221–229.

Pauls, K. P., Chan, J., Woronuk, G., Schulze, 

D., & Brazolot, J. (2006). When microspores 
decide to become embryos – cellular and 
molecular changes. Canadian Journal of 
Botany, 84, 668–678.

Pechan, P. M., & Smykal, P. (2001). Androgenesis: 

Affecting the fate of the male gametophyte. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 111, 1–8.

Peña, L., Cervera, M., Fagoaga, C., Romero, 

J., Ballester, A., & Soler, N., et al. (2008). 
Citrus. In C. Kole & T. C. Hall (Eds.), 
Compendium of transgenic crop plants: 
Transgenic tropical and subtropical fruits and 
nuts. Blackwell Publishing Ltd..

Pinto, G., Park, Y. S., Silva, S., Neves, L., 

Araújo, C., & Santos, C. (2008a). Factors 
affecting maintenance, proliferation, and 
germination of secondary somatic embryos 
of Eucalyptus globulus Labill. Plant Cell, 
Tissue and Organ Culture, 95, 69–78.
Pinto, G., Silva, S., Park, Y. S., Neves, L., 

Araújo, C., & Santos, C. (2008b). Factors 
influencing somatic embryogenesis induction 
in Eucalyptus globulus Labill.: Basal medium 
and anti-browning agents. Plant Cell, Tissue 
and Organ Culture, 95, 79–88.

Powell, W. (1990). Environmental and Genetical 

Aspects of Pollen Embryogenesis. In Y. P. S. 
Bajay (Ed.), Haploids in crop improvement 
(pp. 45–65). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Prakash, M. G., & Gurumurthi, K. (2010). 
Effects of type of explant and age, plant 
growth regulators and medium strength 
on somatic embryogenesis and plant 
regeneration in Eucalyptus camaldulensis. 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 100, 
13–20.

159

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

Predieri, S., & Dii Virgilio, N. (2007). In vitro 

mutagenesis and mutant multiplication. In S. 
M. Jain & H. Haggman (Eds.), Protocols for 
micropropagation of woody trees and fruits 
(pp. 323–333). Dordrecht, Netherlands: 
Springer.

Qin, Y. H., Zhang, S. L., Asghar, S., Zhang, L. 
X., Qin, Q. P., & Chen, K. S., et al. (2005). 
Regeneration mechanism of Toyonoka 
strawberry under different color plastic 
films. Plant Science, 168, 1425–1431.
Quiroz-Figueroa, F. R., Rojas-Herrera, R., 

Galaz-Avalos, R. M., & Loyola-Vargas, V. M. 
(2006). Embryo production through somatic 
embryogenesis can be used to study cell 
differentiation in plants. Plant Cell, Tissue 
and Organ Culture, 86, 285–301.
Raghavan, V. (2006). Can carrot and 

Arabidopsis serve as model systems to 
study the molecular biology of somatic 
embryogenesis? Current Science, 90, 1336–
1343.

Rai, M. K., Asthana, P., Jaiswal, V. S., & Jaiswal, 

U. (2010). Biotechnological advances 
in guava (Psidium guajava L.): Recent 
developments and prospects for further 
research. Trees–Structure and Function, 24, 
1–12.

Ramesar-Fortner, N. S., & Yeung, E. C. (2006). 
Physiological influences in the development 
and function of the shoot apical meristem 
of microspore-derived embryos of Brassica 
napus “Topas”. Canadian Journal of Botany, 
84, 371–383.

Ratanasanobon, K., & Seaton, K. A. (2010). 

Development of in vitro plant regeneration 
of Australian native waxflowers 
(Chamelaucium spp.) via somatic 
embryogenesis. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 100, 59–64.

Reddy, C., Gupta, M., Mantri, V., & Jha, 

B. (2008). Seaweed protoplasts: Status, 
biotechnological perspectives and needs. 
Journal of Applied Phycology, 20(5), 619–632.

Reinert, J., & Bajaj, Y. P. S. (1977). Anther 

culture: Haploid production and its 
significance. In Y. P. S. Bajaj (Ed.), Applied 
and fundamental aspects of plant cell, tissue 
and organ culture (pp. 251–267). Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag.

Reinert, J., Bajaj, Y. P. S., & Haberle-Bors, E. 

(1975). Induction of haploid tobacco plants 
from isolated pollen. Protoplasma, 84, 
191–196.

Romeijn, G., & Van Lammeren, A. A. (1999). 
Plant regeneration through callus initiation 
from anthers and ovules of Scabiosa 
columbaria. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 56, 169–177.

Rose, R., & Nolan, K. (2006). Invited review: 

Genetic regulation of somatic embryogenesis 
with particular reference to Arabidopsis 
thaliana and Medicago truncatula. In Vitro 
Cellular & Developmental Biology–Plant, 42, 
473–481.

Rudolf, K., Bohanec, B., & Hansen, M. (1999). 

Microspore culture of white cabbage, 
Brassica oleracea var. capitata L.: Genetic 
improvement of non-responsive cultivars 
and effect of genome doubling agents. Plant 
Breeding, 118, 237–241.

acid and jasmonic acid play a role in the 
regulation of Medicago sativa L. somatic 
embryogenesis? Plant Growth Regulation, 
59, 159–169.

Sakhanokho, H. F., Rajasekaran, K., & Kelley, 

R. Y. (2009). Somatic embryogenesis in 
Hedychium bousigonianum. HortScience, 44, 
1487–1490.

Santana-Buzzy, N., Rojas-Herrera, R., Galaz-

Ávalos, R., Ku-Cauich, J., Mijangos-Cortés, 
J., & Gutiérrez-Pacheco, L., et al. (2007). 
Advances in coffee tissue culture and its 
practical applications. In Vitro Cellular & 
Developmental Biology–Plant, 43, 507–520.

Sato, S., Katoh, N., Yoshida, H., Iwai, S., & 

Hagimori, M. (2000). Production of doubled 
haploid plants of carnation (Dianthus 
caryophyllus L.) by pseudofertilized ovule 
culture. Scientia Horticulturae, 83, 301–
310.

Schenk, A. V., & Hildebrandt, A. C. (1972). 

Medium and techniques for induction 
and growth of monocotyledonous and 
dicotyledonous plant cell cultures. Canadian 
Journal of Botany, 50, 199–204.

Schiva, T., Dalla-Goda, C., & Mercuri, A. 

(1985). Analisi genetica della resistenza a 
Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. dianthi (Prill et 
Del) Snyd et Hans nel garotano “Ecotipo 
Mediterraneo.” Annali Istituto Sperimentale 
Floricoltura, 16, 23–38.

Seabrook, J. E. A., & Douglass, L. K. (2001). 
Somatic embryogenesis on various potato 
tissues from a range of genotypes and ploidy 
levels. Plant Cell Reports, 20, 175–182.
Seguí-Simarro, J. M., Bárány, I., Suárez, R., 

Fadón, B., Testillano, P. S., & Risueño, 
M. C. (2006). Nuclear bodies domain 
changes with microspore reprogramming 
to embryogenesis. European Journal of 
Histochemistry, 50, 35–44.

Seguí-Simarro, J. M., & Nuez, F. (2008a). How 
microspores transform into haploid embryos: 
Changes associated with embryogenesis 
induction and microspore-derived 
embryogenesis. Physiologia Plantarum, 134, 
1–12.

Seguí-Simarro, J. M., & Nuez, F. (2008b). 

Pathways to doubled haploidy: Chromosome 
doubling during androgenesis. Cytogenetic 
and Genome Research, 120, 358–369.
Seguí-Simarro, J. M., Testillano, P. S., & 

Risueño, M. C. (2003). Hsp70 and Hsp90 
change their expression and subcellular 
localization after microspore embryogenesis 
induction in Brassica napus L. cv. Topas. 
Journal of Structural Biology, 142, 379–391.
Sengar, A. S., Thind, K. S., Kumar, B., Pallavi, 

M., & Gosal., S. S. (2009). In vitro selection 
at cellular level for red rot resistance in 
sugarcane (Saccharum sp.). Plant Growth 
Regulator, 58, 201–209.

Shalaby, T. A. (2007). Factors affecting haploid 

induction through in vitro gynogenesis in 
summer squash (Cucurbita pepo L.). Scientia 
Horticulturae, 115, 1–6.

Shariatpanahi, M. E., Bal, U., Haberle-Bors, E., 

& Touraev, A. (2006). Stresses applied for 
the re-programming of plant microspores 
towards in vitro embryogenesis. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 127, 519–534.

Rudus, I., Weiler, E., & Kepczynska, E. (2009). 
Do stress-related phytohormones, abscisic 

Shi, X., Dai, X., Liu, G., & Bao, M. (2009). 

Enhancement of somatic embryogenesis in 

160

camphor tree (Cinnamomum camphora L.): 
Osmotic stress and other factors affecting 
somatic embryo formation on hormone-free 
medium. Trees – Structure and Function, 23, 
1033–1042.

Shimonaka, M., Hosoki, T., Tomita, M., & 

Yasumuro, Y. (2002). Production of  
somatic hybrid plants between Japanese 
bunching onion (Allium fistulosuml) and 
bulb onion (A. cepal.) via electrofusion. 
Japanese Society for Horticultural Science, 
71, 623–631.

Shizukawa, Y., & Mii, M. (2008). Production of 

bialaphos-resistant Nierembergia repens by 
electroporation. Plant Biotechnology Reports, 
2, 219–226.

Silva, T. (2010). Indica rice anther culture: Can 
the impasse be surpassed? Plant Cell, Tissue 
and Organ Culture, 100, 1–11.

Singh, S., & Rajam, M. V. (2009). Citrus 

biotechnology: Achievements, limitations 
and future directions. Physiology and 
Molecular Biology of Plants, 15, 3–22.

Smykal, P., & Pechan, P. M. (2000). Stress, 

as assessed by the appearance of sHsp 
transcripts, is required but not sufficient to 
initiate androgenesis. Physiologia Plantarum, 
110, 135–143.

Snyman, S. J., Meyer, G. M., Richards, J. M., 
Haricharan, N., Ramgareeb, S., & Huckett, 
B. I. (2006). Refining the application of 
direct embryogenesis in sugarcane: Effect 
of the developmental phase of leaf disc 
explants and the timing of DNA transfer on 
transformation efficiency. Plant Cell Reports, 
25, 1016–1023.

Sonntag, K., Ruge-Wehling, B., & Wehling, P. 

(2009). Protoplast isolation and culture 
for somatic hybridization of Lupinus 
angustifolius and L. subcarnosus. Plant Cell, 
Tissue and Organ Culture, 96, 297–305.
Steinmacher, D. A., Cangahuala-Inocente, 
G. C., Clement, C. R., & Guerra, M. P. 
(2007). Somatic embryogenesis from peach 
palm zygotic embryos. In Vitro Cellular & 
Developmental Biology–Plant, 43, 124–132.
Sticklen, M. B., & Orabya, H. F. (2005). Shoot 

apical meristem: A sustainable explant for 
genetic transformation of cereal crops. In 
Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology, 41, 
187–200.

Suprasanna, P., Sidha, M., & Bapat, V. A. (2009). 

Integrated approaches of mutagenesis and 
in vitro selection for crop improvement. 
In A. Kumar & N. S. Shekhawat (Eds.), 
Plant tissue culture and molecular markers: 
Their role in improving crop productivity 
(pp. 73–92). New Delhi: I. K. International 
Publishing House Pvt. Ltd..

Suprunova, T. and N. Shmykova. 2008. In vitro 
induction of haploid plants in umpollinated 
ovules, anther and microspore culture 
of Cucumis sativus. In M. Pitrat (Ed.), 
Proceedings of the nineth EUCARPIA 
meeting on genetics and breeding of 
Cucurbitaceae, May 21–24th, 2008, (pp. 
371–374). INRA, Avignon (France).
Szarka, B., Gonter, L., Mlonar-lang, M., 

Morocz, S., & Dudits, D. (2002). Mixing of 
maize and wheat genomic DNA by somatic 
hybridization in regenerated sterile maize 

Somatic (asexual) procedures (haploids, protoplasts, cell selection) and their applications

C H A P T E R   1 0

plants. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
105, 1–7.

Taji, A., Kumar, P., & Lakshmanan, P. (2002). 

In vitro plant breeding. New York: Haworth 
Press, Inc..

Takahata, Y., Komatsu, H., & Kaizuma, N. 

(1996). Microspore culture of radish 
(Raphanus sativus L.): Influence of genotype 
and culture conditions on embryogenesis. 
Plant Cell Reports, 16, 163–166.

Takami, K., Matsumara, A., Yahata, M., 

Imayama, T., Kunitake, H., & Komatsu, H. 
(2004). Production of intergeneric somatic 
hybrids between round kumquat (Fortunella 
japonica Swingle) and “Morita navel” orange 
(Citrus sinensis Osbeck). Plant Cell Reports, 
23, 39–45.

Takanori, T. & Cuello, J. (2005). Regulating 

radiation quality and intensity using narrow-
band LEDs for optimization of somatic 
embryogenesis. In Proceedings of the 2005 
annual meeting of the American society of 
agricultural engineers (pp. 1–12).

Tang, F., Tao, Y., Zhao, T., & Wang, G. (2006). 
In vitro production of haploid and double-
haploid plants from pollinated ovaries of 
maize (Zea mays). Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 84, 233–237.

Tantau, H., Balko, C., Brettschneider, B., Melz, 
G., & Dorffling, K. (2004). Improved frost 
tolerance and winter survival in winter 
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) by in vitro 
selection of proline overaccumulating lines. 
Euphytica, 139, 19–32.

Taski-Ajdukovic, K., Vasic, D., & Nagl, N. 

(2006). Regeneration of interspecific 
somatic hybrids between Helianthus annuus 
L. and Helianthus maximiliani (Schrader) 
via protoplast electrofusion. Plant Cell 
Reports, 25(7), 698–704.

Testillano, P. S., Coronado, M. J., Seguí-

Simarro, J. M., Domenech, J., Gonzáles-
Melendi, P., & Raska, I., et al. (2000). 
Defined nuclear changes accompany the 
reprogramming of the microspores to 
embryogenesis. Journal of Structural Biology, 
129, 223–232.

Testillano, P. S., Gonzáles-Melendi, P., 

Coronado, M. J., Seguí-Simarro, J. M., 
Moreno, M. A., & Risueño, M. C. (2005). 
Differentiating plant cells switched to 
proliferation remodel the functional 
organization of nuclear domains. Cytogenetic 
and Genome Research, 109, 166–174.

Thakur, M., Sharma, D., & Sharma, S. (2002). 

In vitro selection and regeneration of 
carnation (Dianthus caryophyllus L.) plants 
resistant to culture filtrate of Fusarium 
oxysporum f. sp. dianthi. Plant Cell Reports, 
20, 825–828.

Thomas, T. D. (2004). Embryological 

observations on unpollinated ovary culture 
of mulberry (Morus alba L.). Acta Biologica 
Cracoviensia Series Botanica, 46, 87–94.

Thomas, T. D. (2009). Isolation, callus 

formation and plantlet regeneration from 
mesophyll protoplasts of Tylophora indica 
(Burm. f.) Merrill: An important medicinal 
plant. In Vitro Cellular & Developmental 
Biology–Plant, 45(5), 591–598.

Tomasi, P., Dierig, D. A., Backhaus, R. A., & 
Pigg, K. B. (1999). Floral bud and mean 

petal length as morphological predictors of 
microspore cytological stage in Lasquerella. 
HortScience, 34, 1269–1270.

Touraev, A., Pfosser, M., & Heberle-Bors, 
E. (2001). The microspores: A haploid 
multipurpose cell. Advances in Botanical 
Research, 35, 53–109.

Touraev, A., Vicente, O., & Heberle-Bors, 

E. (1997). Initiation of microspore 
embryogenesis by stress. Trends in Plant 
Science, 2, 285–323.

Trigiano, R., & Gray, D. (2000). Plant tissue 
culture concepts and laboratory exercises. 
Washington DC: CRC Press.

Trottier, M. C., Collin, J., & Comeau, A. 

(1993). Comparison of media for their 
aptitude in wheat anther culture. Plant Cell, 
Tissue and Organ Culture, 35, 59–67.

Tsuwamoto, R., Fukuoka, H., & Takahata, Y. 

(2007). Identification and characterization 
of genes expressed in early embryogenesis 
from microspores of Brassica napus. Planta, 
225, 641–652.

Tu, Y., Sun, J., Liu, Y., Ge, X., Zhao, Z., & 
Yao, X., et al. (2008). Production and 
characterization of intertribal somatic hybrids 
of Raphanus sativus and Brassica rapa with 
dye and medicinal plant Isatis indigotica. 
Plant Cell Reports, 27(5), 873–883.

Tuvesson, S., Ljungberg, A., Johansson, N., 

Karlsson, K. E., Suijs, L. W., & Josset, J. P. 
(2000). Large-scale production of wheat 
and triticale double haploids through the 
use of single-anther culture method. Plant 
Breeding, 119, 455–459.

van den Bulk, R. W. (1991). Application of 

cell and tissue culture and in vitro selection 
for disease resistance breeding – a review. 
Euphytica, 56, 269–285.

Varotto, S., Nenz, E., Lucchin, M., & Parrini, P. 
(2001). Production of asymmetric somatic 
hybrid plants between Cichorium intybus L. 
and Helianthus annuus L. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 102, 950–956.

Vasil, I. (2008). A history of plant 

biotechnology: From the Cell Theory of 
Schleiden and Schwann to biotech crops. 
Plant Cell Reports, 27, 1423–1440.

Vasil, I. (2008). A short history of plant 

biotechnology. Phytochemistry Reviews, 7, 
387–394.

Venkataiah, P., Christopher, T., & Karampuri, S. 
(2005). Selection of atrazine-resistant plants 
by in vitro mutagenesis in pepper (Capsicum 
annuum). Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 83, 75–82.

Wang, M., van Bergen, S., & Van Duijn, B. 

(2000). Insights into a key developmental 
switch and its importance for efficient plant 
breeding. Plant Physiology, 124, 523–530.
Wang, M. Q., Zhao, J. S., & Peng, Z. Y., et al. 

(2008). Chromosomes are eliminated in 
the symmetric fusion between Arabidopsis 
thaliana L. and Bupleurum scorzonerifolium 
Willd. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 
92, 121–130.

Wang, X., Xia, H., & Yue-rong, W. (2009). 

Progress in protoplast culture and somatic 
hybridization in banana (Musa spp.). Journal 
of Fruit Science

Wang, Y. P., Sonntag, K., & Rudloff, E. (2003). 
Development of rapeseed with high erucic 

acid content by asymmetric somatic 
hybridization between Brassica napus and 
Crambe abyssinica. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 106, 1147–1155.

Wheatley, A. O., Ahmad, M. H., & Asemota, H. 
N. (2003). Development of salt adaptationin 
in vitro greater yam (Dioscorea alata) 
plantlets. In Vitro Cellular Development 
Biology–Plant, 39, 346–353.

White, P. R. (1962). The Cultivation of Animal 

and Plant Cells. New York: Ronald Press.

Wojciechowicz, M. K., & Kikowska, M. A. 

(2009). Induction of multi-nucleate 
microspores in anther culture of Salix 
viminalis L. Dendrobiology, 61, 55–64.

Xia, G. M., Xiang, F. N., Zhou, A. F., Wang, 

H., He, S. X., & Chen, H. M. (2003). 
Asymmetric somatic hybridization between 
wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) and Agropyron 
elongatum (Host) Nevski. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 107, 299–305.

Xiang, F., Wang, J., Xu, C., & Xia, G. (2010). 
The chromosome content and genotype of 
two wheat cell lines and of their somatic 
fusion product with oat. Planta, 231(5), 
1201–1210.

Xiang, F., Xia, G., & Chen, H. (2003). Effect 

of UV dosage on somatic hybridisation 
between common wheat (Triticum aestivum 
L.) and Avena sativa L. Plant Science, 164, 
697–707.

Xiang, F. N., Xia, G. M., Zhi, D. Y., Wang, 

J., Nie, H., & Chen, H. M. (2004). 
Regeneration of somatic hybrids in relation 
to the nuclear and cytoplasmic genomes 
of wheat and Setaria italica. Genome, 47, 
680–688.

Xiao, W., Huang, X., Gong, Q., Dai, X. M., 

Zhao, J. T., & Wei, Y. R., et al. (2009). 
Somatic hybrids obtained by asymmetric 
protoplast fusion between Musa Silk cv. 
Guoshanxiang (AAB) and Musa acuminata 
cv. Mas (AA). Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 97(3), 313–321.

Xing, H. Q., Xia, G. M., & Chen, H. M. 
(2001). Preliminary study on hybrid 
chromosome composition and relationship in 
symmetric hybridization between Triticum 
aestivum and intergeneric grasses (in 
Chinese). Bulletin of Botanical Research, 21, 
74–78.

Xu, C. H., Xia, G. M., Zhi, D. Y., Xiang, F. 
N., & Chen, H. M. (2003). Integration 
of maize nuclear and mitochondrial DNA 
into the wheat genome through somatic 
hybridization. Plant Science, 165, 1001–
1008.

Xu, X. Y., Liu, J. H., & Deng, X. X. (2004). 

Production and characterization of 
intergeneric diploid cybrids derived from 
symmetric fusion between Microcitrus 
papuana Swingle and sour orange (Citrus 
aurantium). Euphytica, 136, 115–123.
Yamagishi, H., Landgren, M., Forsberg, J., 
& Glimelius, K. (2002). Production of 
asymmetric hybrids between Arabidopsis 
thaliana and Brassica napus utilizing 
an efficient protoplast culture system. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 104, 
959–964.

Yan, C. Q., Qian, K. X., Yan, Q. S., Zhang, 

X. Q., Xue, G. P., & Huang, W. G., et 

161

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies 

al. (2004). Use of asymmetric somatic 
hybridization for transfer of the bacterial 
blight resistance trait from Oryza meyeriana 
L. to O. sativa L. ssp. japonica. Plant Cell 
Reports, 22, 569–575.

& Gleba, Y. Y., et al. (2000). Transfer 
of amiprophosmethyl resistance from 
a Nicotiana plumbaginifolia mutant by 
somatic hybridization. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 100, 847–857.

Yang, J. L., Seong, E. S., Kim, M. J., Ghimire, 

B. K., Kang, W. H., & Yu, C. Y., et al. 
(2010). Direct somatic embryogenesis  
from pericycle cells of broccoli (Brassica 
oleracea L. var. italica) root explants. 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 100, 
49–58.

Yang, X. Y., Zhang, X. L., & Jin, S. X., et al. 
(2007). Production and characterization 
of asymmetric hybrids between upland 
cotton Coker 201 (Gossypium hirsutum) 
and wild cotton (G. klozschianum Anderss). 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 89, 
225–235.

Yang, Y., Guan, S., Zhai, H., He, S., & Liu, Q. 
(2009). Development and evaluation of a 
storage root-bearing sweet potato somatic 
hybrid between Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam. 
and I. triloba L. Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 99, 83–89.

Yemets, A. I., Kundel’chuk, O. P., Smertenko, 

A. P., Solodushko, V. G., Rudas, V. A., 

Yue, W., Xia, G. M., Zhi, D. Y., & Chen, H. 

M. (2001). Transfer of salt tolerance from 
Aeleuropus littorulis Sinensis to wheat 
(Triticum aestivum) via asymmetric somatic 
hybridization. Plant Science, 161, 259–263.
Zamani, I., Kovacks, G., Gouli-Vavdinoudi, E., 

Roupakias, D. G., & Barnabas, B. (2000). 
Regeneration of fertile doubled haploid 
plants from colchicine-supplemented media 
in wheat anther culture. Plant Breeding, 
119, 461–465.

Zhang, B. H., Wang, Q. L., Liu, F., Wang, K. B., 
& Frazier, T. P. (2009). Highly efficient plant 
regeneration through somatic embryogenesis 
in 20 elite commercial cotton (Gossypium 
hirsutum L.) cultivars. Plant Omics, 2, 
259–268.

Zhang, C. L., Chen, D. F., Kubalakova, M., 

Zhang, J., Scott, N. W., & Elliott, M. C.,  
et al. (2008). Efficient somatic 
embryogenesis in sugar beet (Beta vulgaris 

L.) breeding lines. Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 93, 209–221.

Zhao, Z. G., Hu, T. T., Ge, X. H., Du, X. Z., 

Ding, L., & Li, Z. Y. (2008). Production 
and characterization of intergeneric 
somatic hybrids between Brassica napus 
and Orychophragmus violaceus and their 
backcrossing progenies. Plant Cell Reports, 
27(10), 1611–1621.

Zhou, A. F., Xia, G. M., & Chen, H. M. (2001). 

Comparative study of symmetric and 
asymmetric somatic hybridization between 
common wheat and Haynaldia villosa. 
Science China (Series C), 44, 294–304.

Zhou, C. E., Xia, G. M., Zhi, D. Y., & Chen, 

Y. (2006). Genetic characterization of 
asymmetric somatic hybrids between 
Bupleurum scorzonerifolium Willd and 
Triticum aestivum L.: Potential application to 
the study of the wheat genome. Planta, 223, 
714–724.

Ziv, M. (2000). Bioreactor technology for plant 
micropropagation. Horticultural Review, 24, 
1–30.

Ziv, M. (2005). Simple bioreactors for mass 

propagation of plants. Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 81, 277–285.

Zubko, M. K., Zubko, E. I., & Gleba, Y. Y. (2002). Self-fertile cybrids Nicotiana tabacum ( Hyoscyamus aureus) with a nucleo–plastome 

incompatibility. Theoretical Applied Genetics, 105, 822–828.

162

Plant tissue culture for biotechnology

9

Prakash P. Kumar  Chiang Shiong Loh 
National University of Singapore, Singapore

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 131
Plant Tissue Culture Technology  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 131
The basic laboratory setup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  131
Preparation of tissue for culturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  132
Nutrient media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  132
Types of culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  133
Environmental aspects of tissue culture  . . . . . . . . . .  133
Modes of regeneration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  134
Implications for Agricultural Biotechnology  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 134
Haploid tissue culture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  135
Somatic embryogenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  135
Artificial seeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  135
In vitro flowering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  136
Future Perspectives  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 136
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 136

Introduction

Regeneration  of  plants  via  tissue  culture  is  based  on  the  prin-
ciple  of  totipotency  originally  proposed  by  Haberlandt  in 
1902  (see  Vasil,  2008).  Early  attempts  to  culture  excised 
plant  parts  included  root  culture  (White,  1934)  and  shoot  tip 
or  axillary  bud  culture  for  micropropagation  (Morel,  1960). 
Subsequently,  regenerating  whole  plants  via  somatic  embryo-
genesis  from  cultured  callus  tissue  of  carrot  (Steward  et  al., 
1958;  Reinert,  1959)  as  well  as  regeneration  of  a  whole  plant 
starting  from  a  single  cell  of  tobacco  (Vasil  and  Hildebrandt, 
1965)  were  accomplished.  Around  the  same  time  Miller 
et  al.  (1955)  reported  that  using  the  appropriate  relative  ratio 
of auxin to cytokinin in the nutrient medium can induce plant 
regeneration  in  culture.  Murashige  and  Skoog  (1962)  devel-
oped  a  well-defined  mineral  nutrient  formulation  based  on 
their analysis of tobacco leaf composition, which helped to sus-
tain  growth  and  division  of  tobacco  cells  and  tissues.  The  MS 

medium, as it is now known, has indeed become a noteworthy 
contribution  to  plant  tissue  culture.  More  recently,  the  tech-
nique  of  Agrobacterium-mediated  gene  transfer  and  regen-
eration  of  transgenic  plants  was  discovered  (Herrera-Estrella 
et al., 1983; De Block et al., 1984), which has proven to be use-
ful  when  introducing  desirable  agronomic  traits  to  transgenic 
crop  plants  (Shah  et  al.,  1986).  These  were  seminal  findings 
that firmly established plant tissue culture as a valuable tool for 
research, as well as crop improvement by biotechnology.

As the name indicates, plant tissue culture involves excising 
plant tissues and growing them on nutrient media. The term 
“tissue culture” is used rather broadly to include several vari-
ations. such as meristem culture for propagation of virus-free 
plants  (e.g.,  orchids,  strawberry,  grape,  and  potato),  proto-
plast culture, cell suspension culture, tissue and organ culture 
(Gamborg,  2002),  and  anther  or  pollen  culture  for  produc-
ing haploid plants (Guha and Maheshwari, 1966). In general, 
the  goal  for  crop  improvement  via  tissue  culture  could  be 
achieved by:
1. Initiation and establishment of cultures.
2. Performing the specific modifications, which include clonal 
propagation, virus elimination, selection of variants, genetic 
transformation, and so forth.

3. Regeneration of plants with the desired modifications.

In this chapter we focus on various technical aspects of plant 
tissue culture. The basic laboratory setup, handling of explant 
tissue, nutrient medium and establishing the culture, and incu-
bation of cultures will be discussed. This will be followed by a 
brief discussion of the implications of plant tissue culture tech-
nology for agricultural biotechnology (see also Chapter 10).

Plant Tissue Culture Technology

The basic laboratory setup

A laboratory that can handle plant biochemistry or physiology-
type experiments will meet most of the general requirements 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00009-2

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

of  plant  tissue  culture.  Some  of  the  major  items  needed 
include  general  glassware  and  disposable  plasticware,  chemi-
cals  that  serve  as  mineral  nutrients  for  media  preparation,  a 
supply of distilled water or high-quality deionized water, pH 
meter,  magnetic  stirrer,  weighing  balance,  autoclave,  filter 
sterilization  units,  microwave  oven,  refrigerator,  and  freezer. 
Specialized equipment such as laminar flow, a sterile air work-
station to handle aseptic explants, media, and so forth will be 
essential. Incubation of the cultures may be done on shelves 
fitted with lighting. Cultures may also be incubated in growth 
chambers  or  rotary  shakers  (for  cell  suspensions).  For  data 
recording  and  image  capture,  cameras  and  microscopes  with 
photography attachments will be required.

Preparation of tissue for culturing

The  part  of  the  plant  that  is  excised  and  put  in  culture  is 
referred  to  as  the  explant.  This  may  be  leaf  disks,  cotyle-
dons,  hypocotyls,  roots,  shoot  tips,  axillary  buds,  or  zygotic 
embryos.  The  selected  explants  have  to  be  rendered  aseptic, 
which  often  involves  surface  sterilization  using  various  dilu-
tions  (10–30%  v/v)  of  Clorox®  or  commercial  bleach  that 
has  sodium  hypochlorite  (5.25%  w/v)  as  the  active  ingredi-
ent. Other chemicals such as ethanol (1 to 5 min rinses in 70% 
ethanol) or silver nitrate solution may also be used for surface 
sterilization. Prior to inoculating the explants onto the nutrient 
medium,  they  have  to  be  rinsed  thoroughly  with  autoclaved 
distilled water to remove traces of the chemical used and then 
trimmed to get rid of the cells along the edges that might have 
been killed by the harsh chemicals used for sterilizing.

There  are  several  simplified,  modified  methods  of  sur-
face  sterilization  where  the  explant  donor  tissues,  such  as 
seed pods and floral buds, may be directly dipped in ethanol 
(70%) and, in some cases, flamed briefly. The seeds or anthers 
are  then  excised  aseptically  for  culture.  With  this  procedure 
the  explants  never  come  in  contact  with  the  chemical  sur-
face-sterilization  agent,  giving  a  better  survival  rate  for  the 
explants. This method is useful for intact seed pods of orchids 
or anthers in unopened floral buds of several species.

Certain  materials,  especially  field-grown  plants,  are 
extremely  difficult  to  surface  sterilize.  In  addition,  selected 
field-grown  plants  with  desired  characteristics  for  clonal 
propagation  might  be  located  too  far  from  the  laboratory. 
Thus, pre-surface sterilization treatments have to be devised. 
For  example,  in  guava,  scions  were  obtained  from  selected 
field-grown  plants  and  grafted  to  seedling  root-stocks  (Loh 
and  Rao,  1989).  Grafted  plants  were  kept  in  the  laboratory 
for  harvesting  nodal  explants.  To  remove  apical  dominance 
and  encourage  sprouting  of  the  axillary  buds,  healthy  scion 
branches were decapitated 5 to 8 days prior to excision of the 
nodal  explants.  The  nodal  segments  were  then  surface  steri-
lized in 80% ethanol followed by 5% and 3% Clorox solutions 
before successful establishment of cultures.

The age and physiological state of the explant donor plant 
may have significant influence on the success of regeneration 
of plants. For example, various studies have shown that coty-
ledons from 3- to 6-day-old seedlings of Brassica species serve 

as  the  best  source  of  explants  for  adventitious  shoot  regen-
eration  and  Agrobacterium-mediated  genetic  transformation 
(Sharma et al., 1990; Gasic and Korban, 2006). When leaves 
are  the  sources  of  explant,  for  example  in  petunia,  the  first 
fully expanded leaf is the preferred material. For mangosteen, 
a  woody  tree  species,  only  young  red  leaves  produced  shoot 
buds in culture (Goh et al., 1990). When mature, green leaves 
were  used  the  frequency  of  shoot  bud  formation  decreased 
(Goh et al., 1994). Furthermore, leaf segments (3 mm trans-
verse sections of mangosteen leaves) showed a strong polarity 
of regeneration with shoot buds arising from the midrib near 
the distal (apical) cut end of leaf segments (Goh et al., 1994). 
Seedling roots and hypocotyls are also used in several species 
as the explant. In some of the cereals such as rice and corn, 
and various grasses (Hiei et al., 1994; Frame et al., 2002), as 
well  as  in  several  of  the  coniferous  tree  species  (Gupta  and 
Durzan, 1986; Lu et al., 1991), the zygotic embryo serves as 
the preferred explant for culture initiation.

Once  a  suitable  explant  is  selected  and  prepared  for  cul-
ture,  it  should  be  incubated  on  an  appropriate  nutrient 
medium for growth and differentiation.

Nutrient media

Various mineral formulations are available to culture plant tis-
sues.  The  major  media  include  MS  medium  (Murashige  and 
Skoog,  1962)  and  Gamborg’s  B5  medium  (Gamborg  et  al., 
1968). Generally, the plant tissue culture media are made up 
of macro- and micronutrients, vitamins, phytohormones, and 
other  adjuvants  (such  as  coconut  water),  as  well  as  sucrose 
(2–3%  w/v,  it  can  be  commercial  grade  refined  sugar  for 
routine  propagation,  but  should  be  analytical  grade  sucrose 
for  research  purposes).  The  nutrient  media  can  be  prepared 
by  mixing  stock  solutions  of  various  chemical  ingredients 
(Gamborg et al., 1976) or from commercially available ready 
mixed powder (e.g., www.plantmedia.com) as recommended 
by the manufacturers. Other formulations for specific species 
may be used based on earlier publications. Adjuvants such as 
ascorbic  acid,  polyvinyl  pyrrolidone,  and  activated  charcoal 
may be required for some species that show extreme cases of 
tissue browning on excision and secretion of polyphenolic sub-
stances from the damaged cells.

The  pH  of  the  medium  is  adjusted  to  5.8  0.2  using 
dilute  NaOH  or  HCl  and  a  suitable  gelling  agent  is  added 
when  a  semisolid  matrix  is  desired.  Agar  (8–10 g/l)  and  the 
gellan gum known as Phytagel® or Gelrite® (2–3 g/l) are two 
of the most common gelling agents used for plant tissue cul-
ture media. The medium is sterilized by autoclaving for about 
20 minutes. Care should be taken to fill the containers to no 
more than half the total volume for effective autoclaving.

Cell  culture  can  be  in  the  form  of  a  liquid  suspension  of 
small clusters of cells, apart from callus culture on semisolid 
nutrient  medium  as  previously  indicated.  When  liquid  nutri-
ent  medium  is  required  it  may  be  similarly  prepared  (with-
out the gelling agent) and sterilized by autoclaving or by filter 
sterilization  using  filters  with  0.22 µm  pore  size.  Also,  heat 
labile components of the media such as some phytohormones 

132

Plant tissue culture for biotechnology

C H A P T E R   9

(indoleacetic  acid,  gibberellic  acid)  and  antibiotics,  if  used, 
should  be  filter  sterilized  and  added  to  autoclaved  medium 
that is cooled to about 60°C before aliquoting the medium to 
aseptic culture vessels.

Selection  of  the  appropriate  nutrient  medium  for  a  given 
species or tissue is generally arrived at by empirical trials. This 
can be done by a systematic screen of various concentrations 
of the media components such as the broad spectrum screen 
using stock solutions of the various groups of mineral compo-
nents  (De  Fossard;  ronalddefossard.com/author.htm).  Thus 
the  medium  components  would  be  grouped  under  four  cat-
egories and use three concentrations for each (low, medium, 
high) category and prepare various combinations of the com-
ponents.  Alternatively,  one  can  start  from  the  standard  MS 
medium and vary the composition of the various macro- and 
micronutrients, vitamins, and phytohormones.

Perhaps one of the major components that has a significant 
effect on regeneration is the type and concentration of phyto-
hormones  in  the  medium.  It  is  worth  remembering  that  the 
discovery  of  the  phytohormone  cytokinins  led  to  the  central 
dogma  of  tissue  culture,  namely,  endogenous  ratio  of  cytoki-
nin  to  auxin  determining  the  nature  of  regeneration  (Skoog 
and  Miller,  1957).  According  to  this,  a  relatively  high  ratio 
of  cytokinin  to  auxin  within  the  explant  favors  shoot  regen-
eration, a relatively high auxin to cytokinin ratio leads to root 
regeneration,  and  the  intermediate  ratio  causes  callus  pro-
liferation.  Often  the  concentration  of  the  phytohormones 
in  the  medium  is  higher  (normally  107–105 M),  because 
the  endogenous  concentration  depends  on  the  efficiency  of 
uptake  of  the  compound  by  the  explant  from  the  external 
medium.  Hence,  optimization  of  the  appropriate  phytohor-
mone  concentrations  in  the  medium  can  also  be  empirically 
determined  in  the  earlier  set  of  exploratory  experiments. 
Once  an  optimum  medium  combination  is  identified,  it  can 
be  used  as  a  defined  medium  for  the  species,  and  often  for 
closely related species of plants.

Types of culture

We  can  identify  various  types  of  plant  tissue  culture.  Based 
on  the  scale  of  operations,  one  can  classify  laboratory-  and 
industrial-scale  cell  cultures.  The  laboratory-scale  cultures 
can be handled in relatively small growth chambers. However, 
industrial-scale  cultures  (i.e.,  commercial  micropropagation 
programs)  will  require  sufficiently  large  facilities,  the  details 
of which are beyond the scope of this discussion.

Based  on  the  nature  and  exposure  of  the  explants  to  the 
nutrient  medium,  we  can  identify  continuous  immersion  or 
batch cultures and periodic immersion, as well as culture on 
semisolid  medium  (solidified  with  agar  or  Gelrite™).  The 
major  types  of  cultures  that  can  be  established  are  sum-
marized  in  Figure  9.1.  The  type  of  culture  to  be  established 
will depend on the purpose of culturing, such as microprop-
agation,  secondary  metabolite  production,  in  vitro  flower-
ing,  and  so  forth.  In  all  cases,  periodic  subculturing  has  to 
be  conducted  to  replenish  nutrients  and  to  eliminate  poten-
tially toxic exudates. Subculture intervals for cell suspension 

cultures  can  be  generally  between  10  to  14  days.  Cultures 
on  semisolid  nutrient  media  need  to  be  transferred  to  fresh 
media once in 4 to 6 weeks.

Protoplast  isolation  and  culture  has  been  a  valuable  tool 
for  early  attempts  at  transgenic  plant  production  for  species 
that  were  not  amenable  for  Agrobacterium-mediated  trans-
formation. When plasmid DNA is incubated with protoplasts 
in the presence of polyethylene glycol and calcium, they can 
be  induced  to  take  up  the  DNA  and  subsequently,  a  small 
percentage of the resulting cells may have the DNA incorpo-
rated into their genomes. This process is inefficient for trans-
genic plant production with most of the species. However, in 
more recent years, this has become a valuable research tool to 
study transient expression of proteins in vivo and subcellular 
localization of tagged proteins (e.g., fusion protein with green 
fluorescent protein), or for testing the activation and compart-
mentalization of such tagged proteins (Yoo et al., 2007). This 
offers a relatively quick experimental system to test hypoth-
eses  and  obtain  valuable  preliminary  data  that  can  form  the 
basis of more detailed studies of complex regulatory networks 
and whole plant physiology.

Environmental aspects of tissue culture

The choice of culture vessels can vary and Erlenmeyer flasks, 
culture tubes, petri dishes, and specialized containers may be 
used to establish plant tissue cultures. Cell cultures for extrac-
tion  of  metabolites  (e.g.,  Taxol  or  recombinant  proteins)  are 
generally established in bioreactor vessels of desirable scale.

The influence of the headspace gas composition (or the gas 
space above the culture medium within the culture container) 
on growth and differentiation is well recorded (Kumar et al., 
1987,  1996,  1998;  Kumar  and  Thorpe,  1991;  Kozai  et  al.,  
1995). One of the major components in the headspace gas is 
ethylene, the gaseous phytohormone. It can exert an influence 
on regeneration even after it is released from the explant tis-
sues (Kumar et al., 1987, 1996, 1998). The partial pressures 
of  carbon  dioxide  and  oxygen  in  the  headspace  gas  can  also 
exert  some  influence  on  regeneration  (Nguyen  et  al.,  2001). 
The use of vented lids, specialty vented plastic film contain-
ers,  or  incorporation  of  chemicals  that  act  as  inhibitors  of 
ethy lene action (e.g., AgNO3, silver thiosulfate) into the cul-
ture medium help in optimizing regeneration.

Once  the  explants  are  inoculated  onto  the  nutrient 
medium  under  aseptic  conditions  working  in  a  laminar  flow 
workstation,  they  are  incubated  at  25  2°C.  Depending  on 
the  needs  of  the  culture,  incubation  may  be  under  a  pho-
toperiod with 12 to 26 hours of light or in darkness for a spe-
cific initial culture period. Incubation of the cultures may be 
done  on  shelves  fitted  with  lighting  or  in  growth  chambers. 
Although  the  most  common  type  of  light  source  is  the  fluo-
rescent bulb, more recently, light emitting diode (LED) light 
sources  are  becoming  available  for  this  purpose.  The  LED 
light  panels  consume  less  power,  generate  less  heat,  and  can 
be  configured  to  deliver  lights  of  specific  wavelengths  (e.g., 
460 nm  blue  and  630 nm  red)  so  that  plants  can  be  grown 
under light suitable for absorption by chlorophyll.

133

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

induce
dedifferentiation

shoot
regeneration

for research
and breeding

regenerated plantlets

aseptic explants

excise

somatic
embryogenesis

regenerate

somatic embryos

somatic   
embryogenesis

regenerate

develop
roots

in vitro flowering

germinate   
seeds

aseptic seedling

cell suspension culture

scale
up

large-scale cultures

 to isolate useful

metabolites,

e.g., taxol

surface sterilized

seeds

regenerated shoots

regenerated plantlets

in vitro generated

seed pod

Figure 9.1 l Schematic representation of various types of plant tissue cultures l Photographs corresponding to the different stages 
of culture (from the left) leading to plant regeneration from excised leaf segments or establishment of callus and cell suspension cultures with 
somatic embryogenesis are arranged sequentially to illustrate the process. Regeneration of switchgrass plantlets from callus and orchid plant 
regeneration via protocorm-like bodies as well as in vitro flower induction and seed pod formation in Dendrobium sp. are illustrated on the 
right half of the collage. Photographs with a magnifying lens indicate that they are close-up views of a larger field of culture. 

Modes of regeneration

As  indicated  earlier,  the  concept  of  totipotency  was  realized 
in plant cells with the ability to regenerate whole new plants 
starting  from  single  cells.  Such  a  process  involves  dediffer-
entiation  from  partially  differentiated  cell/tissue  type  (e.g., 
parenchyma)  to  a  meristem-like  state  followed  by  rediffer-
entiation  (regeneration)  into  well-organized  structures.  The 
totipotency  of  cells  in  plant  meristem  was  the  basis  of  the 
concept  of  “stem  cells”  in  animals  that  has  become  such  an 
intense research area in the past decade or so. De novo orga-
nogenesis (Figure 9.2A, B) and somatic embryogenesis (Figure 
9.2C–E) are the two major routes of regeneration of plants in 
tissue culture. Organogenesis can occur directly as shoot buds 
or roots from the cultured tissues or via an intermediate callus 
stage.  Direct  regeneration  of  adventitious  shoots  is  generally 
preferred  for  clonal  propagation  applications,  because  chro-
mosomal  aberrations  may  be  introduced  during  some  callus 
induction treatments. However, the choice of the pathway of 
regeneration is genetically determined and, depending on the 
species, protocols for only one route of regeneration may be 
available; for example, in cereals such as rice and corn regen-
eration is via callus. In either case, generally a small number of 
cells are involved in establishing the organ or somatic embryo.

The plantlets developed from shoot buds or by germination 
of  somatic  embryos  can  be  grown  to  a  sufficiently  large  size 
before they are put through a hardening process and acclimation 
to be grown in pots.

Implications for Agricultural 
Biotechnology

As  indicated  previously,  plant  tissue  culture  has  contrib-
uted  enormously  to  agricultural  biotechnology.  For  example, 
many plants grown from seed show considerable variation in 
growth, flower characteristics, yield, disease resistance, resist-
ance  to  environmental  stress,  and  so  forth  (Altman,  2003; 
Thorpe,  2007).  It  would  therefore  be  valuable  to  select 
those  that  possess  desirable  characters  for  vegetative  multi-
plication.  Tissue  culture  allows  large-scale  micropropagation 
applications  to  recover  large  numbers  of  plants  with  a  com-
parable  genotype  (clones).  This  is  also  desirable  in  horticul-
ture (i.e., slow-growing ornamental orchids; Figure 9.2G, H) 
and  for  fruit  crops  such  as  strawberry  and  grape.  As  is  well 
documented, introduction of the transgene occurs in a limited 
number  of  cells  after  co-cultivation  with  Agrobacterium  or 
biolistic bombardment of transgenes into explants. To recover 

134

A

C

F

B

D

E

G

H

Figure 9.2 l Examples of various types of tissue culture l (A, 
B) Adventitious shoot regeneration from excised leaves of Paulownia 
fortunei. (B) Well-developed individual rooted plantlets from the 
leaf cultures in (A). (C) Cell suspension culture of Brassica napus 
ssp. oleifera in liquid medium. (D) Cultured cell clusters from the 
suspension. (E) Somatic embryogenesis in cell suspension culture. 
(F) Tobacco anther cultures with germinated haploid embryos. (G) 
Orchid propagation starting from seeds (inset) and multiplication of 
protocorm-like bodies resulting from the seed germination in vitro. 
(H) Well-established orchid plantlets arising from the cultures in (G). 
This method is routinely used for large-scale propagation of various 
ornamental orchid species. 

transgenic plants, plants from only those populations of cells 
need  to  be  regenerated.  Therefore,  plant  tissue  culture  has 
been the key tool to recovering transgenic plants in crop bio-
technology.  The  thousands  of  hectares  of  currently  planted 
transgenic  crops  in  over  40  countries  would  not  have  been 
feasible without tissue culture tools.

Besides  genetic  transformation  for  crop  improvement, 
other  applications  of  tissue  culture  include  selection  of  vari-
ants/mutants  (somaclonal  variation,  mutation),  cryopreserva-
tion, dihaploid production and embryo rescue, and production 
of  useful  chemicals  (e.g.,  Taxol).  Liquid  cultures  have  been 
used for detecting trace elements and determining their tox-
icities to crop plants (Kopittke et al., 2010). Some of the spe-
cific  examples  of  tissue  culture  technology  applied  for  crop 
improvement are discussed in the next section.

Haploid tissue culture

The importance of haploid tissue culture merits special men-
tion. Haploid tissue cultures are most often obtained by cul-
turing  microspores,  pollen  grains,  and  anthers  (Figure  9.2F). 
Haploids in plant breeding programs are useful as a means of 

Plant tissue culture for biotechnology

C H A P T E R   9

shortening the time required to complete backcross programs, 
as  a  means  of  helping  to  retain  the  character  under  transfer, 
and  as  a  means  of  stabilizing  the  transferred  genetic  materi-
als in a homozygous form. The use of haploids in a breeding 
program also allows the possibility of isolating an array of indi-
vidual  genomes  whether  dominant  or  recessive  for  selection, 
study,  and  recombination.  The  individual  carrying  the  lethal 
genes would theoretically be eliminated from the population.

Somatic embryogenesis

In somatic embryogenesis, vegetative cells develop into plants 
through  embryogenetic  stages  without  the  fusion  of  gametes 
(Williams  and  Maheswaran,  1986).  Since  the  first  reports  of 
somatic embryogenesis in the tissue culture of carrot (Steward 
et  al.,  1958;  Reinert,  1959),  the  importance  of  somatic 
embryogenesis in combining efficient cloning of desired geno-
types has been realized (Sharp et al., 1980). The key rationale 
is that plants regenerated from direct somatic embryogenesis 
are often more uniform than plants regenerated via callus tis-
sues  (Maheswaran  and  Williams,  1984).  Somatic  embryos 
could also generate secondary somatic embryos from their sur-
faces. Secondary embryogenesis (also called recurrent, repeti-
tive,  cyclic,  accessory,  or  proliferative  embryogenesis)  occurs 
when  primary  somatic  embryos  give  rise  to  successive  cycles 
of  embryos  (Figure  9.3).  Secondary  embryogenesis  systems 
provide a way to produce large populations of vegetative prop-
agules in a short span of time (Lee et al., 1997). Such second-
ary  embryos  may  be  useful  for  recovering  a  large  number  of 
plants  from  clonal  propagation,  genetic  transformation,  and 
induced  mutation.  Developing  embryos  or  embryogenic  cells 
could  be  exposed  to  microprojectile  bombardment  or  other 
means  of  genetic  transformation,  and  the  transformed  cells 
could  be  selected  and  regenerated  into  plants  (Chen  and 
Beversdorf,  1994).  Thus,  secondary  embryos  of  cassava  were 
used  for  induction  of  mutation  in  vitro  through  γ-irradiation 
and  mutant  plants  with  altered  starch  composition  were 
obtained (Joseph et al., 2004).

Artificial seeds

Production of artificial seeds by embedding somatic embryos 
in  a  suitable  matrix  such  as  agarose  or  calcium  alginate  can 
be a useful tool for large-scale multiplication projects (Figure 
9.3). As early as 1992, successful field planting of alfalfa arti-
ficial seeds derived from somatic embryos encapsulated in cal-
cium  alginate  and  subsequent  conversion  to  plants  had  been 
reported  (Fuji  et  al.,  1992).  The  main  objective  for  devel-
oping  artificial  seeds  has  been  for  the  production  of  “clonal 
seeds” (Redenbaugh, 1990), so somatic embryos are appropri-
ate for this purpose. However, the concept is now extended 
to  include  encapsulation  of  other  tissue  cultured  or  in  vitro 
prepared materials (e.g., protocorm-like bodies, rooted shoot 
buds), so the objective for the making of artificial seeds may 
need to be expanded (Khor and Loh, 2005). It is interesting 
to note that the concept was extended to include the encap-
sulation of non-endospermic seeds or protocorms of commer-
cially high-value species, such as orchids (Khor et al., 1998). 

135

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

A

C

B

D

E

Figure 9.3 l (A) Heart-shaped somatic embryo of Brassica napus 
ssp. oleifera. (B) Secondary somatic embryogenesis from the 
hypocotyls of B. napus ssp. oleifera. (C, D, E) Artificial seeds 
prepared by embedding somatic embryos of B. napus ssp. oleifera 
in calcium alginate. 

They  demonstrated  aseptic  encapsulation  of  orchid  embryos 
in a two-coat (alginate-chitosan and alginate-gelatin) “artificial 
seed” of about 4 mm diameter with simulated endosperm and 
seed coat in the final product. The aim was to allow such nat-
urally non-endospermic seeds to germinate like seeds of other 
angiosperms  without  having  to  go  through  elaborate  in  vitro 
handling at the site of planting and reduce labor cost.

In vitro flowering

One  of  the  more  recent  applications  of  tissue  culture  is  to 
hasten  the  breeding  cycle  of  ornamental  species  that  have 
long  juvenile  phases;  for  example,  orchids  that  require  over 
three years of vegetative growth before flowering. Experience 
with  in  vitro  flowering  of  Dendrobium  hybrid  seedlings 
showed  that  the  flowering  time  could  be  significantly  short-
ened.  Under  optimal  conditions,  in  vitro  flowering  could  be 
observed 5 months after seed germination instead of the over 
30 months required in field-grown plants (Sim et al., 2007). 
Segregation  of  flower  colors  was  observed  in  these  in  vitro 
flowers, hence early assessment of the flower characteristics, 
such  as  color,  shape,  and  size  is  possible  using  the  in  vitro 
flowering  system.  This  will,  in  turn,  reduce  labor  costs  and 
optimize the space required for normal orchid breeding (Sim 
et al., 2007). In addition, flowers induced in culture could be 
self-pollinated  (Hee  et  al.,  2007)  in  vitro  or  pollinated  with 
pollen  grains  harvested  from  field-grown  plants  (Sim  et  al., 
2007)  resulting  in  seed  pod  formation  in  culture.  Therefore, 

136

in vitro flower formation followed by in vitro pollination and 
seed  production  for  evaluation  of  the  flower  phenotypes  in 
the next generation could be achieved within 11 months for 
Dendrobium  hybrid,  which  would  have  taken  over  6  years 
under the normal breeding cycle (Hee et al., 2007).

Future Perspectives

As can be seen from the previous discussion, plant tissue cul-
ture  promises  to  continue  to  be  a  valuable  tool  for  research 
on  morphogenesis,  cell  signaling,  physiology,  and  molecular 
biology,  as  well  as  crop  improvement  by  biotechnology.  The 
benefits  of  biotechnologically  improved  crops  are  apparent 
with the wide introduction of genetically modified cotton (Bt 
cotton)  in  China  and  India.  Based  on  the  2009  estimation, 
there  was  a  net  reduction  of  60%  in  pesticide  use  (reduc-
tion  of  43 kg  of  pesticide  application  per  hectare)  in  China, 
and an increase in yield of about 50% (from about 300 kg/ha  
in  2002–2003  to  about  567 kg/ha  in  2007–2008)  in  India 
(Paarlberg,  2010).  Also,  apart  from  the  resulting  socio-
economic benefits for farmers, such a remarkable increase in 
yield has made India a major exporter of cotton (1.2 million 
bales in 2003–2004 to about 8.5 million bales in 2007–2008). 
Furthermore,  China  has  already  approved  GM  rice  for  cul-
tivation,  and  this  is  expected  to  result  in  improvements  in 
yield similar to that which has been realized with other food 
crops such as corn, soybean, and canola. The biofuel industry 
is also poised for rapid expansion in the coming decade. The 
approximately 12 billion gallons of American bioethanol pro-
duction  in  2010  is  largely  from  corn  starch  and  first  genera-
tion cellulosic ethanol plants such as switchgrass, with about 
30% of the  annual corn crop being used  for  ethanol produc-
tion  (Pueppke,  2010).  Bioethanol  production  is  predicted  to 
increase to about 30 billion gallons in 2020, with corn starch 
and advanced biofuels contributing equally to this (i.e., 15 bil-
lion  gallons  from  genetically  improved  energy  crops  such  as 
switchgrass, Miscanthus, sugarcane, and microalgae along with 
another 15 billion gallons from corn starch).

With  the  predicted  need  of  crop  yield  to  be  doubled  by 
2050 in order to sustain the food, fiber, and fuel needs of the 
ever-increasing human population, the need to use technology 
for  crop  improvement  cannot  be  overemphasized.  It  is  clear 
that development of improved crops such as those with high 
water use efficiency and tolerance to multiple biotic and abi-
otic stresses combined with high yield are currently progress-
ing with judicious use of plant biotechnology. Hence, it is safe 
to predict that the firmly established technology of plant tis-
sue culture will continue to contribute significantly to agricul-
tural biotechnology in the decades to come.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Ms. Petra Stamm for helping to pre-
pare  the  figures  and  Mr.  Koh  Teng  Seah  for  providing  the 
orchid culture photographs. The current research in Kumar Lab 
is funded by grants from the National University of Singapore 
(R154-000-407-112)  and 
the  Science  and  Engineering 
Research Council (SERC), Singapore (R154-000-441-305).

Plant tissue culture for biotechnology

C H A P T E R   9

References

Altman, A. (2003). From plant tissue culture 

to biotechnology: Scientific revolutions, 
abiotic stress tolerance, and forestry. In Vitro 
Cellular and Developmental Biology-Plant, 
39, 75–84.

Chen, K. L., & Beversdorf, W. D. (1994). 
A combined use of microprojectile and 
DNA imbibitions enhances transformation 
frequency of canola (Brassica napus L.). 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 88, 
187–192.

De Block, M., Herrera-Estrella, L., Van 

Montagu, M., Schell, J., & Zambryski, 
P. (1984). Expression of foreign gene in 
regenerated plants and their progeny. EMBO 
Journal, 3, 1681–1689.

Frame, B. R., Shou, H., Chikwamba, R. K., 
Zhang, Z., Xiang, C., & Fonger, T. M.,  
et al. (2002). Agrobacterium tumefaciens-
mediated transformation of maize embryos 
using a standard binary vector system. Plant 
Physiology, 129, 13–22.

Fuji, J. A., Slade, D., Aguirre-Rascon, J., & 

Redenbaugh, K. (1992). Field planting of 
alfalfa artificial seeds. In Vitro Cellular and 
Developmental Biology-Plant, 28P, 73–80.
Gamborg, O. L. (2002). Plant tissue culture. 

Biotechnology. Milestones. In Vitro Cellular 
and Developmental Biology-Plant, 38, 
84–98.

Gamborg, O. L., Miller, R. A., & Ojima, K. 

(1968). Nutrient requirements of suspension 
cultures of soybean root cells. Experimental 
Cell Research, 50, 151–158.

Gamborg, O. L., Murashige, T., Thorpe, T. A., 

& Vasil, I. K. (1976). Plant tissue culture 
media. In Vitro Cellular and Developmental 
Biology-Plant, 12, 473–478.

Gasic, K., & Korban, S. S. (2006). Indian 
Mustard [Brassica juncea (L.) Czern.]. 
Methods in Molecular Biology, 343, 
281–290.

Goh, C. J., Lakshmanan, P., & Loh, C. S. 
(1994). High frequency direct shoot 
bud regeneration from excised leaves of 
mangosteen (Garcinia mangostana L.). 
Plant Science, 101, 173–180.

Goh, K. L., Rao, A. N., & Loh, C. S. (1990). 

Direct shoot bud formation from 
leaf explants of seedlings and mature 
mangosteen (Garcinia mangostana L.) trees. 
Plant Science, 68, 113–121.

Guha, S., & Maheshwari, S. C. (1966). Cell 
division and differentiation of embryos in 
the pollen grains of Datura in vitro. Nature, 
212, 97–98.

Gupta, P. K., & Durzan, D. J. (1986). Somatic 

polyembryogenesis from callus of mature 
sugar pine embryos. Bio/Technology, 4, 
643–645.

Hee, K. H., Loh, C. S., & Yeoh, H. H. (2007). 
Early in vitro flowering and seed production 
in culture in Dendrobium Chao Praya Smile 
(Orchidaceae). Plant Cell Reports, 26, 
2055–2062.

Herrera-Estrella, L., Depicker, A., Van 
Montagu, M., & Schell, J. (1983). 
Expression of chimaeric genes transferred 
in to plant cells using a Ti plasmid-derived 
vector. Nature, 303, 209–213.

Hiei, Y., Ohta, S., Komari, T., & Kumashiro, 

T. (1994). Efficient transformation of 
rice (Oryza sativa L.) mediated by 
Agrobacterium and sequence analysis of the 
boundaries of the T-DNA. Plant Journal, 6, 
271–282.

Joseph, R., Yeoh, H. H., & Loh, C. S. (2004). 
Induced mutations in cassava using somatic 
embryos and the identification of mutant 
plants with altered starch yield and 
composition. Plant Cell Reports, 23, 91–98.

Khor, E., & Loh, C. S. (2005). Artificial 

seeds. In V. Nedović & R. Willaert 
(Eds.), Application of cell immobilisation 
biotechnology (pp. 527–537). Berlin: 
Springer.

Khor, E., Ng, W. F., & Loh, C. S. (1998). 

Two-coat systems for encapsulation 
of Spathoglottis plicate (Orhcidaceae) 
seeds and protocorms. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 59, 635–639.

Kopittke, P. M., Blamey, F. P. C., Asher, C. 

J., & Menzies, N. W. (2010). Trace metal 
phytotoxicity in solution culture: A review. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 945–
954.

Kozai, T., Kitaya, Y., Fujiwara, K., Smith, 
M. A. L., & Aitken-Christie, J. (1995). 
Environmental measurement and control 
systems. In J. Aitken-Chistie (Ed.), 
Automation and environmental control 
in plant tissue culture (pp. 539–574). 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.

Kumar, P. P., Lakshmanan, P., & Thorpe, T. A. 

(1998). Regulation of morphogenesis in 
plant tissue culture by ethylene. In Vitro 
Cellular and Developmental Biology-Plant, 
34, 94–103.

Kumar, P. P., Rao, C. D., & Goh, C. J. (1996). 

Ethylene and CO2 affect direct shoot 
regeneration from the petiolar ends of 
Paulownia kawakamii leaves cultured 
in vitro. Plant Growth Regulation, 20, 
237–243.

Kumar, P. P., Reid, D. M., & Thorpe, T. A. 

(1987). The role of ethylene and carbon 
dioxide in differentiation of shoot buds in 
excised cotyledons of Pinus radiata in vitro. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 69, 244–252.
Kumar, P. P., & Thorpe, T. A. (1991). A 

setup for incubating plant cultures under 
continuous flow of gases. In Vitro Cellular 
and Developmental Biology-Plant, 27P, 
43–44.

Lee, K. S., Van Duren, M., & Mopurgo, R. 

(1997). Somatic embryogenesis in cassava: 
A tool for mutation breeding. In B. S. 
Ahloowalia (Ed.), Improvement of basic 
food crops in Africa through plant breeding, 
including the use of use of induced mutations 
(pp. 55–60). International Atomic Energy 
Agency. (Vienna-TECDOC-951).

Loh, C. S., & Rao, A. N. (1989). Clonal 

propagation of guava (Psidium guajava 
L.) from seedlings and grafted plants and 
adventitious shoot formation in vitro. 
Scientia Horticulturae, 39, 31–39.

Lu, C. -Y., Harry, I. S., Thompson, M. R., & 

Thorpe, T. A. (1991). Plantlet regeneration 
from cultured embryos and seedling parts of 

red spruce (Picea rubens Sarg.). Botanical 
Gazette, 152, 42–50.

Maheswaran, G., & Williams, E. G. (1984). 

Direct somatic embryoid formation in 
immature embryos of Trifolium repens, 
T. pretense and Medicago sativa, and rapid 
clonal propagation of T. repens. Annals of 
Botany, 54, 201–211.

Miller, C. O., Skoog, F., Von Saltza, M. H., & 

Strong, F. M. (1955). Kinetin, a cell division 
factor from deoxyribonucleic acid. Journal of 
the American Chemical Society, 77, 1392.

Morel, G. M. (1960). Producing virus-free 
cymbidium orchids. American Orchid 
Society Bulletin, 29, 495–497.

Murashige, T., & Skoog, F. (1962). A revised 

medium for rapid growth and bioassays 
with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 15, 473–497.

Nguyen, Q. T., Kozai, T., Heo, J., & Thai, D. X. 
(2001). Photoautotrophic growth responses 
of in vitro cultured coffee plantlets to 
ventilation methods and photosynthetic 
photon fluxes under carbon dioxide enriched 
conditions. Plant Cell Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 66, 217–225.

Paarlberg, R. (2010). How agricultural 

biotechnology is being kept out of Africa. 
Plenary lecture at the 12th IAPB Congress, 
St. Louis, MO, USA, June 6–11, 2010.

Pueppke, S. (2010). The global rush to biofuels 

and what we are learning about food 
production, sustainability and the carbon 
economy. Plenary lecture at the 12th IAPB 
Congress, St. Louis, MO, USA, June 6–11, 
2010.

Redenbaugh, K. (1990). Application of artificial 

seeds to tropical crops. HortScience, 25, 
251–255.

Reinert, J. (1959). Uber die controlle der 
morphogenese und die induction von 
adventive-embryonem am gevebeculturen 
aus carotten. Planta, 53, 318–333.

Shah, D. M., Horsch, R. B., Klee, H. J., 

Kishore, G. M., Winter, J. A., & Tumer, 
N. E., et al. (1986). Engineering herbicide 
tolerance in transgenic plants. Science, 233, 
478–481.

Sharma, K. K., Bhojwani, S. S., & Thorpe, T. 

A. (1990). Factors affecting high frequency 
differentiation of shoots and roots from 
cotyledon explants of Brassica juncea (L.) 
Czern. Plant Science, 66, 247–253.

Sharp, W. R., Sondahl, M. R., Caldas, L. S., & 
Maraffa, S. B. (1980). The physiology of in 
vitro asexual embryogenesis. Horticulture 
Review, 2, 268–310.

Sim, G. E., Loh, C. S., & Goh, C. J. (2007). 

High frequency early in vitro flowering 
of Dendrobium Madame Thong-In 
(Orchidaceae). Plant Cell Reports, 26, 
383–393.

Skoog, F., & Miller, C. O. (1957). Chemical 

regulation of growth and organ formation in 
plant tissues cultured in vitro. Symposium 
of the Society of Experimental Biology, 11, 
118–130.

Steward, F. C., Mapes, M. O., & Mears, K. 

(1958). Growth and organized development 
of cultured cells. II. Organization in 

137

S E C T I O N   A

Introduction to basic procedures in plant biotechnology

cultures grown from freely suspended cells. 
American Journal of Botany, 45, 705–708.
Thorpe, T. A. (2007). History of plant tissue 

culture. Molecular Biotechnology, 37, 
169–180.

Vasil, I. K. (2008). A history of plant 

biotechnology: From the cell theory of 
Schleiden and Schwann to biotech crops. 
Plant Cell Reports, 27, 1423–1440.
Vasil, V., & Hildebrandt, A. C. (1965). 

Differentiation of tobacco plants from 

single, isolated cells in microcultures. 
Science, 150, 889–892.

White, P. R. (1934). Potentially unlimited 
growth of excised tomato root tips in a 
liquid medium. Plant Physiology, 9, 585–
600.

Williams, E. G., & Maheswaran, G. A. 

(1986). Somatic embryogenesis: Factors 
influencing coordinated behaviour of cells in 
embryogenic groups. Annals of Botany, 57, 
443–462.

Yoo, S. -D., Cho, Y. H., & Sheen, J. (2007). 

Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts: A 
versatile cell system for transient gene 
expression analysis. Nature Protocols, 2, 
1565–1572.

138

Regulation of apomixis

16

Peggy Ozias-Akins  Joann A. Conner
The University of Georgia, Tifton, Georgia

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 243
Overview of Ovule Development During Sexual 
Reproduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 244
Overview of Ovule Development During Apomictic 
Reproduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 244
Germline Specification  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 244
Apomeiosis  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 246
Megagametogenesis  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 247
Gamete Specification  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 247
Parthenogenesis  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 248
Endosperm Development   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 250
Chromatin Modification and Epigenetic Regulation  .  .  .  .  . 251
Conclusions and Future Prospects for 
Apomixis in Crops   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 251

Introduction

Apomixis, asexual reproduction through seeds, is increasingly 
being viewed as a deregulation of sexual reproduction rather 
than  an  independent  pathway  (Koltunow  and  Grossniklaus, 
2003; Bicknell and Koltunow, 2004; Curtis and Grossniklaus, 
2008).  The  asynchrony  hypothesis  put  forth  by  Carman 
(1997)  alluded  to  deregulation  through  temporally  conflict-
ing  developmental  programs  brought  about  by  hybridization, 
but  such  global  deregulation  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with 
data  from  genetic  studies  that  have  shown  the  transmission 
of  apomixis  by  specific  genomic  regions  (Ozias-Akins  and 
van  Dik,  2007).  Nevertheless,  these  genomic  regions  could 
directly or indirectly alter the regulation of sexual reproduc-
tion  through  genetic  and/or  epigenetic  mechanisms.  If  we 
work  from  the  premise  that  apomixis  results  from  deregula-
tion  of  sexual  reproduction,  an  understanding  of  the  sexual 
developmental pathway at the molecular level will contribute 
to  the  identification  of  genes  influencing  key  components  of 

apomixis.  Since  apomixis  can  incorporate  different  devel-
opmental  events  to  achieve  the  end  result  of  clonal  progeny 
through  seeds,  multiple  steps  in  a  pathway  may  have  under-
gone mutation and selection during evolution.

Apomixis  includes  both  sporophytic  and  gametophytic 
types  (Nogler,  1984).  Somatic  cells  of  the  ovule  directly 
form  embryos  during  sporophytic  apomixis;  therefore,  sex-
ual  reproduction  is  not  perturbed,  although  competition 
between  embryos  derived  from  both  processes  is  inevitable. 
Gametophytic  apomixis  is  characterized  by  the  formation  of 
an  unreduced  embryo  sac  and  parthenogenesis  of  the  unre-
duced  egg.  Therefore,  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  many  of 
the  same  genes  function  during  embryo  sac  maturation  and 
polarization  in  apomicts  as  in  sexuals.  Universal  differences 
between  the  two  modes  of  reproduction  are:  (1)  the  origin 
or  developmental  state  of  cells  specified  to  become  embryo 
sac  mother  cells;  and  (2)  egg  activation  in  the  absence  of 
fertilization.  In  some  apomicts,  endosperm  formation  also 
is  independent  of  fertilization.  The  early  event  of  embryo 
sac  formation  in  an  apomict  may  begin  with  the  megaspore 
mother  cell  (MMC)  or  its  meiotic  restitution  product 
(diplospory), or a somatic cell of the nucellus (apospory). In 
the  former,  meiosis  is  replaced  by  mitosis  and  in  the  latter, 
meiosis  usually  is  subverted  by  competing  aposporous  ini-
tials.  Premature  initiation  of  an  embryo  sac  developmental 
program  in  permissive  cells  might  heterochronically  shift  an 
entire pathway and preclude the completion of certain events 
such  as  meiosis.  For  the  late  event  of  parthenogenesis,  het-
erochronic  expression  of  genes  responsible  for  egg  activation 
could prevent fertilization of the egg while still allowing ferti-
lization of the central cell, an essential event for seed develop-
ment in pseudogamous apomicts.

With  the  advent  of  the  genomics  era,  gene  discovery  has 
been  greatly  accelerated,  even  for  relatively  inaccessible  tis-
sues such as the nucellus and embryo sac. Furthermore a com-
bination of forward and reverse genetics in model plants has 
contributed to our understanding of gene function and inter-
actions  (Mercier  and  Grelon,  2008).  This  review  will  focus 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00016-X

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

on recent advances in our knowledge of genes and gene func-
tions that may regulate or act to effect displacement of meio-
sis, heterochronic or ectopic development of embryo sacs, and 
spontaneous formation of embryos from egg cells, as studied 
in natural apomicts or predominantly in mutants from sexual 
species.

Overview of Ovule Development 
During Sexual Reproduction

The  ovule  is  the  organ  that  forms  the  seeds  of  flowering 
plants.  It  is  borne  in  the  ovary  of  the  flower  and  consists  of 
nucellus  protected  by  integuments,  precursors  of  embryo/
endosperm,  and  seed  coat,  respectively.  The  nucellus  is  the 
central,  micropylar-oriented  tissue  bounded  by  the  integu-
ments,  that  is,  the  site  of  female  meiosis  and  female  game-
tophyte (embryo sac) formation (Yadegari and Drews, 2004). 
Most  common  among  flowering  plants,  a  single  hypoder-
mal  archesporial  cell  becomes  specified  and  morphs  into  the 
MMC.  During  sexual  reproduction,  the  single  MMC  under-
goes  meiosis,  generating  four  haploid  spores.  Typically,  only 
the  chalazal-most  megaspore  survives  while  the  other  three 
undergo  programmed  cell  death  (Bell,  1996).  The  surviv-
ing  megaspore  enters  a  mitotic  phase  to  form  the  haploid 
megagametophyte  containing  the  egg  and  two  synergids  at 
the  micropylar  pole,  three  antipodals  at  the  chalazal  pole, 
and  a  binucleate  central  cell.  Double  fertilization  of  the  egg 
and  central  cell  leads  to  embryo  and  endosperm  develop-
ment,  respectively.  Ovule  development  has  been  extensively 
characterized  in  sexual,  diploid  Arabidopsis  thaliana  using 
mutants  that  affect  ovule  primordium  initiation  during  car-
pel  development  such  as  WUSCHEL  (WUS)  and  SHOOT 
MERISTEMLESS  (STM),  to  inner  and  outer  integument 
formation  such  as  AINTEGUMENTA  (ANT;  Skinner  et  al., 
2004; Kelley and Gasser, 2009).

Overview of Ovule Development 
During Apomictic Reproduction

Gametophytic  apomicts  are  broadly  classified  as  either  apo-
sporous  or  diplosporous.  Chromosomally  unreduced  embryo 
sacs develop from an MMC (diplospory) or a nearby nucellar 
cell  (apospory).  Single  embryo  sacs  are  typical  of  diplospory, 
whereas multiple embryo sacs are more characteristic of apo-
spory.  Mature  unreduced  embryo  sacs  may  be  indistinguish-
able from reduced embryo sacs, each having 7 cells/8 nuclei, 
with  the  exception  of  Panicum-type  embryo  sacs,  which 
probably  represent  an  adaptation  for  maintaining  non-lethal 
dosages  of  maternal  and  paternal  genomes  in  the  endosperm 
(Haig  and  Westoby,  1991).  These  4-nucleate  embryo  sacs 
lack  antipodal  cells  and  most  frequently  have  a  uninucleate 
rather than a binucleate central cell (Ozias-Akins et al., 2003). 
Endosperm development in the majority of apomicts requires 
fertilization  of  the  central  cell  (pseudogamy),  but  autono-
mous  endosperm  formation  is  characteristic  of  apomicts  in 
the  Asteraceae.  Autonomous  development  of  the  egg  into  an 
embryo  (parthenogenesis)  completes  the  apomixis  pathway. 

244

Seed-derived  progeny  of  an  obligate  apomict  are  therefore 
clonal  in  origin  and  genetically  identical  to  the  maternal  par-
ent, although epigenetic states may vary (Leblanc et al., 2009).

Germline Specification

Plant life cycles differ from animal life cycles with respect to 
having  a  distinct  gametophyte  generation.  Meiosis  in  animals 
occurs  in  predetermined  germline  cells  destined  to  produce 
haploid  gametes  (Dickinson  and  Grant-Downton,  2009). 
Meiosis in plants requires induction of a sporogenous state in 
properly  positioned  somatic  cells  (Figure  16.1).  Spatial  and 
temporal  cues  undoubtedly  act  to  switch  the  fate  of  certain 
somatic  cells.  Mutants  affected  in  this  cell  fate  transition 
have been identified. A very early acting SPOROCYTELESS/
NOZZLE  (SPL/NZZ)  gene,  studied  through  mutation  in 
Arabidopsis, is required for differentiation of an archesporial 
cell into an MMC (Yang, 1999). This gene encodes a putative 
transcription factor also involved in establishing chalazal iden-
tity. A role for SPL/NZZ in the initiation of aposporous initials 
is  unlikely  given  that  expression  of  an  AtSPL:GUS  construct 
in apomictic Hieracium led to staining of the MMC but not 
the aposporous initials (Tucker et al., 2003).

Another  well-studied  germline  mutation  in  maize  (Zea 
mays)  whose  gene  has  not  been  cloned  is  multiple  archespo-
rial  cells  1  (mac1;  Sheridan  et  al.,  1996).  In  this  mutant, 
multiple  MMCs  develop  and  undergo  meiosis  with  some 
ovules  even  forming  multiple  embryo  sacs.  Either  multiple 
hypodermal cells are being directly signaled to make the veg-
etative  to  sporogenous  tissue  transition  or  respond  indirectly 
through  the  release  of  suppression.  A  mutation  with  a  simi-
lar  phenotype  to  mac1,  multiple  sporocyte  (msp1),  has  been 
characterized  in  rice  and  the  gene  cloned  (Nonomura  et  al., 
2003).  The  Gramene  resource  for  comparative  grass  genom-
ics (release 30; www.gramene.org) shows MSP1 at rice locus 
LOC_Os01g68870 to have a single homolog in maize on chro-
mosome 3 (GRMZM2G447447). This is not the maize chro-
mosome  to  which  MAC1  maps  (short  arm  of  chromosome 
10;  Sheridan  et  al.,  1996).  Furthermore,  newly  generated 
Mutator  (Mu)-tagged  alleles  of  mac1  did  not  show  evidence 
of Mu insertions in ZmMSP1 (Ma et al., 2007). Therefore, in 
spite  of  the  almost  identical  phenotypes,  MAC1  and  MSP1 
appear to be different genes. The retrotransposon-tagged rice 
MSP1  gene  is  similar  to  a  leucine-rich  repeat  receptor-like 
kinase  (Nonomura  et  al.,  2003).  Both  male  and  female  spo-
rogenesis are affected in msp1 mutants, but sporogenous cells 
degenerate only in the male, resulting in male sterility. As in 
maize  mac1,  msp1  mutants  have  multiple  ovule-derived  spo-
rocytes  that  can  complete  meiosis.  Functional  megaspores 
can  develop  into  gametophytes  and  mutant  ovules  yield 
a  high  frequency  of  twin  embryos;  in  the  rice  mutant  it 
was  not  clear  whether  the  twin  embryos  were  more  likely 
to  arise  from  independent  embryo  sacs  or  from  multiple 
cells  within  a  single  highly  abnormal  embryo  sac,  although 
cytological  study  supported  the 
latter.  Compared  with 
Arabidopsis genes, MSP1 has highest similarity with EXCESS 
MICROSPOROCYTES1/EXTRA  SPOROGENOUS  CELLS 
(EMS1/EXS),  although  ems1/exs  does  not  show  a  female 

Regulation of apomixis

C H A P T E R   1 6

the  MMC.  AGO9  is  a  member  of  the  ARGONAUT  gene 
family, and therefore a component of the RNA silencing path-
way. The protein was shown to be associated with 24-nucle-
otide sequences diagnostic of several retrotransposon families, 
suggesting  that  transposable  element  inactivation  in  compan-
ion  cells  of  reproductive  tissues  restricts  MMC  specification 
to  a  single  cell.  Another  member  of  the  AGO  gene  family 
from rice, MEIOSIS ARRESTED AT LEPTOTENE (MEL1), 
displays  a  complementary  expression  pattern  compared  with 
Arabidopsis  AGO9,  that  is,  expression  is  restricted  to  spo-
rocytes  and  disappears  once  meiosis  is  initiated  (Nonomura 
et al., 2007). Data suggest that modification of heterochroma-
tin may be one function of MEL1.

The  elusive  signal  for  aposporous  initial  specification  in 
natural  apomicts  is  sought  by  transcriptional  and  mutational 
approaches. For example, loss of apomeiosis (loa) is a mutant 
phenotype  recovered 
in  Hieracium  aurantiacum  while 
employing  insertional  (transposon,  T-DNA)  and  γ-irradiation 
mutagenesis  strategies  (Bicknell  et  al.,  2001;  Okada  et  al., 
2007).  The  mutant,  loa1,  was  almost  completely  female 
sterile and the few progeny were predominantly polyhaploid 
(Okada  et  al.,  2007).  Evidence  indicated  that  the  mutant 
locus was not tagged with T-DNA or the transposon, but may 
have  been  generated  by  somaclonal  variation.  Nevertheless, 
the  mutant  has  provided  material  for  detailed  cytological 
analysis  of  this  sterility  phenotype.  The  mutant  was  in  an 
aneuploid apomictic background where aneuploidy alone may 
reduce  fertility  once  apomixis  becomes  defective.  Indeed, 
even  though  aposporous  initials  were  formed,  their  posi-
tion and direction of enlargement with respect to the MMC 
was  altered  (more  posterior),  reducing  the  displacement  of 
developing  megaspores,  yet  sexual  reproduction  was  rarely 
completed.  The  defective  aposporous  initials  also  degener-
ated after assuming partial sexual identity (callose deposition 
in cell walls). A more extensive collection of loa mutants was 
generated by γ-irradiation (Catanach et al., 2006), but molec-
ular characterization of mutant loci is still in progress.

Transcriptional analysis of ovules at an early stage of devel-
opment  corresponding  to  MMC  specification  has  shown 
heterochronic  shifts  in  expression  of  more  than  500  genes 
between  apomictic  and  sexual  Boechera  (Sharbel  et  al., 
2009). These data support the hybrid-dependent floral asyn-
chrony  hypothesis  of  Carman  (1997),  since  even  in  diploid 
Boechera, clear evidence of hybrid origin has been shown with 
molecular  cytogenetics  (Kantama  et  al.,  2007)  and  sequence 
tags (Sharbel et al., 2009). Of the large number of apomict-
specific  differentially  expressed  genes,  gene  ontology  terms 
related  to  transcriptional  regulation  were  overrepresented 
(Sharbel  et  al.,  2010).  Comparative  transcriptome  analysis 
of  early-stage  ovules  from  apomictic  and  sexual  genotypes 
of  several  species  has  been  conducted  using  cDNA-ampli-
fied  fragment  length  polymorphism  (AFLP)  and  expressed 
sequence  tag  (EST)  data.  These  studies  include  Paspalum 
notatum  (Laspina  et  al.,  2008),  P.  simplex  (Polegri  et  al., 
2010),  Poa  pratensis  (Albertini  et  al.,  2004),  Panicum  maxi-
mum  (Yamada-Akiyama  et  al.,  2009),  Brachiaria  brizantha 
(Rodrigues  et  al.,  2003),  and  Eragrostis  curvula  (Cervigni 
et al., 2008). As with the more global analysis of Sharbel et al. 
(2010), many expression differences were observed between 

245

Figure 16.1 l Mutation in genes involved in sexual 
reproduction can lead to apospory-like phenotypes 
l During sexual reproduction, a single archesporial cell (AS) is 
converted into the megaspore mother cell (MMC) through the 
expression of SPOROCYTELESS/NOZZLE (SPL/NZZ). MULTIPLE 
ARCHESPORIAL CELLS 1 (MAC1), ARGONAUTE 9 (AGO9), and 
MULTIPLE SPOROCYTE (MSP1) with TAPETUM DETERMINANT-
LIKE1A (OsTDL1A) act to repress the formation of multiple MMCs. 
ago9, mac1, and msp1 mutants lead to the formation of multiple 
MMCs, which is similar to the formation of multiple aposporous 
initials (AI) seen in aposporous apomictic development.

INSENSITIVE 

germline  phenotype  (Canales  et  al.,  2002),  but  it  has  signifi-
cant  similarity  with  other  receptor-like  kinase  genes  includ-
ing the rice disease resistance gene, XA21, the brassino steroid 
receptor,  BRASSINOSTEROID 
(BRI1), 
and  the  developmental  gene,  CLAVATA1  (CLV1).  MSP1 
is  expressed  in  cells  surrounding  the  sporogenous  tissue,  but 
not  in  the  sporogenous  cells,  indicating  that  its  expression  is 
suppressing  entry  into  the  sporocyte  pathway.  MSP1  is  pre-
dicted  to  be  a  transmembrane  protein  whose  extracellular 
LEUCINE-RICH  REPEAT  (LRR)  domain  interacts  with  a 
protein  ligand  encoded  by  TAPETUM  DETERMINANT-
LIKE1A (OsTDL1A). MSP1 and OsTDL1A are co-expressed 
and  protein  interaction  has  been  demonstrated  in  a  yeast 
two-hybrid  system.  Zhao  et  al.  (2008)  hypothesized  that 
aposporous  initials  and  extra  sporogenous  cells  develop  from 
the  same  cell  populations;  however,  the  extra  sporogenous 
cells are usually confined to the nucellar hypodermal layer of 
both maize and rice, a position not always so well defined for 
aposporous  initials  that  most  frequently  originate  from  cells 
adjacent  to  meiotic  or  degenerating  meiotic  products  (Peel 
et al., 1997; Koltunow et al., 1998; Wen et al., 1998).

Interestingly,  a  gene  with  similar  expression  pattern 
to  MSP1,  ARGONAUT9  (AGO9),  was  recently  identi-
fied  through  analysis  of  Arabidopsis  insertional  mutants. 
The  mutant  phenotype  is  characterized  by  the  formation  of 
multiple  enlarged  subepidermal  cells  in  premeiotic  ovules 
(Olmedo-Monfil  et  al.,  2010).  Only  one  of  these  typically 
adopts  MMC  fate  as  demonstrated  by  callose  deposition 
and  progression  through  meiosis,  but  several  of  the  enlarged 
cells can express a marker specific to functional megaspores. 
AGO9  is  expressed  in  the  distal  region  of  the  premeiotic 
ovule  at  the  sporophyte–gametophyte  boundary,  but  not  in 

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

apomictic  and  sexual  genotypes  at  similar  stages  of  develop-
ment.  Many  of  the  apomixis-linked  and  stage-specific  clones 
in the P. simplex study also had putative regulatory functions. 
Whether  substantial  heterochronic  shifts  in  gene  expres-
sion  have  a  convergent  regulatory  mechanism  that  would  be 
more consistent with genetic studies awaits further investiga-
tion.  AFLP  mapping  in  Hypericum  perforatum  L.  identified 
the  Hypericum  APOSPORY  (HAPPY)  locus.  A  truncated 
ARIADNE  ortholog  (HpARI)  resides  within  HAPPY  and  is 
speculated  to  play  a  role  in  apospory.  ARIADNE  proteins, 
found  in  yeast,  animals,  and  plants,  are  involved  in  the  con-
trol  of  ubiquitin-dependent  protein  degradation  (Schallau 
et al., 2010).

Apomeiosis

More than 50 plant meiosis genes have been cloned and func-
tionally characterized in little more than a decade, mainly due 
to the broad genetic resources available for the model plant, 
A.  thaliana  (Mercier  and  Grelon,  2003;  Caryl  et  al.,  2003; 
Figure  16.2).  Several  mutants  of  these  genes  may  be  partic-
ularly  relevant  to  the  regulation  of  apomixis.  Diplosporous 
apomixis precludes meiosis from initiating or completing; for 
example,  the  fate  of  the  MMC  is  altered  such  that  meiosis 
is  blocked  at  some  point  prior  to  crossing  over.  Apomeiotic 
mutants have been described where no phase of meiosis can 
be observed. For example, mutants of AMEIOTIC1 (AM1) in 
maize affect microspore and megaspore development, causing 
mitotic  rather  than  meiotic  divisions  in  mother  cells.  In  the 
female, MMCs can complete more than one mitotic division 
to  form  a  linear  array  of  up  to  eight  cells  that  subsequently 
degenerate  (Golubovskaya  et  al.,  1997).  A  recently  cloned 
mutant allele of maize AMEIOTIC1 (am1-1) showed no evi-
dence  for  entry  into  meiosis  in  that  chromosomes  displayed 
a  mitotic  prophase  arrangement,  did  not  show  telomere-
specific  bouquet  formation  at  the  nuclear  envelope,  lacked 
homologous  chromosome  pairing,  did  not  recruit  meiosis-
specific  proteins  such  as  ABSENCE  OF  FIRST  DIVISION1 
(AFD1;  a  cohesin  complex  Rec8  homolog)  or  ASYNAPTIC 
(ASY1;  a  HOMOLOG  PAIRING,  HOP1,  homolog),  and 
did not show meiotic double-strand breaks (Pawlowski et al., 
2009).  AM1  is  thus  required  for  the  transition  from  mitosis 
to meiosis in maize. A homolog of maize AM1 in Arabidopsis 
is SWITCH1 (SWI1)/DYAD, although the two proteins may 
have somewhat different functions since meiosis-specific Rec8 
is  installed  on  chromosomes  of  Arabidopsis  in  swi1/dyad 
mutants indicating entry into meiosis. However, Rec8 also was 
recruited to chromosomes of one am1 mutant, am1-praI, sug-
gesting  that  the  differences  between  maize  and  Arabidopsis 
could be due to allelic diversification. The dyad allele of SWI1 
only  affects  female  meiosis  wherein  development  terminates 
after a single equational division of the MMC, leading to pre-
dominantly female sterility (Siddiqi et al., 2000). The mutant 
is incompletely penetrant, however, such that it is not lethal 
and  a  few  seeds  can  be  produced.  Ploidy  level  analysis  of 
progeny indicated that occasional mitotic products developed 
further into unreduced embryo sacs and that unreduced eggs 
could  be  fertilized  to  produce  embryos  with  elevated  ploidy 

246

Figure 16.2 l Mutation in genes involved in sexual 
reproduction can lead to diplospory-like phenotypes l During 
sexual reproduction, the megaspore mother cell (MMC) undergoes 
meiosis to produce a chromosomally reduced (N) female megaspore. 
Genes required for meiosis I include SPO11 for pairing and 
recombination and REC8 for chromatid cohesion. OMISSION OF 
SECOND DIVISION (OSD1) and TARDY ASYNCHRONOUS MEIOSIS 
(TAM) are required for the transition from meiosis I to meiosis II. 
Triple mutants of osd1/Atspo11-1/Atrec8 or tam/Atspo11-1/Atrec8, 
like the outcome of diplospory, lead to 2N megaspores that have 
not undergone recombination and are genetically identical to the 
maternal genotype. Mutations in ameiotic1 (am1-1), dyad, and 
elongate (el1) also lead to 2N megaspores, although they are not 
genetically identical to the mother.

levels. These relatively rare events established that functional 
unreduced  eggs  where  maternal  parent  heterozygosity  was 
retained could be produced in the dyad mutant (Ravi et al., 
2008).

To  produce  a  relatively  fertile  mutant  Arabidopsis  phe-
notype  forming  unreduced  eggs  with  non-recombined  chro-
mosomes  required  mutations  in  three  genes:  OMISSION 
OF  SECOND  DIVISION  (OSD1),  a  plant-specific  gene 
required for entry into the second meiotic division; SPO-11, 
required for pairing and recombination; and REC8, participat-
ing in chromatid cohesion (d’Erfurth et al., 2009). The dou-
ble  mutant  spo-11/rec8  replaced  meiosis  I  with  mitosis,  and 
when combined with osd1 produced an apomeiosis phenotype 
(mitosis  instead  of  meiosis;  MiMe).  A  second  MiMe  pheno-
type  (MiMe-2)  was  produced  by  replacing  the  osd1  muta-
tion  with  a  mutant  allele  of  TARDY  ASYNCHRONOUS 
MEIOSIS/CYCA1;2  (tam),  a  cyclin  gene  (d’Erfurth  et  al., 
2010).  As  expected,  ploidy  increased  with  each  generation 
due to fertilization of unreduced eggs. A phenotype similar to 
osd1 has been observed in the elongate (el1) mutant (Rhoades 
and Dempsey, 1966) of maize and attributed to the absence 
of  meiosis  II  (Barrell  and  Grossniklaus,  2005),  but  no  gene 
has  been  cloned  to  date.  Although  a  triple  recessive  mutant 
to  derive  apomeiosis  as  generated  from  sexual  Arabidopsis 
is  unlikely  the  evolutionary  pathway  followed  by  natural 
apomicts, this knowledge may nevertheless be useful for syn-
thesizing apomixis de novo in sexual plants.

None  of  these  mutations  has  been  shown  to  play  a  role 
in  natural  apomixis,  although  intriguing  evidence  for  linkage 

of  apomixis  and  meiosis  loci  was  published  from  Tripsacum 
dactyloides  (Grimanelli  et  al.,  1998).  Comparative  mapping 
between  diplosporous  Tripsacum  and  sexual  maize  identified 
two regions in maize syntenic with the apomixis-linked region 
in Tripsacum. The syntenic chromosomal regions of maize 6L 
and 8L also contained afd1 and el1 loci.

The  signals  that  control  degeneration  of  meiotic  products 
in  aposporous  apomicts  are  not  known.  It  is  possible  that 
timing  of  aposporous  initial  specification,  growth  rate,  and 
competition for space with the functional megaspore are key 
mechanisms providing an advantage for the surviving embryo 
sacs.  It  is  also  possible  that  a  signal  similar  to  one  responsi-
ble  for  micropylar  megaspore  degeneration  is  generated  by 
enlarging  aposporous  initials,  but  only  sporogenous  cells,  and 
not  somatic  cells  of  the  nucellus,  are  competent  to  respond 
by  cell  death.  Calcium  is  known  to  play  important  signaling 
and regulatory roles in plant reproduction (Ge et al., 2007a). 
Degenerating  micropylar  megaspores  in  lettuce  (Lactuca 
sativa  L.)  showed  a  redistribution  of  loosely  bound  calcium 
that  preceded  cell  death  (Qiu  et  al.,  2008).  Only  studying 
additional  plants  will  determine  if  calcium  flux  is  a  general 
phenomenon during megaspore degeneration, and whether it 
plays a role in death of the functional megaspore or its mei-
otic derivatives upon aposporous initial formation.

Megagametogenesis

The female gametophytic program observed in apomicts typi-
cally  parallels  that  observed  during  sexual  reproduction  with 
the most prominent exception being the 4-nucleate Panicum-
type embryo sac (Figure 16.3). The 4-nucleate pattern actu-
ally  resembles  a  more  primitive  embryo  sac  structure  based 
on  the  module  theory  of  quartets  of  nuclei  (Friedman  and 
Ryerson,  2009),  but  is  almost  certainly  a  derived  state.  In 
both 4- and 8-nucleate embryo sacs, polarity clearly is estab-
lished  with  the  egg  apparatus  most  often  positioned  toward 
the  micropyle,  although  in  aposporous  Pennisetum  ciliare 
(Cenchrus ciliaris), the egg apparatus may be oriented toward 
the closest boundary of the ovule (Snyder et al., 1955). More 
deviation  in  arrangement  may  occur  in  aposporous  apomicts 
that  frequently  initiate  multiple  competing  embryo  sacs, 
some  of  which  may  remain  immature  (Snyder  et  al.,  1955; 
Koltunow et al., 2000; Guan et al., 2007).

Gamete Specification

Evidence  continues  to  build  that  auxin  plays  a  key  role  in 
establishing developmental gradients in the ovule. Correlation 
between patterning in the female gametophyte of Arabidopsis 
and  auxin  gradient  was  demonstrated  with  the  green  fluo-
rescent  protein  reporter  gene  under  the  control  of  an  auxin 
responsive  promoter  (Pagnussat  et  al.,  2009).  Auxin  signal-
ing  resulting  from  auxin  biosynthesis  at  the  micropylar  pole 
of  the  nucellus  and  developing  embryo  sac  led  to  establish-
ment  of  gametic  cell  identity,  although  it  did  not  alter  the 
positioning  of  nuclei  or  number  of  cell  divisions  within  the 
embryo sac. It would be interesting to analyze auxin gradients 

Regulation of apomixis

C H A P T E R   1 6

Figure 16.3 l Cleared Pennisetum sexual and apomictic 
ovaries l Ovaries were cleared and mounted using methyl salicylate 
and photographed using differential interference contrast (DIC) 
optics. Features of interest are highlighted with color. (A) Sexual 
Pennisetum glaucum ovary with embryo sac consisting of antipodal 
cells (gray), antipodal cell on a different plane of focus (orange), 
central cell (yellow) with unfused polar nuclei (blue), and reduced egg 
and synergid cells (pink). (B) Apomictic Pennisetum squamulatum 
ovary with the formation of multiple aposporous embryo sacs. 
Central cells (green) with a single 2N polar nucleus (blue) are shown. 
(C) Developing endosperm (red) and embryo (purple) in an ovary from 
a BC8 P. glaucum introgression line. (D) Apomictic P. squamulatum 
ovary with parthenogenetic precocious embryo development (purple) 
in the embryo sac with a uninucleate (blue) central cell (green). 

in ovules of aposporous apomicts. Constitutive expression of 
rolB  in  apomictic  H.  piloselloides  presumably  enhanced  cell 
sensitivity  to  auxin  and  led  to  an  increase  in  the  number  of 
aposporous  embryo  sacs,  some  more  distant  from  the  MMC 
than typical but retaining the capacity to develop embryo and 
endosperm (Koltunow et al., 2001). Two auxin response fac-
tor clones were identified as early-apomixis-stage-specific dur-
ing  cDNA-AFLP  analysis  in  P.  simplex  (Polegri  et  al.,  2010); 
however,  these  clones  were  not  shown  to  be  linked  to  the 
apomixis-controlling locus (ACL). It is possible that auxin sig-
naling, either directly in aposporous embryo sacs or indirectly 
from  surrounding  ovule  tissues,  may  play  a  role  in  nuclear 
division as well as embryo sac patterning.

lachesis 

(lis), 

genes, 

Three  Arabidopsis 

clotho 
(clo)/GAMETOPHYTIC  FACTOR  1(GFA1),  and  atropos 
(atos) are involved in gamete specification. In lis, clo/gfa1, and 
atos  mutants,  ectopic  expression  of  an  egg  cell  marker  was 
observed  in  synergids  and  the  central  cell.  LIS  is  expressed 
at  all  stages  of  female  gametophyte  development;  how-
ever,  expression  of  LIS  is  upregulated  in  gametic  cells  and 
downregulated  in  accessory  cells  after  cellularization  of  the 
embryo sac. LIS encodes a homolog of yeast PRP4, which is 

247

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

a component of the spliceosome (Gross-Hardt et al., 2007). 
Interestingly,  CLO/GFA1  and  ATO  also  encode  genes  with 
sequence similarity to the splicing factor Snu114 and a human 
pre-mRNA  splicing  factor  SF3a60,  respectively  (Moll  et  al., 
2008).

The  indeterminate  gametophyte  (ig1)  mutant  of  maize 
(Kermicle,  1969)  was  initially  characterized  by  its  high  fre-
quency of haploid production (both maternally and paternally 
derived),  and  was  shown  to  extend  the  free-nuclear  stage 
and affect the polarity of female gametophytes, resulting in a 
phenotype of increased numbers of eggs, synergids, and polar 
nuclei (Lin, 1978; Huang and Sheridan, 1996). The IG1 gene 
has  been  cloned  and  shown  to  encode  a  LATERAL  ORGAN 
BOUNDARIES (LOB) domain protein, a member of a plant-
specific  gene  family  (Evans,  2007).  In  the  wild-type  embryo 
sac  of  maize,  IG1  is  detectable  in  the  single-cell  stage  (func-
tional megaspore) and subsequently is expressed in the egg and 
antipodals, but not the synergids. IG1 may control the switch 
from  cell  proliferation  to  differentiation  in  the  female  game-
tophyte. Ultimately, variable numbers of micropylar cells have 
cell fates as eggs or synergids, although they are not ultrastruc-
turally distinguishable as such (Huang and Sheridan, 1996).

Genes controlling central cell differentiation have also been 
isolated. In diana (dia, agl61) mutants, the absence of a nor-
mal  central  cell  triggers  the  degeneration  of  the  embryo  sac 
at  female  gametophyte  (FG)  stage  FG7.  DIA  is  expressed 
in  the  polar  nuclei  starting  at  late-stage  FG5  and  continues 
through  the  formation  of  the  secondary  nucleus  of  the  cen-
tral cell (Bemer et al., 2008). DIA forms a heterodimer with 
AGAMOUS-LIKE80  (AGL80),  both  Type  I  MADS-box 
genes (Bemer et al., 2008; Steffen et al., 2008) that are sus-
pected to control downstream genes essential for central cell 
and embryo development.

A  detailed  analysis  of  cellular 

transcriptomes  of 
Arabidopsis  embryo  sacs  has  been  made  possible  by  the 
technological  advances  of  laser  capture  microdissection  and 
expression  arrays  based  on  whole-genome  sequence  data. 
Distinct transcriptional profiles for egg, synergid, and central 
cell  implicated  epigenetic  regulatory  mechanisms  through 
small RNA pathways in the egg and transcription factor over-
representation  in  the  female  gametophyte  compared  with 
sporophytic  tissues  (Wuest  et  al.,  2010).  Other  studies  of 
female  gametophyte  transcription  and  mutation  analysis  are 
reviewed by Kagi and Gross-Hardt (2007, 2010).

Parthenogenesis

Parthenogenesis  is  fertilization  independent  development  of 
the  embryo  during  seed  formation.  Parthenogenesis  is  rare, 
but  well  documented,  in  sexual  plants  and  usually  leads  to 
the formation of haploids (Kimber and Riley, 1963; Dunwell, 
2010). Induction of gynogenic haploids is one breeding tech-
nology used for crops recalcitrant to induction of androgenic 
haploids  (Forster  et  al.,  2007).  Spontaneous  formation  of 
gynogenic haploids may be accompanied by a diploid embryo 
in the same seed. The haploid embryo in a twin-embryo seed 
probably  arises  most  frequently  from  a  synergid  cell  that 
assumes egg cell fate (Kimber and Riley, 1963). In the maize 

248

ig1 mutant described earlier, the micropylar-oriented embryo 
sac cells are competent to form embryos without fertilization. 
Embryogenesis  most  likely  is  triggered  post-pollination  even 
though fertilization is avoided.

The  strict  sense  of  parthenogenesis  as  observed  among 
apomicts would entail egg activation in the absence of either 
pollination  or  fertilization.  Evidence  that  eggs  from  the 
“Salmon” system of wheat are activated comes from their in 
vitro  response  upon  isolation  from  the  surrounding  tissues. 
The  Salmon  system  is  characterized  by  a  1BS/1RS  wheat/
rye  chromosomal  translocation  that  is  essential  to  confer 
the  capacity  for  parthenogenesis  in  specific  heterocytoplas-
mic  backgrounds.  Chromosome  1BS  is  postulated  to  carry  a 
parthenogenesis-suppressing  gene  while  1RS  has  a  partheno-
genesis-inducing  gene  (Matzk  et  al.,  1995).  The  mechanisms 
underlying  this  complex  nuclear–cytoplasmic  interaction  are 
not understood, but the isogenic lines developed with differ-
ent  cytoplasms  provide  valuable  genetic  tools  for  comparing 
gene  expression  differences  between  parthenogenetic  and 
non-parthenogenetic  eggs  (Kumlehn  et  al.,  2001).  Of  par-
ticular  importance  was  the  demonstration  that  egg  cells  iso-
lated  from  the  parthenogenetic  (cS  and  kS)  lines  initiated 
embryos in up to 25% of the cases, whereas unfertilized egg 
cells from the non-parthenogenetic (aS) isogenic line showed 
no egg cell division in vitro. Metabolic differences were indi-
cated  by  ultrastructural  comparison  of  aS  and  kS  lines  three 
days prior to anthesis where nuclear size, number of nucleoli, 
and number of ribosomes were greater in the kS than aS eggs 
(Naumova and Matzk, 1998). The precocious metabolic activ-
ity  did  not  lead  to  egg  cell  division  prior  to  anthesis,  as  has 
been demonstrated for some apomicts.

The  factors  responsible  for  egg  activation  in  plants  are 
unknown. In fact, the egg of Arabidopsis assumes a quiescent 
state with an abundance of stored transcripts whose translation 
predominates  for  approximately  three  days  after  zygote  for-
mation and prior to the maternal to zygotic transition (Vielle-
Calzada  et  al.,  2000;  Pillot  et  al.,  2010).  Enhancer  trap  lines 
with  β-glucuronidase  (GUS)  as  the  reporter  gene  and  repre-
senting  19  embryo  expressed  genes  showed  GUS  expression 
in  seeds  only  when  maternally  transmitted.  Furthermore,  the 
GUS  evidence  for  maternal  allele  expression  of  some  genes 
was  validated  using  allele-specific  RT-PCR.  Paternal  alleles  of 
these  genes  could  not  be  detected  in  seeds,  either  embryo  or 
endosperm, until more than three days after pollination. Data 
generated  to  address  the  timing  of  maternal  to  zygotic  transi-
tion in maize are contrasting, however, perhaps due to different 
analytical methods and crosses tested (Grimanelli et al., 2005; 
Meyer  and  Scholten,  2007).  Allele-specific  RT-PCR  showed 
no evidence for paternal allele expression of 16 genes in maize 
seeds  three  days  after  pollination  (Grimanelli  et  al.,  2005), 
whereas  a  single  nucleotide  poly morphism  (SNP)-detection 
assay  identified  paternal  alleles  for  24  active  genes  in  micro-
dissected zygotes 1 day after pollination (Meyer and Scholten, 
2007).  Paternal  allele  expression  was  consistent  with  observa-
tion of heterosis early in embryo development, manifested as a 
higher rate of cell division.

In  Arabidopsis  as  well  as  maize,  there  is  evidence  for 
repression  of  paternal  allele  expression  in  endosperm  and 
embryo,  although  the  two  fertilization  products  were 

shown  to  have  different  transcriptional  states.  The  require-
ment  for  transcription  during  early  seed  development  was 
tested  by  knockdown  of  RNA  POLYMERASE  II  through 
RNA  interference  (Pillot  et  al.,  2010).  Transcription  was 
shown  to  be  essential  for  functional  megaspore  mitosis  and 
endosperm  development,  but  dispensable  for  embryo  initia-
tion.  Microarray  analysis  of  seeds  with  developing  embryos 
but  no  endosperm  (apomictic  maize-Tripsacum  hybrid  with 
fertilization-independent  and  precocious  embryo  initiation), 
and seeds with embryo and endosperm three days after pol-
lination  (sexual  maize)  showed  no  differential  gene  expres-
sion  for  the  embryo-only  sample  compared  to  unfertilized 
maize  ovules.  In  contrast,  more  than  2%  of  the  genes  were 
differentially  expressed  once  endosperm  began  to  develop 
(Grimanelli  et  al.,  2005).  These  collective  data  support  that 
zygotic  transcription  is  not  required  for  embryo  initiation, 
nor  is  there  zygote-specific  gene  expression.  Yet  there  must 
be similar signals generated during the formation of a zygote 
that  are  precociously  generated  and  perceived  by  unreduced 
eggs in apomictic plants, or repressive signals that are absent. 
In  apomicts,  egg  activation  and  assumption  of  a  zygotic  fate 
does  not  require  a  signal  from  pollination  or  pollen  tube 
penetration  of  a  synergid,  such  as  generation  of  a  calcium 
wave.  Furthermore,  synergids  undergo  accelerated  degen-
eration compared with those in the egg apparatus of a sexual 
plant (Vielle et al., 1995). Perhaps a quiescent state is never 
imposed on the egg of apomicts. The egg of sexual buffelgrass 
has a large chalazal vacuole, whereas many small vacuoles are 
more centrally positioned in the egg of apomictic buffelgrass. 
A similar pattern of vacuolation was observed in aposporous P. 
maximum (Naumova and Willemse, 1995).

How  is  fertilization  of  an  unreduced  egg  prevented? 
Mechanisms could be physical or physiological, although there 
is little direct evidence for either. The cell wall of the egg in 
a  sexual  individual  is  incomplete,  particularly  at  the  chalazal 
end and where it is in contact with a synergid. The exposed 
membrane presumably would be necessary for gamete recog-
nition  via  membrane  localized  receptor  molecules  (Peng  and 
Sun, 2008). In apomictic buffelgrass, the cell wall around the 
egg is completed shortly after pollination, imposing a physical 
barrier to syngamy (Vielle et al., 1995), but this is not a uni-
versal phenomenon in apomicts as demonstrated for P. maxi-
mum  (Naumova  and  Willemse,  1995).  Early  pollination  of 
Pennisetum and Paspalum species has been shown to increase 
the  frequency  of  fertilization  events  leading  to  generation  of 
2n  n (BIII) hybrids with elevated ploidy levels (Martinez et 
al., 1994; Burson et al., 2002), implying that the fertilization 
barrier  intensifies  shortly  before  anthesis.  Lack  of  cell  cycle 
synchronization also could influence fertilization if the egg is 
receptive  only  at  G1,  yet  early  egg  activation  in  an  apomict 
presumably  would  yield  eggs  at  multiple  phases  of  the  cell 
cycle.

What  genes  might  therefore  be  responsible  for  initiating 
embryogenesis in the absence of fertilization? Positive regula-
tors  of  embryogenesis  have  been  studied  more  thoroughly  in 
somatic  rather  than  zygotic  embryogenesis.  Over-expression 
of  numerous  genes  provides  evidence  for  a  role  in  embryo 
morphogenesis.  Expression  profiling  of  mutants  of  some 
of  these  genes  also  has  provided  evidence  for  their  direct 

Regulation of apomixis

C H A P T E R   1 6

and  indirect  targets.  The  embryogenesis  gene  SOMATIC 
EMBRYOGENESIS  RECEPTOR-LIKE  KINASE  (SERK)  is 
a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase that is a marker for 
embryogenically  competent  cells,  both  somatic  and  zygotic 
(Schmidt et al., 1997). In Arabidopsis, AtSERK1 is expressed 
in the ovule primordium, continuing through megasporogene-
sis in the distal region of the ovule, including the MMC, in all 
cells  of  the  megagametophyte,  and  post-fertilization  in  both 
early embryo and endosperm (Hecht et al., 2001). Mutants of 
AtSERK1,  however,  do  not  show  attenuation  of  embryogen-
esis  suggesting  that  other  SERK  genes  may  have  overlapping 
functions. Over-expression of AtSERK1 in Arabidopsis led to 
enhanced competence for somatic embryo induction, although 
somatic embryos did not form in the absence of auxin (Hecht 
et al., 2001). Among natural apomicts, a SERK gene differen-
tially expressed in apomictic versus sexual ovules was identi-
fied  in  Poa  pratensis  (Albertini  et  al.,  2005),  suggesting  that 
its expression could play a role in acquisition of embryogenic 
competence  by  either  the  MMC  or  aposporous  initials.  The 
pattern  of  expression  of  AtSERK:GUS  in  Hieracium  ovules, 
however,  did  not  precisely  parallel  that  of  Arabidopsis;  for 
example,  no  expression  was  observed  during  megagame-
togenesis or in the egg cell, but globular stage embryos were 
clearly marked by GUS signal. Furthermore, no differences in 
AtSERK:GUS  expression  were  observed  between  sexual  and 
apomictic reproduction (Tucker et al., 2003).

identified 

Several  transcriptional  regulators  that  play  a  role  in 
including  LEAFY 
embryogenesis  have  been 
COTYLEDON  1  (LEC1)  and  LEC2,  FUSCA3  (FUS3), 
AGAMOUS-LIKE  15  (AGL15),  WUSCHEL  (WUS),  and 
BABY BOOM (BBM). LEC1 encodes a HAP3 subunit of the 
CCAAT-box binding factor whereas LEC2 and FUS3 encode 
B3-domain  proteins.  Over-expression  of  LEC1  or  LEC2  in 
vegetative  tissues  causes  ectopic  embryo  formation  indicat-
ing that either is sufficient for embryo formation under such 
permissive  conditions,  and  their  loss-of-function  mutants 
have  impaired  embryo  development  indicating  their  require-
ment  for  embryo  morphogenesis.  LEC1  and  LEC2  both  act 
to target FUS3 as well as each other. Other targets of LEC2 
are auxin biosynthesis genes, YUC2 and YUC4 (Stone et al., 
2008), a finding that suggests LEC2 may indirectly influence 
levels or gradients of auxin, a growth regulator known to stim-
ulate somatic embryogenesis and establish polarity in zygotic 
embryos (Weijers and Jurgens, 2005). LEC2 also upregulates 
AGL15,  a  MADS  domain  transcription  factor  that  activates 
expression  of  GA2ox6,  an  inhibitor  of  gibberellin  biosynthe-
sis.  Furthermore,  ChIP-chip  experiments  showed  that  LEC2 
and FUS3 were direct targets of AGL15 (Zheng et al., 2009), 
suggesting positive feedback regulation. While a role for LEC1 
and  LEC2  in  early  embryogenesis  is  implicated  by  these 
experiments,  LEC2  has  been  shown  to  bind  to  RY  elements 
found  in  the  promoter  of  many  seed-specific  genes,  particu-
larly  those  involved  in  seed  maturation  such  as  seed  storage 
proteins  (Braybrook  et  al.,  2006).  Similarly,  LEC1  promotes 
expression of fatty acid biosynthetic genes during seed matu-
ration albeit indirectly (Mu et al., 2008). Evidence therefore 
supports  that  LEC1  and  LEC2  have  functions  in  both  early 
(Lotan  et  al.,  1998)  and  late  (Braybrook  and  Harada,  2008) 
embryogenesis.

249

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

Another  transcriptional  regulator,  WUS,  is  necessary  for 
shoot apical meristem development, including the shoot mer-
istem  of  embryos;  however,  ectopic  expression  of  WUS  is 
sufficient  to  induce  somatic  embryo  formation  (Zuo  et  al., 
2002).  WUS  is  a  homeobox  gene  whose  product  confers 
stem  cell  identity.  In  addition  to  being  expressed  in  shoot 
meristems,  it  is  expressed  in  the  nucellus  (thought  to  have 
evolved  from  a  shoot  meristem;  Kenrick  and  Crane,  1997), 
but  acts  non-cell-autonomously  through  a  signaling  path-
way  to  stimulate  integument  initiation  (Gross-Hardt  et  al., 
2002). WUS expression is positively regulated by NOZZLE/
SPOROCYTELESS  (Sieber  et  al.,  2004),  a  putative  tran-
scription  factor  that  affects  ovule  ontogeny  and  specification 
of  the  MMC  (Yang  et  al.,  1999;  Schiefthaler  et  al.,  2004). 
Since WUS has multiple signaling functions, its expression in 
embryogenically competent cells and response to auxin gradi-
ents is probably related to its regulation of stem cell function 
(Su et al., 2009).

BABY  BOOM 

is  an  AP2-domain  transcription  fac-
tor,  a  member  of  the  AP2-ERF  gene  family  (Weigel,  1995; 
Ohme-Takagi  and  Shinshi,  1995).  BABY  BOOM  falls  in  the 
AINTEGUMENTA  (ANT)  clade,  members  of  which  are 
involved in root, ovule, and embryo development (Kim et al., 
2006). The discovery of BBM was as a gene expressed during 
Brassica microspore embryogenesis. Over-expression of BBM 
leads to ectopic embryo formation in seedlings of Brassica and 
Arabidopsis (Boutilier et al., 2002). It is likely that BBM func-
tions  through  a  different  pathway  than  LEC,  given  the  gene 
targets  that  have  been  identified  (Passarinho  et  al.,  2008). 
Interestingly, a novel homolog of BBM has been identified in 
two  apomicts,  Pennisetum  squamulatum  and  C.  ciliaris,  that 
is  tightly  linked  with  apomixis  (Conner  et  al.,  2008).  The 
gene is expressed one to two days prior to anthesis and dur-
ing  embryo  development,  whereas  transcript  from  the  most 
closely  related  homolog  from  a  sexual  genotype  is  barely 
detectable on the day of anthesis (Huo, 2008; Zeng, 2009).

Non-viable  parthenogenetic  haploid  embryos  of  up  to  20 
cells  have  been  associated  with  the  loss-of-function  of  the 
Arabidopsis gene MULTICOPY SUPPRESSOR IRA 1 (MSI1; 
Guitton  and  Berger,  2005).  Rodrigues  et  al.  (2010)  found 
similar  expression  of  the  Hieracium  homolog  HMSI1  in 
both  apomictic  and  sexual Hieracium  ovules,  suggesting  that 
autonomous  egg  cell  development  is  not  caused  by  a  lack  of 
HMS1  expression  in  apomicts.  Furthermore,  HMS1  did  not 
map  to  the  loss  of  parthenogenesis  (LOP)  locus,  which  con-
trols  both  autonomous  embryo  and  endosperm  development 
in Hieracium.

Whether  mis-expression  or  expression  of  novel  forms 
of  any  of  the  previously  mentioned  transcriptional  regula-
tors  or  signaling  pathway  components  plays  a  role  in  parthe-
nogenesis  is  still  open  to  speculation  and  hypothesis  testing. 
Regulated expression of several of these transcription factors 
in  the  ovule  and  egg  cell  has  failed  to  induce  parthenogen-
esis (reported without supporting data in a review by Curtis 
and  Grossniklaus,  2008),  although  these  experiments  were 
likely to have been carried out in sexual, diploid Arabidopsis, 
with  genes  from  sexual  diploids,  and  would  not  have  tested 
the effect of a novel gene or its regulatory elements from an 
apomict.

250

Endosperm Development

A  unique  evolutionary  feature  of  angiosperms  is  double  fer-
tilization  to  yield  embryo  and  endosperm  through  mater-
nal  and  paternal  contributions.  Seed  development  rarely 
occurs  in  the  absence  of  endosperm.  While  fertilization  of 
the  egg  is  prevented  in  apomixis,  the  requirement  for  fer-
tilization  of  the  central  cell,  termed  pseudogamy,  remains 
in  most  apomicts.  Exceptions  are  largely  found  in  the 
Asteraceae  where  autonomous  endosperm  development 
is  typical.  Members  of  the  Poaceae,  however,  show  aber-
rant  and  often  aborted  seed  development  when  maternal 
to  paternal  genome  ratios  in  the  endosperm  are  other  than 
2:1  (Lin,  1984).  Apomicts  demonstrate  adaptations  to  this 
requirement,  for  example,  tolerance  of  imbalanced  ratios, 
such  as  diplosporous  Tripsacum  (Grimanelli  et  al.,  1997); 
altered embryo sac structure, such as species with Panicum-
type  embryo  sacs  (Vielle  et  al.,  1995);  or  participation  of 
both  sperm  in  fertilization  of  the  central  cell  (Grossniklaus 
et al., 2001). Whether apomixis with autonomous endosperm 
development  can  be  engineered  into  a  sexual  grass  is  open 
to  debate  and  further  experimentation.  Nevertheless,  con-
siderable  progress  in  identifying  genes  that  normally  arrest 
endosperm  formation  in  the  absence  of  fertilization  has 
been  made  through  the  isolation  of  fertilization  independ-
ent  seed  (fis)  class  mutants  in  Arabidopsis  (see  Curtis  and 
Grossniklaus,  2008).  The  best  studied  of  these  mutants  are 
fis2,  fertilization  independent  endosperm  (fie),  medea  (mea), 
and multisuppressor of ira1 (msi1). Most of these genes par-
ticipate  in  the  formation  of  a  Polycomb  group  (PcG)  com-
plex,  a  type  of  multimeric  complex  originally  identified  in 
Drosophila  as  binding  to  chromatin  and  suppressing  tar-
get  gene  expression,  thereby  suppressing  cell  proliferation. 
Mutants  for  these  genes  in  Arabidopsis  show  proliferation 
of  endosperm  and  fruit  development  in  the  absence  of  fer-
tilization.  Several  of  these  genes  are  regulated  by  genomic 
imprinting,  that  is,  their  expression  is  dependent  on  mater-
nal  or  paternal  origin.  Paternally  inherited  alleles  are  not 
expressed  during  early  seed  development.  When  promot-
ers  for  Arabidopsis  FIS2,  FIE,  and  MEA  genes  were  fused 
with  the  coding  region  for  GUS  and  introduced  into  sexual 
and apomictic Hieracium, expression of the three genes was 
coordinately  regulated,  although  expression  was  less  local-
ized within ovules of Hieracium compared with Arabidopsis 
(Tucker et al., 2003). Furthermore, no differences in expres-
sion were observed between sexual and apomictic Hieracium 
genotypes, suggesting that the same molecular pathways were 
operating  during  endosperm  development  even  though  the 
genotypes differed in their requirement for central cell ferti-
lization. RNAi knockdown of HFIE failed to promote autono-
mous  endosperm  formation  in  sexual  Hieracium  suggesting 
that the suppressive role of FIE in the central cell is not con-
served between Hieracium and Arabidopsis (Rodrigues et al., 
2008). Similarly, a T-DNA knockout of OsFIE1, which shows 
endosperm-specific expression, also failed to promote auton-
omous endosperm formation. In this study, a role for consti-
tutively  expressed  OsFIE2  in  endosperm  suppression  could 
not be ruled out (Luo et al., 2009).

Chromatin Modification and 
Epigenetic Regulation

DNA  methylation,  chromatin  modifications,  and  transcrip-
tional  gene  silencing  mediated  by  small  interfering  (si)  RNA 
affect  gene  expression  of  diverse  plant  development  path-
ways  including  vernalization  and  flowering  time,  endosperm 
development,  stem  cell  maintenance,  and  response  to  stress 
(Grant-Downton and Dickinson, 2005, 2006; Berr and Shen, 
2010;  Mosher  and  Melnyk,  2010).  Examples  during  sex-
ual  plant  development  include  control  of  parental  genomic 
imprinting of endosperm genes and the transcriptional activa-
tion of transposable elements (TEs) in both the pollen vegeta-
tive  nucleus  (Slotkin  et  al.,  2009)  and  endosperm  (Gehring 
et al., 2009, Hsieh et al., 2009). Production of siRNAs by the 
transcriptional activation of TEs in pollen vegetative cells and 
endosperm is hypothesized to protect the developing embryo 
from TE activation. An epigenetic change of gene expression 
is  also  seen  during  interspecific  hybridization  and  allopoly-
ploidization (Chen, 2007; Martienssen, 2010).

Epigenetics  has  been  hypothesized  to  play  a  role  in  the 
creation of apomicts through gene expression changes occur-
ring  during  the  stabilization  of  apomictic  genomes  derived 
from  polyploidy  or 
interspecific  hybridization.  Do  the 
mapped genetic loci for apomixis have an epigenetic compo-
nent? A frequent occurrence among mapped apomixis loci is 
the  suppression  of  recombination  noted  through  either  the 
identification  of  multiple  linked  markers  or  by  a  decrease 
in  recombination  rates  in  apomicts  among  apomixis-linked 
markers  compared  with  homologous  or  syntenic  regions  of 
sexual  relatives,  along  with  hemizygosity  of  molecular  mark-
ers  (Ozias-Akins  and  van  Dik,  2007).  Physical  mapping  of 
apomixis  loci  has  been  limited  to  the  ASGR  (apospory-spe-
cific  genomic  region)  in  Pennisetum/Cenchrus  (Goel  et  al., 
2003;  Akiyama  et  al.,  2004,  2005),  the  ACL  in  P.  simplex 
(Pupilli  et  al.,  2001),  and  the  Beta  corolliflora  apomixis  car-
rier  chromosome  and  corresponding  chromosomal  BACs 

References

Regulation of apomixis

C H A P T E R   1 6

in  the  apomictic  monosomic  addition 
line  Beta  M14 
(2n    2x    18    1;  Ge  et  al.,  2007b).  In  all  four  spe-
cies,  hemizygosity  was  confirmed  by  BAC-FISH  analysis. 
Quantitative ideograms from P. squamulatum/C. ciliaris show 
the  ASGR  to  be  highly  heterochromatic  and  abundant  in  an 
Opie-2-like retrotransposon for the ASGR in P. squamulatum 
and  throughout  the  genome  in  C.  ciliaris.  The  heterochro-
matic characteristic of the ASGR does not preclude the iden-
tification of non-transposable element coding regions (Conner 
et al., 2008) or expression of ASGR specific genes. Given the 
limited data from apomicts, it is easy to speculate a role for 
epigenetic  control  of  the  trait;  however,  final  proof  remains 
elusive.

Conclusions and Future Prospects 
for Apomixis in Crops

The study of development at the molecular level in both sex-
ual  and  apomictic  genotypes  is  vastly  expanding  our  knowl-
edge  of  the  obscured  female  gametophyte  generation  from 
spores  to  gametes.  How  the  key  events  of  apomixis,  non-
reduction,  and  parthenogenesis  have  evolved  their  regulation 
remains  unknown.  Since  the  function  of  female  expressed 
genes identified from Arabidopsis and maize is not completely 
orthologous  in  apomicts,  continued  investigation  of  genes 
expressed  in  naturally  evolved  apomicts  is  an  essential  com-
plement to the study of mutants in sexual species that express 
components  of  apomixis.  It  is  anticipated  that  knowledge 
emerging  from  the  study  of  both  sexual  and  apomictic  spe-
cies will enable the eventual development of apomictic crops 
where  hybrid  vigor  could  be  retained  through  clonal  seeds. 
Furthermore,  engineered  regulation  of  apomixis  for  condi-
tional expression would allow the outcomes of each mode of 
reproduction  to  be  accessed  to  develop  either  new  genetic 
combinations  or  clonal  genotypes  as  desired.  Apomixis  then 
would become an even more valuable tool for plant breeding 
and seed production.

Akiyama, Y., Conner, J. A., Goel, S., Morishige, 

D. T., Mullet, J. E., & Hanna, W. W., et al. 
(2004). High-resolution physical mapping in 
Pennisetum squamulatum reveals extensive 
chromosomal heteromorphism of the 
genomic region associated with apomixis. 
Plant Physiology, 134, 1733–1741.

Akiyama, Y., Hanna, W. W., & Ozias-Akins, P. 
(2005). High-resolution physical mapping 
reveals that the apospory-specific genomic 
region (ASGR) in Cenchrus ciliaris 
is located on a heterochromatic and 
hemizygous region of a single chromosome. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 111, 
1042–1051.

Albertini, E., Marconi, G., Barcaccia, G., 

Raggi, L., & Falcinelli, M. (2004). Isolation 
of candidate genes for apomixis in Poa 
pratensis L. Plant Molecular Biology, 56, 
879–894.

Albertini, E., Marconi, G., Reale, L., Barcaccia, 

G., Porceddu, A., & Ferranti, F., et al. 
(2005). SERK and APOSTART. Candidate 
genes for apomixis in Poa pratensis. Plant 
Physiology, 138, 2185–2199.

Barrell, P. J., & Grossniklaus, U. (2005). 

Confocal microscopy of whole ovules for 
analysis of reproductive development: The 
elongate1 mutant affects meiosis II. Plant 
Journal, 43, 309–320.

Bell, P. R. (1996). Megaspore abortion: 

A consequence of selective apoptosis? 
International Journal of Plant Sciences, 157, 
1–7.

Bemer, M., Wolters-Arts, M., Grossniklaus, 

U., & Angenent, G. C. (2008). The MADS 
domain protein DIANA acts together with 
AGAMOUS-LIKE80 to specify the central 
cell in Arabidopsis ovules. Plant Cell, 20, 
2088–2101.

Berr, A., & Shen, W. (2010). Molecular 

mechanisms in epigenetic regulation of 
plant growth and development. Plant 
Developmental Biology: Biotechnological 
Perspectives, 2, 325–344.

Bicknell, R., Podivinsky, E., Catanach, S., 
Erasmuson, S., & Lambie, S. (2001). 
Strategies for isolating mutants in Hieracium 
with dysfunctional apomixis. Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 14, 227–232.

Bicknell, R. A., & Koltunow, A. M. (2004). 

Understanding apomixis: Recent advances 
and remaining conundrums. Plant Cell, 16, 
S228–S245.

Boutilier, K., Offringa, R., Sharma, V. K., Kieft, 

H., Ouellet, T., & Zhang, L., et al. (2002). 
Ecotopic expression of BABY BOOM 
triggers a conversion from vegetative to 
embryonic growth. Plant Cell, 14, 1737–
1749.

251

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

Braybrook, S. A., & Harada, J. J. (2008). LECs 
go crazy in embryo development. Trends in 
Plant Science, 13, 624–630.

Braybrook, S. A., Stone, S. L., Park, S., Bui, 

A. Q., Le, B. H., & Fischer, R. L., et al. 
(2006). Genes directly regulated by LEAFY 
COTYLEDON2 provide insight into the 
control of embryo maturation and somatic 
embryogenesis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 103, 3468–3473.

Burson, B. L., Hussey, M. A., Actkinson, J. 

M., & Shafer, G. S. (2002). Effect of 
pollination time on the frequency on 2n  n 
fertilization in apomictic buffelgrass. Crop 
Science, 42, 1075–1080.

Canales, C., Bhatt, A. M., Scott, R., & 

Dickinson, H. (2002). EXS, a putative LRR 
receptor kinase, regulates male germline cell 
number and tapetal identity and promotes 
seed development in Arabidopsis. Current 
Biology, 12, 1718–1727.

Carman, J. G. (1997). Asynchronous expression 

of duplicate genes in angiosperms may 
cause apomixis, bispory, tetraspory, and 
polyembryony. Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 61, 51–94.

Caryl, A. P., Jones, G. H., & Franklin, F. C. 

H. (2003). Dissecting plant meiosis using 
Arabidopsis thaliana mutants. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 54, 25–38.

Catanach, A. S., Erasmuson, S. K., Podivinsky, 

E., Jordan, B. R., & Bicknell, R. (2006). 
Deletion mapping of genetic regions 
associated with apomixis in Hieracium. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
103, 18650–18655.

Cervigni, G. D. L., Paniego, N., Diaz, M., Selva, 

J. P., Zappacosta, D., & Zanazzi, D., et al. 
(2008). Expressed sequence tag analysis and 
development of gene associated markers in 
a near-isogenic plant system of Eragrostis 
curvula. Plant Molecular Biology, 67, 1–10.

Chen, Z. J. (2007). Genetic and epigenetic 

mechanisms for gene expression and 
phenotypic variation in plant polyploids. 
Annual Review of Plant Biology, 58, 377–
406.

Conner, J. A., Goel, S., Gunawan, G., 

Cordonnier-Pratt, M. M., Johnson, V. E., & 
Liang, C., et al. (2008). Sequence analysis of 
bacterial artificial chromosome clones from 
the apospory-specific genomic region of 
Pennisetum and Cenchrus. Plant Physiology, 
147, 1396–1411.

Curtis, M. D., & Grossniklaus, U. (2008). 

Molecular control of autonomous embryo 
and endosperm development. Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 21, 79–88.

Dickinson, H. G., & Grant-Downton, R. 
(2009). Bridging the generation gap: 
Flowering plant gametophytes and animal 
germlines reveal unexpected similarities. 
Biological Reviews, 84, 589–615.

Dunwell, J. M. (2010). Haploids in flowering 

plants: Origins and exploitation. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 8, 377–424.

d’Erfurth, I., Cromer, L., Jolivet, S., Girard, 
C., Horlow, C., & Sun, Y., et al. (2010). 
The cyclin-A CYCA1;2/TAM is required 
for the meiosis I to meiosis II transition and 
cooperates with OSD1 for the prophase 

252

to first meiotic division transition. PLoS 
Genetics, 6, e1000989.

d’Erfurth, I., Jolivet, S., Froger, N., Catrice, 

O., Novatchkova, M., & Mercier, R. (2009). 
Turning meiosis into mitosis. PLoS Biology, 
7(6), e1000124.

Evans, M. M. S. (2007). The indeterminate 

gametophyte1 gene of maize encodes a LOB 
domain protein required for embryo sac and 
leaf development. Plant Cell, 19, 46–62.
Forster, B. P., Heberle-Bors, E., Kasha, K. J., 
& Touraev, A. (2007). The resurgence of 
haploids in higher plants. Trends in Plant 
Science, 12, 368–375.

Friedman, W. E., & Ryerson, K. C. (2009). 

Reconstructing the ancestral female 
gametophyte of angiosperms: Insights 
from Amborella and other ancient lineages 
of flowering plants. American Journal of 
Botany, 96, 129–143.

Ge, L. L., Tian, H. Q., & Russell, S. D. (2007a). 

Calcium function and distribution during 
fertilization in angiosperms. American 
Journal of Botany, 94, 1046–1060.

Ge, Y., He, G. C., Wang, Z. W., Guo, D. D., 

Qin, R., & Li, R. T. (2007b). GISH and BAC-
FISH study of apomictic Beta M14. Science 
in China Series C-Life Sciences, 50, 242–250.

Gehring, M., Bubb, K. L., & Henikoff, S.  

(2009). Extensive demethylation 
of repetitive elements during seed 
development underlies gene imprinting. 
Science, 324, 1447–1451.

Goel, S., Chen, Z., Conner, J. A., Akiyama, 

Y., Hanna, W. W., & Ozias-Akins, P. (2003). 
Physical evidence that a single hemizygous 
chromosomal region is sufficient to confer 
aposporous embryo sac formation in 
Pennisetum squamulatum and Cenchrus 
ciliaris. Genetics, 163, 1069–1082.

Golubovskaya, I., Avalkina, N., & Sheridan, 

W. F. (1997). New insights into the role of 
the maize ameiotic1 locus. Genetics, 147, 
1339–1350.

Grant-Downton, R. T., & Dickinson, H. G. 

(2005). Epigenetics and its implications for 
plant biology. 1. The epigenetic network in 
plants. Annals of Botany, 96, 1143–1164.
Grant-Downton, R. T., & Dickinson, H. G. 

(2006). Epigenetics and its implications for 
plant biology 2. The “Epigenetic Epiphany”: 
Epigenetics, evolution and beyond. Annals of 
Botany, 97, 11–27.

Grimanelli, D., Hernandez, M., Perotti, E., 
& Savidan, Y. (1997). Dosage effects in 
the endosperm of diplosporous apomictic 
Tripsacum (Poaceae). Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 10, 279–282.

Grimanelli, D., Leblanc, O., Espinosa, E., 

Perotti, E., Gonzales de Leon, D., & 
Savidan, Y. (1998). Mapping diplosporous 
apomixis in tetraploid Tripsacum: One gene 
or several genes? Heredity, 80, 33–39.
Grimanelli, D., Perotti, E., Ramirez, J., & 

Leblanc, O. (2005). Timing of the maternal-
to-zygotic transition during early seed 
development in maize. Plant Cell, 17, 
1061–1072.

Gross-Hardt, R., Kagi, C., Baumann, N., 

Moore, J. M., Baskar, R., & Gagliano, W. B., 
et al. (2007). LACHESIS restricts gametic 
cell fate in the female gametophyte of 
Arabidopsis. PLoS Biology, 5, 494–500.

Gross-Hardt, R., Lenhard, M., & Laux, T. 
(2002). WUSCHEL signaling functions 
in interregional communication during 
Arabidopsis ovule development. Genes & 
Development, 16, 1129–1138.

Grossniklaus, U., Spillane, C., Page, D. R., & 

Kohler, C. (2001). Genomic imprinting and 
seed development: Endosperm formation 
with and without sex. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology, 4, 21–27.

Guan, L. M., Chen, L. Z., & Terao, H. (2007). 

Ultrastructural studies of gametophytic 
apomicts in guinea grass (Panicum 
maximum) II. Characteristics of aposporous 
initial cell-derived embryo sac. Cytologia, 
72, 145–153.

Guitton, A. E., & Berger, F. (2005). Loss of 

function of MULTICOPY SUPPRESSOR 
OF IRA 1 produces nonviable 
parthenogenetic embryos in Arabidopsis. 
Current Biology, 15, 750–754.

Haig, D., & Westoby, M. (1991). Genomic 
imprinting in endosperm – its effect on 
seed development in crosses between 
species, and between different ploidies of 
the same species, and its implications for 
the evolution of apomixis. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B, Biological Sciences, 333, 1–13.

Hecht, V., Vielle-Calzada, J. -P., Hartog, 

M. V., Schmidt, E. D. L., Boutilier, K., 
& Grossniklaus, U., et al. (2001). The 
Arabidopsis Somatic Embryogenesis 
Receptor Kinase 1 gene is expressed in 
developing ovules and embryos and enhances 
embryogenic competence in culture. Plant 
Physiology, 127, 803–816.

Hsieh, T. F., Ibarra, C. A., Silva, P., Zemach, 

A., Eshed-Williams, L., & Fischer, R. L., et 
al. (2009). Genome-wide demethylation 
of Arabidopsis endosperm. Science, 324, 
1451–1454.

Huang, B. Q., & Sheridan, W. F. (1996). Embryo 
sac development in the maize indeterminate 
gametophyte1 mutant: Abnormal nuclear 
behavior and defective microtubule 
organization. Plant Cell, 8, 1391–1407.

Huo, H. (2008). Genetic analysis of the 

apospory-specific genomic region (ASGR) 
in Pennisetum squamulatum: From mapping 
to candidate gene. 1-211. The University of 
Georgia. (GENERIC)

Kagi, C., & Gross-Hardt, R. (2007). 

How females become complex: Cell 
differentiation in the gametophyte. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 10, 633–638.

Kagi, C., & Gross-Hardt, R. (2010). Analyzing 

female gametophyte development and 
function: There is more than one way to 
crack an egg. European Journal of Cell 
Biology, 89, 258–261.

Kantama, L., Sharbel, T. F., Schranz, M. E., 

Mitchell-Olds, T., de Vries, S., & de Jong, 
H. (2007). Diploid apomicts of the Boechera 
holboellii complex display large-scale 
chromosome substitutions and aberrant 
chromosomes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 104, 14026–14031.

Kelley, D. R., & Gasser, C. S. (2009). 

Ovule development: Genetic trends and 
evolutionary considerations. Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 22, 229–234.

Kenrick, P., & Crane, P. R. (1997). The origin 

and early evolution of plants on land. 
Nature, 389, 33–39.

Kermicle, J. L. (1969). Androgenesis 

conditioned by a mutation in maize. Science, 
166, 1422–1424.

Kim, S., Soltis, P., Wall, K., & Soltis, D. (2006). 

Phylogeny and domain evolution in the 
APETALA2-like gene family. Molecular 
Biology and Evolution, 23, 107–120.
Kimber, G., & Riley, R. (1963). Haploid 

angiosperms. Botanical Review, 29, 480–531.

Koltunow, A. M., & Grossniklaus, U. (2003). 
Apomixis: A developmental perspective. 
Annual Review of Plant Biology, 54, 547–
574.

Koltunow, A. M., Johnson, S. D., & Bicknell, 

R. A. (1998). Sexual and apomictic 
development in Hieracium. Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 11, 213–230.

Koltunow, A. M., Johnson, S. D., & Bicknell, R. 
A. (2000). Apomixis is not developmentally 
conserved in related, genetically 
characterized Hieracium plants of varying 
ploidy. Sexual Plant Reproduction, 12, 
253–266.

Koltunow, A. M., Johnson, S. D., Lynch, M., 

Yoshihara, T., & Costantino, P. (2001). 
Expression of rolB in apomictic Hieracium 
piloselloides Vill causes ectopic meristems 
in planta and changes in ovule formation, 
where apomixis initiates at higher frequency. 
Planta, 214, 196–205.

Kumlehn, J., Kirik, V., Czihal, A., Altschmied, 

L., Matzk, F., & Lorz, H., et al. (2001). 
Parthenogenetic egg cells of wheat: Cellular 
and molecular studies. Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 14, 239–243.

Laspina, N. V., Vega, T., Seijo, J. G., Gonzalez, 
A. M., Martelotto, L. G., & Stein, J., et al. 
(2008). Gene expression analysis at the 
onset of aposporous apomixis in Paspalum 
notatum. Plant Molecular Biology, 67, 
615–628.

Leblanc, O., Grimanell, D., Hernandez-

Rodriguez, M., Galindo, P. A., Soriano-
Martinez, A. M., & Perotti, E. (2009). Seed 
development and inheritance studies in 
apomictic maize–Tripsacum hybrids reveal 
barriers for the transfer of apomixis into 
sexual crops. The International Journal of 
Developmental Biology, 53, 585–596.

Lin, B. Y. (1978). Structural modifications 
of female gametophyte associated with 
indeterminate-gametophyte (Ig) mutant in 
maize. Canadian Journal of Genetics and 
Cytology, 20, 249–257.

Lin, B. Y. (1984). Ploidy barrier to endosperm 

development in maize. Genetics, 107, 
103–115.

Lotan, T., Ohto, M., Yee, K. M., West, M. A. 
L., Lo, R., & Kwong, R. W., et al. (1998). 
Arabidopsis LEAFY COTYLEDON1 is 
sufficient to induce embryo development in 
vegetative cells. Cell, 93, 1195–1205.

Luo, M., Platten, D., Chaudhury, A., Peacock, 
W. J., & Dennis, E. S. (2009). Expression, 
imprinting, and evolution of rice homologs 
of the polycomb group genes. Molecular 
Plant, 2, 711–723.

Ma, J., Duncan, D., Morrow, D. J., Fernandes, 

J., & Walbot, V. (2007). Transcriptome 
profiling of maize anthers using genetic 

Regulation of apomixis

C H A P T E R   1 6

ablation to analyze pre-meiotic and tapetal 
cell types. Plant Journal, 50, 637–648.

Martienssen, R. A. (2010). Heterochromatin, 
small RNA and post-fertilization dysgenesis 
in allopolyploid and interploid hybrids of 
Arabidopsis. The New Phytologist, 186, 
46–53.

Martinez, E. J., Quarin, C. L., & Espinoza, 
F. (1994). BIII progeny (2n  n) from 
apomictic Paspalum notatum obtained 
through early pollination. The Journal of 
Heredity, 85, 295–297.

Matzk, F., Meyer, H. -M., Baumlein, H., Balzer, 

H. -J., & Schubert, I. (1995). A novel 
approach to the analysis of the initiation of 
embryo development in Gramineae. Sexual 
Plant Reproduction, 8, 266–272.

Mercier, R., & Grelon, M. (2008). Meiosis 

in plants: Ten years of gene discovery. 
Cytogenetic and Genome Research, 120, 
281–290.

Meyer, S., & Scholten, S. (2007). Equivalent 
parental contribution to early plant zygotic 
development. Current Biology, 17, 1686–
1691.

Moll, C., von Lyncker, L., Zimmermann, S., 
Kagi, C., Baumann, N., & Twell, D., et al. 
(2008). CLO/GFA1 and ATO are novel 
regulators of gametic cell fate in plants. 
Plant Journal, 56, 913–921.

Mosher, R. A., & Melnyk, C. W. (2010). siRNAs 

and DNA methylation: Seedy epigenetics. 
Trends in Plant Science, 15, 204–210.

Mu, J. Y., Tan, H. L., Zheng, Q., Fu, F. Y., 
Liang, Y., & Zhang, J. A., et al. (2008). 
LEAFY COTYLEDON1 is a key regulator of 
fatty acid biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiology, 148, 1042–1054.

Naumova, T. N., & Matzk, F. (1998). 

Differences in the initiation of the zygotic 
and parthenogenetic pathway in the Salmon 
lines of wheat: Ultrastructural studies. 
Sexual Plant Reproduction, 11, 121–130.

Naumova, T. N., & Willemse, M. T. M. 

(1995). Ultrastructural characterization of 
apospory in Panicum maximum. Sexual Plant 
Reproduction, 8, 197–204.

Nogler, G. A. (1984). Gametophytic apomixis. 

In B. M. Johri (Ed.), Embryology of 
angisoperms (pp. 475–518). Berlin: Springer.

Nonomura, K. I., Miyoshi, K., Eiguchi, M., 
Suzuki, T., Miyao, A., & Hirochika, H.,  
et al. (2003). The MSP1 gene is necessary 
to restrict the number of cells entering into 
male and female sporogenesis and to initiate 
anther wall formation in rice. Plant Cell, 15, 
1728–1739.

Nonomura, K. I., Morohoshi, A., Nakano, M., 

Eiguchi, M., Miyao, A., & Hirochika, H., 
et al. (2007). A germ cell-specific gene of 
the ARGONAUTE family is essential for 
the progression of premeiotic mitosis and 
meiosis during sporogenesis in rice. Plant 
Cell, 19, 2583–2594.

Ohme-Takagi, M., & Shinshi, H. (1995). 

Ethylene-inducible DNA binding proteins 
that interact with an ethylene-responsive 
element. Plant Cell, 7, 173–182.

Okada, T., Catanach, A. S., Johnson, S. D., 

Bicknell, R. A., & Koltunow, A. M. (2007). 
An Hieracium mutant, loss of apomeiosis 
1 (loa1) is defective in the initiation of 

apomixis. Sexual Plant Reproduction, 20, 
199–211.

Olmedo-Monfil, V., Duran-Figueroa, N., 

Orteaga-Vazquez, M., mesa-Arevalo, E., 
Autran, D., & Grimanelli, D., et al. (2010). 
Control of female gamete formation by a 
small RNA pathway in Arabidopsis. Nature, 
464, 628–632.

Ozias-Akins, P., Akiyama, Y., & Hanna, W. 

W. (2003). Molecular characterization of 
the genomic region linked with apomixis 
in Pennisetum/Cenchrus. Functional & 
Integrative Genomics, 3, 94–104.

Ozias-Akins, P., & van Dik, P. J. (2007). 

Mendelian genetics of apomixis in plants. 
Annual Review of Genetics, 41, 509–537.

Pagnussat, G. C., Alandete-Saez, M., 

Bowman, J. L., & Sundaresan, V. (2009). 
Auxin-dependent patterning and gamete 
specification in the Arabidopsis female 
gametophyte. Science, 324, 1684–1689.
Passarinho, P., Ketelaar, T., Xing, M. Q., van 
Arkel, J., Maliepaard, C., & Hendriks, M. 
W., et al. (2008). BABY BOOM target 
genes provide diverse entry points into cell 
proliferation and cell growth pathways. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 68, 225–237.

Pawlowski, W. P., Wang, C. J. R., Golubovskaya, 

I. N., Szymaniak, J. M., Shi, L., & Hamant, 
O., et al. (2009). Maize AMEIOTIC1 is 
essential for multiple early meiotic processes 
and likely required for the initiation 
of meiosis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 106, 3603–3608.

Peel, M. D., Carman, J. G., & Leblanc, O. 

(1997). Megasporocyte callose in apomictic 
buffelgrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Pennisetum 
squamulatum Fresen, Tripsacum L, and 
weeping lovegrass. Crop Science, 37, 
724–732.

Peng, X. B., & Sun, M. X. (2008). Gamete 
recognition in higher plants: An abstruse 
but charming mystery. Journal of Integrative 
Plant Biology, 50, 868–874.

Pillot, M., Baroux, C., Vazquez, M. A., Autran, 

D., Leblanc, O., & Vielle-Calzada, J. P.,  
et al. (2010). Embryo and endosperm inherit 
distinct chromatin and transcriptional states 
from the female gametes in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Cell, 22, 307–320.

Polegri, L., Calderini, O., Arcioni, S., & Pupilli, 

F. (2010). Specific expression of apomixis-
linked alleles revealed by comparative 
transcriptomic analysis of sexual and 
apomictic Paspalum simplex Morong flowers. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 1869–
1883.

Pupilli, F., Labombarda, P., Caceres, M. E., 
Quarin, C. L., & Arcioni, S. (2001). The 
chromosome segment related to apomixis 
in Paspalum simplex is homoeologous to 
the telomeric region of the long arm of rice 
chromosome 12. Molecular Breeding, 8, 
53–61.

Qiu, Y. L., Liu, R. S., Xie, C. T., Russell, S. D., 

& Tian, H. Q. (2008). Calcium changes 
during megasporogenesis and megaspore 
degeneration in lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.). 
Sexual Plant Reproduction, 21, 197–204.
Ravi, M., Marimuthu, M. P. A., & Siddiqi, I. 

(2008). Gamete formation without meiosis 
in Arabidopsis. Nature, 451, 1121–1U10.

253

(1996). The mac1 gene: Controlling the 
commitment to the meiotic pathway in 
maize. Genetics, 142, 1009–1020.

Siddiqi, I., Ganesh, G., Grossniklaus, U., 

& Subbiah, V. (2000). The dyad gene is 
required for progression through female 
meiosis in Arabidopsis. Development, 127, 
197–207.

Sieber, P., Gheyselinck, J., Gross-Hardt, R., 

Laux, T., Grossniklaus, U., & Schneitz, 
K. (2004). Pattern formation during early 
ovule development in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Developmental Biology, 273, 321–334.
Skinner, D. J., Hill, T. A., & Gasser, C. S. 

(2004). Regulation of ovule development. 
Plant Cell, 16, S32–S45.

Slotkin, R. K., Vaughn, M., Borges, F., 

Tanurdzic, M., Becker, J. D., & Feijo, J. A., 
et al. (2009). Epigenetic reprogramming 
and small RNA silencing of transposable 
elements in pollen. Cell, 136, 461–472.

Snyder, L. A., Hernandez, A. R., & Warmke, H. 

E. (1955). The mechanism of apomixis in 
Pennisetum ciliare. Botanical Gazette, 116, 
209–221.

Steffen, J. G., Kang, I. H., Portereiko, M. F., 

Lloyd, A., & Drews, G. N. (2008). AGL61 
interacts with AGL80 and is required for 
central cell development in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Physiology, 148, 259–268.

Stone, S. L., Braybrook, S. A., Paula, S. L., 

Kwong, L. W., Meuser, J., & Pelletier, 
J., et al. (2008). Arabidopsis LEAFY 
COTYLEDON2 induces maturation traits 
and auxin activity: Implications for somatic 
embryogenesis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 105, 3151–3156.

Su, Y. H., Zhao, X. Y., Liu, Y. B., Zhang, C. 

L., O'Neill, S. D., & Zhang, X. S. (2009). 
Auxin-induced WUS expression is essential 
for embryonic stem cell renewal during 
somatic embryogenesis in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Journal, 59, 448–460.

Tucker, M. R., Araujo, A. C. G., Paech, 

N. A., Hecht, V., Schmidt, E. D. L., & 
Rossell, J. B., et al. (2003). Sexual and 
apomictic reproduction in Hieracium 
subgenus Pilosella are closely interrelated 
developmental pathways. Plant Cell, 15, 
1524–1537.

Vielle, J. P., Burson, B. L., Bashaw, E. C., & 
Hussey, M. A. (1995). Early fertilization 
events in the sexual and aposporous egg 
apparatus of Pennisetum ciliare (L.) Link. 
Plant Journal, 8, 309–316.

Vielle-Calzada, J. P., Baskar, R., & Grossniklaus, 

U. (2000). Delayed activation of the 
paternal genome during seed development. 
Nature, 404, 91–94.

Weigel, D. (1995). The APETALA2 domain 
is related to a novel type of DNA binding 
domain. Plant Cell, 7, 388–389.

Weijers, D., & Jurgens, G. (2005). Auxin and 
embryo axis formation: The end’s in sight? 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 8, 32–37.
Wen, X. S., Ye, X. L., Li, Y. Q., Chen, Z. L., & 
Xu, S. X. (1998). Embryological studies on 
apomixis in Pennisetum squamulatum. Acta 
Botanica Sinica, 40, 598–604.

Wuest, S. E., Vijverberg, K., Schmidt, A., 

Weiss, M., Gheyselinck, J., & Lohr, M.,  
et al. (2010). Arabidopsis female 
gametophyte gene expression map reveals 
similarities between plant and animal 
gametes. Current Biology, 20, 506–512.

Yadegari, R., & Drews, G. N. (2004). Female 
gametophyte development. Plant Cell, 16, 
S133–S141.

Yamada-Akiyama, H., Takahara, M., Kikuchi, S., 

Takamiza, T., Nakagawa, H., & Sugita, S. i., 
et al. (2009). Analysis of expressed sequence 
tags in apomictic guineagrass (Panicum 
maximum). Journal of Plant Physiology, 166, 
750–761.

Yang, W. C., Ye, D., Xu, J., & Sundaresan, V. 
(1999). The SPOROCYTELESS gene of 
Arabidopsis is required for initiation of 
sporogenesis and encodes a novel nuclear 
protein. Genes & Development, 13, 2108–
2117.

Zeng Y. J. (2009). Identification and 

characterization of apospory candidate 
genes in Pennisetum and Cenchrus. 1–162. 
Ph.D. Thesis, The University of Georgia. 
(GENERIC)

Zhao, X. A., de Palma, J., Oane, R., Gamuyao, 
R., Luo, M., & Chaudhury, A., et al. (2008). 
OsTDL1A binds to the LRR domain of rice 
receptor kinase MSP1, and is required to 
limit sporocyte numbers. Plant Journal, 54, 
375–387.

Zheng, Y. M., Ren, N., Wang, H., Stromberg, 

A. J., & Perry, S. E. (2009). Global 
identification of targets of the Arabidopsis 
MADS domain protein AGAMOUS-Like15. 
Plant Cell, 21, 2563–2577.

Zuo, J. R., Niu, Q. W., Frugis, G., & Chua, N. 
H. (2002). The WUSCHEL gene promotes 
vegetative-to-embryonic transition in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 30, 349–359.

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

Rhoades, M. M., & Dempsey, E. (1966). 
Induction of chromosome doubling at 
meiosis by elongate gene in maize. Genetics, 
54, 505–522.

Rodrigues, J. C. M., Cabral, G. B., Dusi, D. 
M. A., de Mello, L. V., Rigden, D. J., & 
Carneiro, V. T. C. (2003). Identification of 
differentially expressed cDNA sequences 
in ovaries of sexual and apomictic plants 
of Brachiaria brizantha. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 53, 745–757.

Rodrigues, J. C. M., Tucker, M. R., Johnson, 

S. D., Hrmova, M., & Koltunow, A. M. 
G. (2008). Sexual and apomictic seed 
formation in Hieracium requires the plant 
polycomb-group gene FERTILIZATION 
INDEPENDENT ENDOSPERM. Plant 
Cell, 20, 2372–2386.

Rodrigues J. C. M., Okada T., Johnson S. D. and 

Koltunow A. M. (2010) A MULTICOPY 
SUPPRESSOR OF IRA1 (MSI1) homologue 
is not associated with the switch to 
autonomous seed development in apomictic 
(asexual) Hieracium plants. Plant Science, 
(in press).

Schallau, A., Arzenton, F., Johnston, A. J., 

Hahnel, U., Koszegi, D., & Blattner, F. R.,  
et al. (2010). Identification and genetic 
analysis of the APOSPORY locus in 
Hypericum perforatum L. Plant Journal, 62, 
773–784.

Schiefthaler, U., Balasubramanian, S., Sieber, 

P., Chevalier, D., Wisman, E., & Schneitz, K. 
(1999). Molecular analysis of NOZZLE, a 
gene involved in pattern formation and early 
sporogenesis during sex organ development 
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 96, 11664–11669.

Schmidt, E. D. L., Guzzo, F., Toonen, M. A. 

J., & De Vries, S. C. (1997). A leucine-
rich repeat containing receptor-like kinase 
marks somatic plant cells competent to form 
embryos. Development, 124, 2049–2062.

Sharbel, T. F., Voigt, M. L., Corral, J. M., Galla, 
G., Kumlehn, J., & Klukas, C., et al. (2010). 
Apomictic and sexual ovules of Boechera 
display heterochronic global gene expression 
patterns. Plant Cell, 22, 655–671.

Sharbel, T. F., Voigt, M. L., Corral, J. M., 

Thiel, T., Varshney, A., & Kumlehn, J., et al. 
(2009). Molecular signatures of apomictic 
and sexual ovules in the Boechera holboellii 
complex. Plant Journal, 58, 870–882.

Sheridan, W. F., Avalkina, N. A., Shamrov, I. 
I., Batygina, T. B., & Golubovskaya, I. N. 

254

Marker-assisted selection in plant 
breeding

11

Giora Ben-Ari 
Institute of Horticulture, The Volcani Center ARO, Bet-Dagan, Israel

 Uri Lavi 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Background   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 163
The concept of marker-assisted selection . . . . . . . . .  163
Historical review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  164

Plant Traits, DNA Markers, Technologies,  
and Applications  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 164
Genes controlling important traits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  164
DNA markers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  165
Modern genotyping technologies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  168
Identification of genes controlling  
commercially important traits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  170
Application of DNA markers to breeding . . . . . . . . . .  173
MAS in breeding programs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  174
Discussion   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 176
Bottlenecks and difficulties in the application of MAS . . 176
Future prospects of application of genetic  
variations to breeding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  177
Acknowledgment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 178

Background

The concept of marker-assisted selection

The  concept  of  marker-assisted  selection  (MAS)  was  sug-
gested 25 years ago by C. Smith and P. Simpson (1986) and 
by Soller and Beckmann (1983; see more details in the next 
section).  The  idea  was  that:  “It  is  unlikely  that  many  of  the 
polymorphisms  identified  by  the  new  laboratory  techniques 
will  be  the  QTL  themselves.  However,  many  of  them  may 
be  linked  to  the  QTL  and  so  will  allow  indirect  selection.” 
Following  the  discovery  of  restriction  fragment  length  poly-
morphism  (RFLP;  Botstein  et  al.,  1980)  and  other  kinds  of 
DNA markers (see the following section), it was assumed that 

classical  plant  breeding  (as  well  as  animal  breeding)  would 
experience  a  major  revolution,  in  that  most  of  the  selection 
would not be carried out on the basis of the phenotypes (the 
performance in the field), but would depend significantly on 
markers genetically linked to the genes of interest. This con-
cept is also known in the literature as marker-assisted breed-
ing  (MAB).  In  this  chapter  we  will  use  the  term  MAS.  The 
practice of MAS relies upon a situation of linkage disequilib-
rium (LD; for explanation see the section Classical Methods 
of  Gene  Identification),  which  exists  between  the  DNA 
marker and a specific gene (quantitative trait locus; QTL). LD 
can  be  exploited  by  selection  as  if  the  effects  are  caused  by 
the marker.

The advantages of MAS results from the fact that many of 
the traits of interest to breeders are not easily assessed. Thus, 
selection,  which  is  based  on  linked  DNA  markers,  is  much 
more efficient. Selection based on markers can be carried out 
at  an  early  age  (plantlets);  therefore,  it  has  the  potential  to 
significantly reduce the number of individuals assessed by the 
breeder,  thus  reducing  costs.  MAS  has  greater  potential  for 
efficient  gene  pyramiding;  namely,  combining  several  impor-
tant  genes  in  one  cultivar.  At  the  same  time  MAS  does  not 
reduce the time of the breeding project because the selected 
plants need to be tested and evaluated in the field. The length 
of the evaluation process depends mainly on the length of the 
juvenile period of each species.

The  prerequisites  for  the  classical  procedure  of  MAS  are 
the  DNA  markers  (see  the  following  sections)  and  linkage 
analysis,  which  will  identify  markers  that  are  linked  to  the 
genes controlling the trait(s) of interest. It is noteworthy that 
the “quality” and the number of markers have a major impact 
on the success of MAS. The quality of markers relates to their 
characteristics and to the cost and the efficiency of the geno-
typing process. The number of markers affects the reliability 
of the linkage between them and the gene(s). In other words, 
screening a large number of markers has the potential to iden-
tify  close  and  reliable  linkage  between  the  marker  and  the 
gene of interest.

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00011-0

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Linkage  analysis  is  basically  aimed  at  determining  the  link-
age between sequence variation (specific DNA markers) and a 
specific phenotype. The details of such analyses can be found 
elsewhere  (Martin  et  al.,  1993,  1994;  Okada  et  al.,  2010; 
Udagawa  et  al.,  2010;  Yang  et  al.,  2010)  and  will  not  be  dis-
cussed here. Cost-benefit analysis is required, because for some 
traits it may be cheaper and more efficient to rely upon pheno-
typic selection rather than on MAS. It is essential to emphasize 
that  MAS  must  be  carried  out  in  family  structures  (progeny 
of known crosses) where there is significant LD in one or two 
generations. It is essential to emphasize that any identification 
of linkage between markers and genes of interest must be veri-
fied before application in a breeding project. We will distinguish 
between  applications  of  MAS  to  traits  that  are  controlled  by 
single  genes  versus  quantitative  traits  that  are  controlled  by  a 
number of genes. Due to the similarities between the search for 
markers  for  human  diseases  and  the  search  for  markers  asso-
ciated  with  agricultural  traits,  we  will  include  examples  from 
human  genetics.  Many  reviews  have  described  MAS  princi-
ples and applications (Collard et al., 2008; Collins et al., 2008; 
Neil et al., 2009; Varshney and Dubey, 2009; Xu et al., 2009; 
Varshney et al., 2009a; Thomson et al., 2010; Varshney, 2010; 
Xu, 2010). In this review we would like to discuss MAS in a 
very  broad  sense;  namely  to  discuss  various  technologies  that 
are  based  on  DNA  variations  and  that  have  the  potential  to 
improve classical breeding.

The  topics  to  be  covered  in  this  chapter  include:  a  his-
torical  review  of  MAS;  identification  of  genes  controlling 
the  important  agricultural  traits;  a  description  of  the  major 
technological tools used in MAS (emphasizing their pros and 
cons); a description of modern genotyping technologies; vari-
ous  applications  of  DNA  markers  in  plant  breeding;  modern 
methods for identification of genes controlling important agri-
cultural traits; actual applications of MAS in commercial plant 
breeding  programs;  difficulties  in  the  application  of  MAS  to 
plant breeding programs; and finally, future prospects of new 
technologies that identify sequence variation.

Historical review

Intuitive  phenotypic  selection  of  domesticated  species  has 
been practiced by farmers for thousands of years with cumu-
latively rewarding results. In recent years, however, MAS has 
emerged  as  a  strategy  for  dramatically  increasing  selection 
gains. Sax (1923) showed in the early twentieth century that 
an observable gene having simple Mendelian inheritance could 
act as a marker for the segregation of a gene involved in the 
expression  of  a  quantitative  trait.  About  60  years  later,  fol-
lowing the discovery of RFLPs (Botstein et al., 1980), the first 
DNA  marker  map  consisting  of  57  RFLP  markers  was  con-
structed for tomatoes (Bernatzky and Tanksley, 1986).

The use of DNA markers for the purposes of selection in 
breeding  programs  was  first  suggested  by  Neimann-Sorensen 
and  Robertson  (1961),  Smith  (1967),  Soller  (1978),  and 
Stuber  et  al.  (1982).  Tanksley  et  al.  (1981)  published  the 
first MAS experimental study with plants and suggested that 
isozyme  selection  could  precede  morphological  selection  in 
tomatoes,  but  not  replace  it.  The  number  of  studies  aimed 

164

at  establishing  genetic  markers  linked  to  important  pheno-
typic  traits  has  increased  rapidly,  and  has  virtually  exploded 
since the publication of the first use of DNA markers (RFLP) 
for  the  analysis  of  quantitative  traits  in  tomatoes  (Paterson 
et  al.,  1988).  These  studies  dealt  with  both  theoretical  and 
applied  aspects  of  the  application  of  DNA  markers  (Lander 
and  Botstein,  1989;  Lande  and  Thompson,  1990;  Zhang  and 
Smith, 1992; Dudley, 1993; Gimelfarb and Lande, 1994; Lee, 
1995; Hospital and Charcosset, 1997; Whittaker et al., 1997). 
as well as experimental studies of MAS (Fatokun et al., 1992; 
Meksem et al., 1995; Austin and Lee, 1996; Peterhansel et al., 
1997). A recent search of the ISI Web of Knowledge (www
.isiwebofknowledge.com) yielded 3385 references to “Marker 
Assisted  Selection.”  The  number  of  publications  per  year  on 
this subject expanded from two publications in 1989 to 496 
papers in 2010.

Young  (1999)  expressed  some  caution  in  his  optimistic 
vision of MAS by saying: “Even though marker-assisted selec-
tion  now  plays  a  prominent  role  in  the  field  of  plant  breed-
ing,  examples  of  successful,  practical  outcomes  are  rare.” 
Limited availability of markers and efficient genotyping meth-
odologies  were  among  the  main  limitations  in  the  practical 
application  of  QTL  studies.  Technical  developments  such  as 
high-throughput sequencing technologies have overcome some 
of these limitations, and the last decade has witnessed numer-
ous  QTL  detection  experiments  in  various  species.  The  first 
fully described plant gene responsible for a quantitative trait 
was the QTL fw2.2 controlling fruit size in tomato. This gene 
was  mapped  by  analysis  of  recombinants,  cosmid  comple-
mentation, and genomic sequencing, and identified the OFRX 
gene  as  the  underlying  gene  (Frary  et  al.,  2000).  To  date, 
more than 2500 studies on QTL mapping in plants have been 
published.  Yet,  Young’s  (1999)  optimistic  vision  has  still  not 
become a reality, and breeding programs based on DNA mark-
ers for improving quantitative traits in plants are rare.

Plant Traits, DNA Markers, 
Technologies, and Applications

Genes controlling important traits

The  interest  of  breeders  in  MAS  is  focused  mainly  on  the 
important  traits  including  tolerance  to  biotic  and  abiotic 
stresses as well as agronomic (or horticultural) traits.

MAS for biotic stresses
Numerous  pathogens  attack  plants,  including  viruses,  bacte-
ria,  nematodes,  and  fungi.  Considerable  effort  is  required  to 
determine pathogenic mechanisms and to identify host plant 
genes that confer resistance. These mechanisms are under the 
control of dominant or recessive major genes or QTLs. DNA 
markers  are  used  to  identify  resistance  genes  and  for  their 
introgression and pyramiding into new cultivars. Plant disease 
resistance genes (R-genes) play a key role in recognizing pro-
teins  expressed  by  specific  avirulence  (Avr)  genes  in  patho-
gens.  Different  techniques  have  been  developed  to  identify 
R-genes,  and  to  date  a  total  of  73  have  been  isolated  from 

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

22  plant  species,  most  of  them  from  the  Solanaceae  family. 
These  have  been  found  to  interact  with  31  different  patho-
gens  (Sanseverino  et  al.,  2010).  Examples  of  characterized 
R-genes are the ASC1 gene conferring resistance to the patho-
gen Alternaria alternata, which causes the disease Alternaria 
stem  canker  (Brandwagt  et  al.,  2000),  and  the  broad-spec-
trum  mildew  resistance  gene  RPW8  in  Arabidopsis  thaliana 
(Xiao et al., 2001).

However,  not  all  disease  resistance  traits  are  monogenic. 
Some types of resistance behave as quantitative traits and are 
controlled by multiple genes. An example of this type of dis-
ease is caused by filamentous fungi of the Fusarium species that 
are widely distributed in soil. Numerous Fusarium species have 
been  associated  with  Fusarium  head  blight  (FHB)  in  wheat 
(Triticum  aestivum),  barley  (Hordeum  vulgare),  and  other 
small-grain cereals (Parry et al., 1995). The most prevalent spe-
cies of this pathogen are Fusarium graminearum, F. culmorum, 
and  F.  avenaceum  (Walter  et  al.,  2010).  Apart  from  losses  in 
grain yield and seed quality, the major damage caused by FHB 
is the contamination of the crop with toxic secondary metabo-
lites of the fungus, known as mycotoxins. More than 100 QTLs 
for  FHB  resistance  have  been  reported  in  wheat  (Buerstmayr 
et  al.,  2009),  but  few  of  them  have  been  validated.  Among 
those  validated  QTLs,  Fhb1  has  been  found  to  have  a  major 
effect  on  FHB  resistance  and  can  be  mapped  as  a  single 
Mendelian gene with high precision. Thus, for the purposes of 
MAS, Fhb1 is the diagnostic marker (Pumphrey et al., 2007).

MAS for abiotic stress
Abiotic  stress  is  defined  as  the  negative  impact  of  non-living 
factors  on  living  organisms  in  a  specific  environment.  The 
stresses  include  drought,  salinity,  low  or  high  temperatures, 
and other environmental extremes. Abiotic stresses, especially 
hypersalinity and drought, are the primary causes of crop loss 
worldwide.  In  contrast  to  plant  resistance  to  biotic  stresses, 
which  mostly  depends  on  monogenic  traits,  the  genetically 
complex responses to abiotic stresses are multigenic and thus 
more difficult to identify, control, and manipulate.

To  date,  27  drought-resistant  cultivars/lines  of  different 
crops  have  been  registered  in  Crop  Science  or  reported  in 
other  sources.  These  crops  included  peanut,  common  bean, 
sunflower,  chickpea,  wheat,  tall  fescue,  wheatgrass,  barley, 
and maize (Ashraf, 2010). QTL mapping of drought tolerance 
has been carried out for various crops including maize, wheat, 
barley, cotton, sorghum, and rice (Quarrie et al., 1994; Teulat 
et  al.,  1997;  Sari-Gorla  et  al.,  1999;  Saranga  et  al.,  2001; 
Sanchez et al., 2002; Bernier et al., 2008; Chin et al., 2010; 
Nevo and Chen, 2010).

Due to inappropriate irrigation regimes and the wider use 
of  brackish  water  for  irrigation,  areas  devastated  by  second-
ary  salinization  are  increasing.  To  cope  with  this  escalating 
problem,  efforts  are  being  made  to  enhance  salt  tolerance 
of  economically  important  crops.  QTLs  for  salt  tolerance  or 
related physiological traits have been reported in A. thaliana 
(Quesada et al., 2002), barley (Ellis et al., 1997, 2002; Mano 
and  Takeda,  1997),  citrus  (Tozlu  et  al.,  1999),  rice  (Flowers 
et  al.,  2000;  Prasad  et  al.,  2000;  Koyama  et  al.,  2001;  Lin  
et al., 2004; Ren et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2006), soybean (Lee 

et al., 2004), tomato (Foolad et al., 1998, 2001; Villalta et al., 
2007,  2008),  wheat  (Ma  et  al.,  2007;  Quarrie  et  al.,  2005), 
and  white  clover  (Wang  et  al.,  2010).  However,  despite  the 
extensive  research  on  the  salt  response  in  various  crops, 
genetically engineered salt-tolerant cultivars (with few excep-
tions like the transgenic wheat expressing a vacuolar Na/H 
antiporter  gene,  AtNHX1  from  A.  thaliana,  with  improved 
grain  yields  in  saline  soils;  Xue  et  al.,  2004)  have  not  been 
successfully tested under natural field conditions (Ashraf and 
Akram, 2009).

MAS for agronomic traits
Nearly  100  genes  and  functional  polymorphisms  under-
lying  natural  variation  in  plant  development  and  physiol-
ogy  have  been  identified.  In  crop  plants  these  include  genes 
involved in domestication traits, such as those related to the 
timing  of  germination  and  flowering,  plant  architecture,  and 
fruit  and  seed  structure  and  morphology,  as  well  as  yield 
and  quality  traits  (Alonso-Blanco  et  al.,  2009).  For  example: 
DELAY  OF  GERMINATION  1  (DOG1)  induces  seed  dor-
mancy and is specifically expressed during seed development 
(Alonso-Blanco  et  al.,  2003).  In  addition,  it  has  been  shown 
that  a  DOG1  functional  nucleotide  polymorphism  affects 
its  expression,  and  dormant  seeds  have  higher  RNA  levels 
than non-dormant ones (Bentsink et al., 2006). It was shown 
that  DOG1  plays  a  role  in  the  germination  of  non-dormant 
seeds  such  as  Lepidium  sativum  and  Brassica  rapa  of  the 
Brassicaceae family (Graeber et al., 2010).

Nine  genes  contributing  to  the  variation  in  the  flowering 
time of A. thaliana have been isolated (Alonso-Blanco et al., 
2009).  Among  these  are:  FRIGIDA  (FRI),  FRIGIDA  LIKE1 
(FRL1), FRIGIDA LIKE2 (FRL2), FLOWERING LOCUS C 
(FLC), and others. In contrast, analysis of variability in flow-
ering  time  in  maize  showed  no  evidence  of  any  QTL  having 
a  major  effect  on  this  trait.  Instead,  numerous  small-effect 
QTLs  were  identified  (Buckler  et  al.,  2009).  More  than  20 
loci  having  a  major  effect  on  plant  architecture  have  been 
identified  and,  in  many  instances,  linked  to  genes  encoding 
transcription factors (Alonso-Blanco et al., 2009).

A large number of studies have focused on the genetic basis 
of  positive  heterosis  or  hybrid  vigor.  Heterosis  is  observed 
in  many  hybrids  and  is  a  major  plant  breeding  objective. 
Numerous QTLs with different levels of dominance, overdomi-
nance, and epistatic effects have been mapped for heterosis in 
maize  (Frascaroli  et  al.,  2007),  rice  (Li  et  al.,  2001),  tomato 
(Semel et al., 2006), rapeseed (B. napus; Radoev et al., 2008), 
and A. thaliana (Kusterer et al., 2007; Melchinger et al., 2007). 
Heterosis  in  tomato  yield  and  Brix  value  (sugar  content)  has 
recently  been  nicely  demonstrated  by  Krieger  et  al.  (2010). 
They  reported  that  heterozygosity  for  tomato  loss-of-function 
alleles of SINGLE FLOWER TRUSS (SFT) increases yields by 
up to 60% and Brix by about 30%. This effect was repeated in 
distinct genetic backgrounds and environments.

DNA markers

Genetic variation (and mainly phenotypic variation) has been a 
focus of interest and research for a long time. The discovery of 

165

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

RFLP  by  Botstein  et  al.  (1980)  revolutionized  this  field  since 
it  first  allowed  a  quantitative,  accurate,  genome-wide  assess-
ment of polymorphisms at the DNA level. Ever since, numer-
ous  classes  of  DNA  markers  have  been  developed  and  have 
been the subject of many reviews (Masojc, 2002; Collard et al., 
2008; Appleby et al., 2009; Barone et al., 2009; Gailing et al., 
2009; Varshney et al., 2009b; Edwards and Batley, 2010). DNA 
markers are the tools for MAS in plants, animals, humans, and 
other  organisms.  In  this  chapter  we  will  discuss  only  a  few 
important  classes  of  these  markers  that  have  been  applied  to 
plants, emphasizing their advantages and disadvantages.

It  is  noteworthy  that  many  of  these  DNA  markers  were 
discovered  and  developed  in  humans  and  then  applied  to 
plants based on their general characteristics. Development of 
tens of classes of markers resulted from the desire to improve 
these tools using new technologies, as well as from the crea-
tivity of various scientists.

The ideal DNA marker should be: (1) highly polymorphic 
(as  assessed  by  the  number  of  alleles  in  the  population)  to 
have  the  potential  to  identify  the  analyzed  phenotypes;  (2) 
highly  abundant  and  uniformly  distributed  in  the  genome  to 
have  the  potential  to  identify  tight  linkage  between  markers 
and  the  genes  of  interest  and  to  construct  saturated  genetic 
maps; (3) co-dominant (the ability to distinguish the hetero-
zygote) to link the marker allele to a specific allele of the gene 
controlling  the  phenotype  of  interest;  and  (4)  easy  to  geno-
type, which is the ability to genotype large numbers of indi-
viduals in a large number of marker loci at a reasonable price 
(see the section Genome-wide association studies).

DNA markers are indirect alternatives for whole genome 
sequence  since  full  sequencing  of  many  genotypes  in  each 
study  is  not  yet  feasible.  However,  major  developments 
have been made and seven green plant species (A. thaliana, 

Table 11.1  Major characteristics of the various DNA markers

Glycine max, Oryza sativa, Physcomitrella patens, Populus 
trichocarpa, Sorghum bicolor, and Vitis vinifera) have been 
fully sequenced and quite a number of other species are in 
the process of being sequenced. Moreover, efforts are being 
invested in the development and improvement of sequenc-
ing  methodologies,  thus,  it  is  expected  that  the  DNA 
sequence of many other species will soon be available. The 
characteristics of the various DNA markers are summarized 
in Table 11.1.

Restriction fragment length polymorphism
RFLP was developed by Botstein et al. (1980).

Genotyping technology: DNA is cut with a restriction 
enzyme, the resulting fragments are size separated on an 
agarose gel, blotted onto a membrane, hybridized, and 
exposed to a labeled probe. Specific probes are usually 
generated from genomic or c-DNA libraries.
Genotyping: Each band represents an allele having a specific 
size in base pairs (bp).
Source of polymorphism: Existence or absence of a 
restriction site.
Characteristics: An RFLP marker usually has two alleles at 
each locus and thus has a low level of polymorphism.
The number of available RFLP loci in plants varies between 
tens to a few thousands. RFLPs are single locus markers and 
their  mode  of  inheritance  is  co-dominant.  The  genotyping 
technology  is  rather  complicated  (including  restriction,  gel 
electrophoresis, blotting, hybridization, and exposure of X-ray 
film); therefore, the actual number of analyzed RFLP loci var-
ies between tens to a few hundreds. RFLP was the first DNA 
marker  discovered  and  thus  the  drive  for  the  development 

Number of 
detected loci

Source of 
polymorphism

Level of 
polymorphism

Dominance

Abundance

References

Low

Low

Co-dominant

Medium

Dominant

Low

Botstein et al. 
(1980)

Welsh and 
McClelland(1990); 
Williams et al. 
(1990)

Dominant

Medium

Vos et al. (1995)

Low (for each 
band) but one 
reaction detects 
many loci

Very high

Co-dominant

Medium

Litt and Luty 
(1989); Edwards 
et al. (1991)

Co-dominant

Very high

Rafalski (2002)

Low for each 
locus, but high for 
high-throughput 
genotyping

Laboratory 
technique

Southern blot; 
agarose gel

Single locus

Point mutation (in a 
restriction site)

PCR; agarose gel

Multiloci

PCR; acrylamide 
gel

Multiloci

PCR; acrylamide 
gel

Single locus

Primer extension; 
chips

Single locus

Point mutation 
(affecting the 
annealing of the 
primer)

Point mutation 
(mainly in a 
restriction site)

Variation in the 
number of the 
repeats

Point mutation 
(with sequence 
information)

DNA marker

RFLP

RAPD

AFLP

SSR

SNP

166

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

of  the  MAS  concept.  Many  studies  have  applied  RFLP  over 
the years (Paterson et al., 1988, 1991; Tanksley et al., 1992; 
Martin et al., 1993; Wing et al., 1994). However, lately, due 
to  the  aforementioned  disadvantages  of  this  marker,  other 
DNA  markers  have  become  more  popular.  It  is  notewor-
thy  that  RFLP  is  still  applied  to  studies  of  synteny  due  to 
its  ability  to  genotype  various  species  that  are  genetically 
close  (Moore  et  al.,  1995a,b;  Devos  and  Gale,  1997,  2000; 
Gebhardt et al., 2003; Srinivasachary et al., 2007).

Random amplified polymorphic DNA
Random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) markers were 
developed  and  applied  in  plants  (Welsh  and  McClelland, 
1990; Williams et al., 1990).

Genotyping technology: Total DNA is amplified using short 
single (10 nucleotides) random primers in PCR and the 
resulting fragments are size separated on an ethidium 
bromide stained agarose gel.
Genotyping: The banding pattern is transformed onto a 
1/0 matrix to determine the existence or absence of each 
band.
Source of polymorphism: Homology between the primer 
and the template DNA results in the existence of a certain 
band. Any mutation that prevents the hybridization of a 
primer to the template DNA at a certain locus results in 
the absence of this band.
Characteristics: RAPD usually has two alleles at each locus 
(existence or absence of a certain band).
The  number  of  RAPD  loci  used  for  the  analyses  of  plant 
genomes  varies  between  several  tens  to  several  hundreds. 
(Note: although the number of short, random, 10 base prim-
ers  is  high,  most  of  them  are  not  polymorphic).  RAPD  are 
multilocus  markers  and  their  mode  of  inheritance  is  domi-
nant.  The  genotyping  technology  is  very  simple  (the  major 
advantage of this system), therefore, RAPD has become very 
popular in many laboratories. The main disadvantages of this 
system  are  low  level  of  polymorphism,  dominant  mode  of 
inheritance  that  is  less  suitable  for  MAS,  and  low  reliability. 
RAPD  primers  are  shorter  than  regular  PCR  primers  (which 
are  about  16–22  nucleotides)  in  order  to  detect  polymor-
phism. On the other hand, the short (10 nucleotide) primers 
result in very “sensitive” PCRs and as a result repeated PCR 
results  are  not  always  identical..  Many  studies  have  applied 
RAPD for various goals (Paran et al., 1991; Reiter et al., 1992; 
Adamblondon et al., 1994; Xue et al., 2010).

Amplified fragment length polymorphism
Amplified  fragment  length  polymorphism  (AFLP)  markers 
were developed by Keygene (Vos et al., 1995).

Genotyping technology: Total DNA (or c-DNA) is 
restricted by both a “4 cutter” (a restriction enzyme whose 
restriction site contains 4 bp) and a “6 cutter.” Specific 
universal adaptors homologous to the specific restriction 
sites are then ligated to the resulting DNA fragments. 
Restriction and ligation are carried out simultaneously 
in one reaction making the procedure easy to perform. 
The resulting fragments flanked by a pair of primers 

are amplified by PCR using primers homologous to the 
universal primers. To decrease the number of fragments, 
a second PCR with primers elongated at their 3 end 
by 1–3 random nucleotides is carried out. During the 
latter PCR the primers of the amplified fragments are 
labeled radioactively or by fluorescent dye. The amplified 
fragments are size separated on a sequencing acrylamide 
gel. The AFLP banding pattern can also be generated on a 
DNA sequencer.
Genotyping: The band pattern is transformed onto a 1/0 
matrix to determine the existence or absence of each band.
Source of polymorphism: Existence or absence of a 
restriction site (and/or nucleotide polymorphism detected 
in the second PCR).
Characteristics: An AFLP band usually has two alleles in 
each locus (existence or absence of a certain band).
The  number  of  bands  in  a  typical  run  of  AFLP  is  several 
tens.  Since  one  can  use  various  combinations  of  restriction 
endonucleases  and  several  combinations  of  nucleotides  to 
elongate the primers for the second PCR, band patterns con-
sisting  of  several  hundred  bands  and  more  for  each  tested 
individual  can  be  generated.  AFLP  are  multilocus  markers 
and  their  mode  of  inheritance  is  dominant.  The  genotyping 
technology is rather simple. The main advantages of this sys-
tem are the relative ease of the genotyping, the relative high 
number of loci detected in each reaction, and the reliability of 
the system. The major disadvantages are the low level of poly-
morphism  and  the  dominant  mode  of  inheritance,  which  is 
less suitable for MAS. It is noteworthy that AFLP markers are 
applied  to  the  detection  of  DNA  methylation  by  using  pairs 
of restriction enzymes (methylation sensitive and methylation 
resistant). Many studies have applied AFLP for various goals 
(Mueller and Wolfenbarger, 1999; Meudt and Clarke, 2007).

Simple sequence repeats (also referred to as 
microsatellites)
Simple  sequence  repeats  (SSRs)  were  discovered  and  devel-
oped by Litt and Luty (1989) and by Edwards et al. (1991) 
in  humans  and  were  first  applied  to  plants  by  Akkaya  et  al. 
(1992).

Genotyping technology: Specific loci are PCR amplified 
by specific primers flanking a simple repeat that consists 
of 1–5 nucleotides. Primers are generated by screening 
genomic libraries with probes consisting of the various 
combinations of 1–5 nucleotides (when the genome 
sequence is available, the sequence for microsatellites 
and synthesized PCR primers homologous to the flanking 
sequences can be screened). The number of available 
SSR primers in various plant species varies from a few to 
several hundred (the SSR human map consists of about 
20,000 SSRs loci). During this PCR, the primers are 
labeled radioactively or by fluorescent dye. The amplified 
fragments are size separated on a sequencing acrylamide 
gel. The SSR banding pattern can also be generated and 
assessed on a DNA sequencer.
Genotyping: Each band represents an allele having a specific 
size in base pairs.

167

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Source of polymorphism: SSRs are one of several sequence 
variations named variable number of tandem repeats 
(VNTR), and are distinguished from the macrosatellites by 
the size of the core sequence (few nucleotides vs. several 
tens). Thus, the polymorphism is the number of the tandem 
repeats of a specific microsatellite at a specific locus.
Characteristics: SSRs are single locus markers and have a 
few to even more than ten alleles in each locus; thus, SSRs 
are highly polymorphic.
SSRs are co-dominant markers so they can distinguish het-
erozygotes  from  homozygotes.  The  main  advantages  of  SSRs 
are  their  high  level  of  polymorphism  and  their  reliability. 
Many  studies  have  applied  SSRs  to  various  goals  (Zhao  and 
Kochert,  1993;  Provan  et  al.,  1998;  Kim  et  al.,  2002;  Guo  
et al., 2006; Scascitelli et al., 2010).

Single nucleotide polymorphism
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is a point mutation (a 
change in one nucleotide) for which a short flanking sequence 
is  known.  The  system  is  used  in  humans,  animal  husbandry, 
and to a lesser extent in plants.

Genotyping technology: There are various technologies 
to genotype SNP including the use of DNA sequencers, 
mass spectrometry, and more. Modern technologies are 
automated, requiring expensive machinery, but they are 
also offered by commercial companies as a service (see 
section Modern genotyping technologies).
Genotyping: Each allele is defined by the actual nucleotide 
in the sequence.
Source of polymorphism: SNPs are generated by point 
mutations; namely, any change of a single nucleotide at any 
place in the genome. Changes can be the replacement of 
one nucleotide with another and/or deletion or addition 
(Indels) of a single nucleotide.
Characteristics: SNPs are single locus markers and mostly 
have two alleles in each locus (low level of polymorphism).
Their  mode  of  inheritance  is  co-dominant.  SNPs  have 
become  the  marker  of  choice  due  to  two  main  advantages: 
they are highly abundant (there are about 10 million SNPs in 
the  human  genome;  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp);  and 
high-throughput  technologies  of  genotyping  SNPs  (allowing 
the  genotyping  of  hundreds  of  thousands  SNP  in  each  indi-
vidual) are available. These advantages compromise their low 
level  of  polymorphism  (see  also  the  section  Genome-wide 
Association).  SNPs  have  been  applied  to  only  a  few  studies 
in  plants  (Nordborg  and  Weigel,  2008;  Ganal  et  al.,  2009; 
Krause et al., 2010), although, based on the work in humans 
and farm animals, this number is expected to rise.

Modern genotyping technologies

DNA sequencing technologies and DNA markers were devel-
oped separately. However, when sequence data began to yield 
information on sequence variation among different accessions 
of  the  same  species,  these  two  avenues  merged.  A  signifi-
cant advancement was the development of the high-through-
put  genotyping  of  SNPs.  Although  the  efficiency  of  the 

168

sequencing  technologies  has  increased  dramatically  and  the 
cost has decreased, they are mainly used in humans and to a 
lesser degree in farm animals. The genotyping of various agri-
cultural plant species is still a bottleneck. Some of the high-
throughput technologies that have been applied to plants for 
genotyping SNPs are described in the following sections.

Mass spectrometry
Kwon  et  al  (2001)  pioneered  the  use  of  mass  spectrometry 
(MS)  for  DNA  sequencing.  They  demonstrated  that  matrix-
assisted  laser  disruption/ionization  (MALDI)  time  of  flight 
(TOF) was very efficient (in terms of high-throughput, accu-
racy,  and  cost-efficiency)  for  analysis  of  complex  mixtures 
of  molecules  that  are  separated  by  their  mass/charge  ratios. 
An  automated  system  is  currently  offered  by  Sequenom, 
Inc.  (www.sequenom.com)  and  is  used  for  high-through-
put  SNP  analysis  (Jurinke  et  al.,  2001).  The  short  sequence 
flanking  the  SNP  is  amplified  in  PCR  and  serves  as  a  tem-
plate  for  DNA  synthesis  in  the  presence  of  specific  dideoxy 
nucleotides. The SNP alleles differ in the location of the first 
chosen  dideoxy  nucleotide,  and  thus  the  primer  extension 
reaction  results  in  alleles  with  different  mass/charge  ratios. 
These  fragments  are  separated,  as  described  previously,  and 
the  automated  system  can  generate  tens  of  thousands  (mul-
tiplexing and analysis of DNA pools are available) of alleles at 
various  loci/various  individuals,  each  given  a  number  equiva-
lent  to  its  size  in  base  pairs  (Figure  11.1).  The  MassARRAY 
system  can  be  either  purchased  or  supplied  as  a  service.  It 
should be noted that in addition to SNP genotyping, the sys-
tem  can  be  applied  to  studies  of  DNA  methylation,  analy-
ses  of  copy  number  variation  (CNV),  and  gene  expression 
(Cullinan and Cantor, 2008).

Diversity arrays technology
The  diversity  arrays  technology  (DArT)  was  developed  and 
first demonstrated in barley (having a large genome) by Wenzl 
et  al.  (2004).  It  is  based  on  microarray  hybridizations  as 
described by Jaccoud et al. (2001). DArT arrays are generated 
from  genomic  libraries  by  amplification  of  either  random  or 
candidate clones that are spotted on polylysine covered slides. 
The genotyped samples are genomic DNA cut with Pst1 and 
a 4 cutter to which suitable adapters were ligated. The result-
ing  fragments  are  amplified  by  PCR  (similar  to  AFLP).  The 
samples  are  denatured  and  hybridized  to  the  microarrays, 
and  washed  and  scanned  on  a  confocal  laser  scanner  such  as 
Affymetrix  428  (Santa  Clara,  CA)  or  Tecan  LS300  (Grödig, 
Austria). Several articles describe the application of DArT to 
various  plants  (Bolibok-Bragoszewska  et  al.,  2009;  Kopecky 
et al., 2009; Hippolyte et al., 2010).

SNP arrays
Two  commercial  platforms  are  currently  available  for  very 
high throughput genotyping of SNPs (500,000 SNPs). These 
platforms are mainly used in humans in genome-wide associa-
tion (GWA) studies. In these studies the association between 
specific  SNPs  and  human  diseases  is  analyzed  by  comparing 
thousands, and even tens of thousands, of “cases” (individuals 

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

Step 1: Amplification of the
DNA fragment containing
the polymorphism.

SNP
A/T

PRC product

Extension Products

Specimen 1–
Heterozygous A/T 

5’ Primer 3’

Specimen 2–
Heterozygous A/A

Specimen 3–
Heterozygous T/T

50-150bp

AC

TC

AC

AC

TC

TC

Step 3: Extension with
a primer having the 3’
base corresponding to
the last base preceding
the polymorphism
+ dATP + ddTTP +
ddGTP + ddCTP.

+T

+AG

+T

+T

+AG

+AG

Step 3: Extension
products are deposited
on a chip within
specific matrix. A laser
beam ejects the DNA
from the chip and
measures its time of
flight in the MS tunnel.

MS output

UP

UP

UP

Mass

Figure 11.1 l  Mass spectrometry l  High-throughput single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis by matrix-assisted laser disruption/
ionization (MALDI) time of flight (TOF). Genotyping of three DNA samples containing a specific SNP locus (A/T) by the MALDI-TOF-MS. The 
MS output contains either two or three peaks, the first one represents the unextended primer (UP), followed by one peak (of a homozygote), 
or two peaks (of a heterozygote). The peaks differ in their TOF on the basis of the ratio mass/charge affected by the sequence.

having  a  certain  disease)  and  a  similar  number  of  controls, 
each genotyped by hundreds of thousands of SNPs. A number 
of  studies  using  these  platforms  have  been  carried  out  (Ge 
et  al.,  2009;  Thomas  et  al.,  2009;  Ku  et  al.,  2010).  In  addi-
tion,  the  technology  is  now  starting  to  be  applied  to  farm 
animals  (M.  Ron,  personal  communication).  These  platforms 
are  offered  by  Affymetrix,  Inc.  (www.affymetrix.com)  and 
Illumina, Inc. (www.Illumina.com).

Affymetrix offers a GWA Human SNP array featuring over 
900,000 SNPs, and the same number of probes for the detec-
tion  of  CNV.  Illumina  offers  the  Genome  Analyzer,  which 
is based on a different technology but is applied to the same 
purposes.  Illumina  also  offers  “custom-made”  chips  that  can 
be generated for any organism.

Modern sequencing technologies
As  stated  earlier,  only  seven  green  plant  species  have  been 
fully  sequenced  due  to  the  very  high  cost  of  these  projects. 
However,  the  importance  of  sequencing  large  numbers  of 

human individuals for the detection of genes controlling com-
plex  diseases  has  encouraged  the  development  of  new  high-
throughput  technologies  at  a  moderate  price.  Some  of  these 
technologies  are  already  commercially  available  and  oth-
ers are close to being launched. It is reasonable to think that 
these new technologies will be applied to generating the full 
sequence  of  various  plant  species.  Today,  these  technologies 
can  be  applied  to  sequencing  c-DNA  libraries  of  various  tis-
sues under various conditions. Thus, it is an important tool for 
the  assessment  of  patterns  of  gene  expression  and  the  iden-
tification  of  specific  genes  controlling  important  agricultural 
traits.  The  description  of  three  major  modern  sequencing 
technologies is presented next.

Solexa-Illumina
The technology is described on the Illumina Web site (www
.illumina.com).  This  technology  relies  on  the  attachment  of 
randomly  fragmented  genomic  DNA  to  a  planar,  optically 
transparent  surface.  Attached  DNA  fragments  are  extended 

169

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

and amplified to generate an ultra-high density flow cell with 
hundreds of millions of clusters each containing ~1000 copies 
of  the  same  template.  These  templates  are  sequenced  using 
a  four-color  technology  that  employs  reversible  terminators 
with removable fluorescent dyes. High-sensitivity fluorescent 
detection is achieved using laser excitation and total internal 
reflection  optics.  Sequence  reads  are  aligned  against  a  refer-
ence genome and genetic differences are called using specific 
software.  After  completion  of  the  first  read,  the  templates 
can  be  regenerated  in  situ  to  enable  a  second  75    bp  read 
from  the  opposite  end  of  the  fragments.  The  Paired-End 
Module directs the regeneration and amplification operations 
to prepare the templates for the second round of sequencing. 
First,  the  newly  sequenced  strands  are  stripped  off  and  the 
complementary  strands  are  amplified  to  form  clusters.  Once 
the  original  templates  are  cleaved  and  removed,  the  reverse 
strands undergo sequencing by synthesis. The second round of 
sequencing occurs at the opposite end of the templates, gen-
erating  75    bp  reads  for  a  total  of  20 Gbp  of  paired-end 
data  per  run.  Alternative  sample  preparation  methods  allow 
the same system to be applied for analysis of gene expression, 
small RNA discovery, and protein–nucleic acid interactions.

454 (now Roche)
This technology is based on miniaturizing a pyrosequencing reac-
tion and carrying it out on a solid phase (Margulies et al., 2005; 
Rothberg  and  Leamon,  2008).  Genomic  DNA  (or  c-DNA)  is 
isolated, fragmented, ligated to adapters, and separated into sin-
gle strands. Fragments are bound to beads under conditions that 
favor  one  fragment  per  bead.  The  beads  are  isolated  and  com-
partmentalized in the droplets of a “PCR-reaction-mixture-in-oil 
emulsion,”  and  PCR  amplification  occurs  within  each  droplet. 
Ten million copies of a unique DNA template are generated in 
each bead. The emulsion is broken down, the DNA strands are 
denatured,  and  beads  are  deposited  into  wells  of  a  fiber-optic 
slide. Smaller beads carrying immobilized required enzymes are 
deposited into each well. CCD camera-based imaging is used to 
image the fiber-optic slide.

Pacific biosciences
Pacific Biosciences has developed the single molecule real-time 
sequencing  technology  (SMRT™)  (www.pacificbiosciences
.com).  The  technology  operates  at  single  molecule  resolution 
and  its  main  features  are:  (1)  an  SMRT  Cell,  which  enables 
observation  of  individual  fluorophores  by  maintaining  a  high 
signal-to-noise  ratio;  (2)  phospho-linked  nucleotides  serving 
as the building blocks for the fast accurate synthesis of natural 
DNA; and (3) a detection platform that enables single mole-
cule, real-time detection. Thus, the prospect is an accurate and 
very high-throughput DNA sequencing at a low cost.

Identification of genes controlling 
commercially important traits

The  phenotypes  of  plants  are  determined  by  the  interaction 
between  their  genome  and  the  environment.  A  successful 
breeding program manipulates the plant genome with the aim 

170

of developing new cultivars with desirable traits. Genetic con-
trol  of  physiological  traits  is  traditionally  studied  by  analyz-
ing the segregation of the trait of interest in conjunction with 
molecular  markers  in  a  mapping  population.  The  identifica-
tion of plant genes, which determines economically important 
traits,  is  an  important  step  toward  further  manipulation  of 
the plant phenotype. This knowledge can be applied to MAS 
using the gene sequence as a marker for the trait, or through 
direct manipulation of the gene to create a transgenic cultivar 
of improved phenotype (see the section Classical Methods of 
Gene Identification).

Most  target  traits,  such  as  yield,  seed  dormancy,  flower-
ing  time,  fruit  production,  fruit  quality,  resistance  to  some 
diseases  and  insects,  and  stress  tolerance,  are  quantitative 
in  nature  and  have  a  complex  mode  of  inheritance  (Alonso-
Blanco  et  al.,  2005).  Understanding  the  genetic  control  of 
quantitative  traits  is  necessary  and  relevant  in  exploring  the 
theory, methods, and strategies of cultivar development.

The ultimate aim of molecular genetic studies of quantita-
tive genetic variation is to identify the genes that collectively 
control the desired trait. The use of MAS enables the breeder 
to  manipulate  the  trait  of  interest  with  the  help  of  linked 
markers,  even  without  identification  of  the  genes  involved 
(Dekkers and Hospital, 2002).

Classical methods of gene identification
Map-based  positional  cloning  has  been  a  popular  tool  for 
identifying  genes  of  interest  without  prior  knowledge  of 
the  molecular  mechanism  responsible  for  the  desired  phe-
notype  (Tanksley  et  al.,  1995;  Glazier  et  al.,  2002;  Peters 
et  al.,  2003).  Positional  cloning  has  been  used  success-
fully  for  gene  isolation  in  numerous  studies  of  human,  ani-
mal,  and  plant  genetics  (Martin  et  al.,  1993;  Yano,  2001; 
Korstanje  and  Paigen,  2002;  Andersson  and  Georges,  2004; 
Salvi  and  Tuberosa,  2005;  Varshney  et  al.,  2006)  and  is  con-
sidered  a  routine  technique,  particularly  in  plants  (Lukowitz 
et al., 2000; Jander et al., 2002). Saturated genetic maps have 
already  been  established  for  many  crops,  and  modern  geno-
typing  technologies  are  capable  of  providing  comprehensive 
genome coverage, even in organisms in which DNA sequence 
information is not available (Tester and Langridge, 2010).

Linkage disequilibrium (LD) is the non-random association 
of  alleles  at  separate  loci  located  on  the  same  chromosome 
(Mackay  and  Powell,  2007).  Family-based  linkage  analysis  is 
generated  by  establishing  a  population  from  a  small  number 
of founders in the recent past in which LD is still maintained 
over short genetic distances and during few generations. Two 
genetically  divergent  parents,  who  show  clear  genetic  differ-
ences  for  one  or  more  traits  of  interest,  need  to  be  selected 
and crossed. Crosses are made to generate segregating popu-
lations  (e.g.,  F1  populations  in  naturally  out-crossing  plants; 
or  F2  populations  in  inbreeding  species  and/or  backcross 
populations). Existence of LD allows the detection of linkage 
between a DNA marker and a gene of interest.

Introgression  lines  (ILs)  are  a  series  of  lines  each  having 
most  of  its  genetic  material  derived  from  a  commercial  cul-
tivar  and  each  having  a  defined  fragment  of  a  certain  chro-
mosome  derived  from  a  genetically  close  wild  species.  A 

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

complete  collection  of  ILs  (the  IL  library)  covers  the  com-
plete genome of the donor by having a representative of each 
chromosomal  fragment  of  the  wild  species.  Such  IL  libraries 
have been created for tomato (Eshed and Zamir, 1995), rice 
(Li et al., 2005), and wheat (Pestsova et al., 2006; Maccaferri 
et al., 2008). IL libraries are generated by crossing a commer-
cial  cultivar  with  a  wild-type  donor  followed  by  a  series  of 
backcrosses with the recipient parent and several generations 
of selfing to obtain a single homozygous fragment of the donor 
in each line (Figure 11.2). IL libraries serve as an efficient tool 
for  the  identification  of  chromosomal  segments  controlling 
traits of interest.

A  sufficient  number  of  markers  that  reveal  polymor-
phism  between  parents  must  be  identified  and  applied  for 
genotyping  the  entire  population.  Once  the  phenotypic  and 
genotypic  data  are  determined  for  each  individual,  signifi-
cant  linkage  between  the  markers  and  the  relevant  trait  are 
established  through  various  statistical  analyses  ranging  from 
simple  techniques,  such  as  analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA), 
to  models  that  deal  with  multiple  markers  and  interactions 
(Doerge,  2002).  We  will  not  elaborate  here  on  these  analy-
ses but mention a simple method called “tail analysis” (Hillel 
et al., 1989; Plotsky et al., 1990) or “bulked segregant analy-
sis” (Michelmore et al., 1991), which is used to rapidly iden-
tify  markers  linked  to  gene(s)  of  interest.  The  two  bulked 
DNA  samples  are  generated  from  a  segregating  population 
(from  a  single  cross).  The  two  bulks  differ  in  the  trait  of 
interest  or  represent  the  two  tails  of  the  progeny  distribu-
tion regarding the trait of interest, and then they are screened 
by  the  available  DNA  markers.  The  assumption  is  that  alle-
les of DNA markers, which are statistically different between 
the  two  bulks,  are  associated  with  the  trait  of  interest. 
Michelmore et al. (1991) applied this method to lettuce and 
identified  RAPD  markers  linked  to  a  gene  conferring  resist-
ance to downy mildew.

At  a  second  stage,  fine-scale  mapping  is  applied  to  nar-
row  down  the  candidate  region  until  sufficient  resolution 
is  achieved  to  anchor  the  target  gene  to  the  physical  map 
(Collins, 1992; Glazier et al., 2002). Chromosome walking is 
used to zoom in on a targeted gene from a very tightly linked 
marker(s),  ultimately  leading  to  isolation  of  the  target  gene 
(Collins, 1992; Tanksley et al., 1995). This procedure involves 
construction of large insert libraries composed of overlapping 
clones  to  generate  contigs.  Identification  of  the  clone(s)  of 
interest  is  based  on  screening  the  libraries  with  the  markers 
found to flank the gene of interest. Large DNA clones, in the 
order  of  several  megabases,  include  mainly  bacterial  artificial 
chromosomes (BAC), and yeast artificial chromosomes (YAC; 
Kumar, 1999).

The  candidate  gene  is  usually  sequenced  in  the  various 
phenotypes to identify the causative DNA variant. Such vari-
ants include non-synonymous and deletion polymorphisms in 
coding  regions  (Mackay  et  al.,  2009),  as  well  as  differences 
in  gene  expression  level  (Doebley  et  al.,  1997;  Kliebenstein 
et  al.,  2001;  Liu  et  al.,  2003),  polymorphism  in  promoters, 
and introns affecting the binding of transcription factors and 
mRNA  splicing  (Mackay  et  al.,  2009).  The  last  step  of  gene 
identification is validation, which can be performed in various 
ways, such as introducing specific alleles followed by a change 

of a specific phenotype, testing outlier populations, and more 
(Borevitz and Chory, 2004).

An  alternative  approach  for  using  DNA  markers  that  are 
evenly spaced throughout the genome is the use of candidate 
genes that are selected because of a priori hypotheses about 
their  role  in  the  trait  of  interest.  Identification  of  QTLs  is 
based  on  genotype–phenotype  association  within  this  set  of 
genes (Tabor et al., 2002; Ben-Ari et al., 2006).

Modern methods for gene identification
The  concept  of  DNA  markers  results  from  the  fact  that  in 
most cases the gene(s) controlling the trait(s) of interest are 
unknown. However, it is obvious that when the gene(s) con-
trolling  the  phenotypic  difference  is  known,  it  is  the  best 
tool  for  MAS.  Recently,  a  number  of  methodologies  aimed 
toward identification of genes have been developed. The fol-
lowing are some examples based on modern high-throughput 
technologies.

Targeting-induced local lesions in genomes
Targeting-induced  local  lesions  in  genomes  (TILLING)  is  a 
powerful  reverse-genetic  strategy  that  employs  a  mismatch-
specific  endonuclease  (an  enzyme  that  identifies  a  mismatch 
and  cuts  the  double-stranded  DNA  at  this  specific  site) 
to  detect  induced  or  natural  DNA  polymorphisms.  High-
throughput TILLING allows the rapid and cost-effective detec-
tion  of  induced  point  mutations  in  populations  of  chemically 
mutagenized  individuals.  The  strategy  of  TILLING  was  first 
reported  by  McCallum  et  al.  (2000a,b)  ten  years  ago.  They 
used HPLC to detect mismatches in heteroduplex DNAs that 
had been generated by PCR amplification of specific genes on 
a  DNA  template  from  a  pooled  population  of  wild-type  and 
mutant  Arabidopsis  plants.  A  high-throughput  TILLING  pro-
tocol  was  published  a  year  later  and  employed  a  mismatch-
specific celery nuclease, CEL1, to identify SNPs (Colbert et al., 
2001). The advantages of TILLING are that it is a simple pro-
cedure, with high sensitivity, high efficiency, and non-transgenic 
modifications.  Thus,  TILLING  provides  a  powerful  approach 
for  gene  discovery,  assessment  of  DNA  polymorphism,  and 
plant  improvement  (Wang  et  al.,  2006).  TILLING  has  been 
successfully applied to various crops including maize (Till et al., 
2004), rice (Till et al., 2007), potato (Muth et al., 2008), and 
soybean (Cooper et al., 2008), as well as tetraploid and hexa-
ploid wheat (Uauy et al., 2009).

involves 

searching 

Genome-wide association
The  genome-wide  association  (GWA)  is  increasingly  being 
adopted  as  the  method  of  choice  for  identifying  genes. 
Association  analysis 
for  genotype– 
phenotype correlations in unrelated individuals (Myles et al., 
2009).  This  method  can  reveal  genes  or  QTLs  by  examining 
the  marker-trait  associations  that  can  be  attributed  to  the 
strength  of  LD  between  markers  and  functional  polymor-
phisms  across  a  set  of  diverse  germplasm.  GWA  was  origi-
nally pioneered by human geneticists as a potential solution to 
the  challenging  problem  of  finding  the  genetic  basis  of  com-
mon  complex  human  diseases  such  as  diabetes,  high  blood 
pressure,  and  diseases  of  the  heart  and  the  nervous  system 

171

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

commercial

cultivar

wild
species

F1

Backcrosses and MAS for

Several  generations

Self fertilization

chromosome:

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

IL1-1

IL1-2

IL2-1

IL8-5

Figure 11.2 l Introgression lines (ILs) library l  A wild-type parent (red genome) is crossed with the commercial cultivar (blue genome) to 
generate the F1 hybrid, which is backcrossed for several generations with the commercial cultivar. The progenies are then selfed for several 
generations. This procedure results in a series of plants, each of which are carrying a known, different, homozygous segment of the wild 
species genome. These chromosomal segments are identified by genotyping the library with genome-wide DNA markers distinguishing 
between the wild and commercial parental strains. The whole IL library covers all of the wild genome. For example, IL1-1 consists of the 
entire commercial cultivar genome with the exception of a single segment donated by the wild species located at the north of chromosome 1, 
whereas IL8-5 contains the wild segment on the south of chromosome 8. 

(Hirschhorn and Daly, 2005; Burton et al., 2007). Application 
of  GWA  depends  on  the  scale  of  LD,  which  in  turn  deter-
mines  the  degree  to  which  molecular  markers  may  be  asso-
ciated  with  the  relevant  phenotype  (Mitchell-Olds,  2010). 
The  main  advantage  of  GWA  over  linkage  analysis  is  that  it 
exploits all of the recombination events that have occurred in 
the  evolutionary  history  of  a  sample,  which  results  in  much 
higher  resolution.  In  addition,  the  number  of  mapped  QTLs 
for a given phenotype is not limited to those that are signifi-
cantly different between the parents of a particular cross, but 
rather by the number of real QTL underlying the trait (Zhu 
et al., 2008). Due to higher genome density, lower mutation 
rate,  and  better  amenability  to  high-throughput  detection 
systems, SNPs are rapidly becoming the marker of choice for 
GWA  studies.  High-capacity  DNA  sequencing  instruments 
or  high-density  oligonucleotide  arrays  efficiently  identify 
SNPs  at  a  density  that  accurately  reflects  genome-wide  LD 
structure  and  haplotype  diversity.  A  proper  statistical  analy-
sis  is  needed  to  identify  genotype–phenotype  associations 

(Zhu  et  al.,  2008).  Recently,  several  studies  used  GWA  to 
identify  QTLs  in  Arabidopsis  (Chan  et  al.,  2009;  Atwell 
et al., 2010; Brachi et al., 2010), barley (Stracke et al., 2009), 
maize (Sherry et al., 2005), pearl millet (Saidou et al., 2009), 
and teosinte (Weber et al., 2008). This high-density genotyp-
ing becomes increasingly accessible and was recently used to 
generate genetic linkage maps in several other plants, includ-
ing soybean (Hyten et al., 2010) and wheat (Akhunov et al., 
2009).  In  cases  where  relevant  alleles  are  present  at  high 
frequencies,  association  studies  can  disclose  causal  polymor-
phism  affecting  agronomic  traits  in  crop  plants  (Rafalski, 
2010). The detection power of association mapping depends 
not only on the magnitude of the effect that can be ascribed 
to a locus relative to other loci present in the population, but 
also  on  the  allele  frequency.  The  limitations  of  this  method 
are that rare alleles cannot be detected with confidence unless 
their effect is considerable, and that population structure may 
lead to wrong results. Therefore, linkage analysis in segregat-
ing families is more appropriate for the identification of rare 

172

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

alleles  (Rafalski,  2010).  It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  the 
new  high-throughput  genotyping  methods  will  be  applied  to 
segregating  populations  and  thus  overcome  some  of  the  dif-
ficulties of GWA (Mitchell-Olds, 2010).

RNA interference
The  functions  of  many  genes  have  been  elucidated  by  selec-
tive  gene  inactivation  and  subsequent  phenotypic  analysis. 
For  example,  specific  mutations,  gene  knockouts,  and  RNA 
interference  can  all  result  in  decreased  production  of  a  spe-
cific  protein,  yielding  informative  phenotypes  (Raina  and 
Crews, 2010). Small RNAs are riboregulators that have criti-
cal roles in most eukaryotes. They repress gene expression by 
acting  either  on  DNA  to  guide  sequence  modifications  and 
chromatin  remodeling  or  on  RNA  to  guide  degradation  and/
or  prevent  translation.  Small  RNA-mediated  regulation  is 
often  referred  to  as  RNA  silencing,  gene  silencing,  or  RNA 
interference (RNAi). RNA silencing was discovered in plants 
about  20  years  ago  during  the  course  of  transgenic  experi-
ments  that  eventually  led  to  gene  silencing  (Napoli  et  al., 
1990; Smith et al., 1990; Van Der Krol et al., 1990). At the 
post-transcriptional level, RNAi has emerged as a useful tool 
for  gene  silencing  due  to  its  ability  to  knock  down  levels  of 
any gene for which a rather short sequence is available. Since 
its  discovery,  RNAi  has  been  shown  to  play  an  essential  role 
in plants (Vaucheret, 2006), fungi (Nakayashiki et al., 2006), 
and mammals (McCaffrey et al., 2002). RNA-silencing can be 
induced by short nucleotide double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). 
Significantly,  the  production  of  large-scale  small  interfering 
RNA and short hairpin RNA libraries has made genome-wide 
RNAi analysis possible (Ruiz-Ferrer and Voinnet, 2009).

Expression QTLs
Expression  QTLs  (eQTLs)  are  identified  by  applying  QTL 
analysis  to  data  assessing  gene  expression  in  a  segregating 
population. Transcript abundance of each gene is the analyzed 
phenotype.

eQTL  analysis  requires  genetic  markers  that  can  be  geno-
typed  in  all  individuals  in  the  analyzed  population.  The  out-
come  of  this  analysis  is  a  statistical  association  between 
genetic markers located at specific regions of the genome and 
the expression level of the assayed gene. The resulting eQTL 
plot  indicates  the  likely  genetic  location  of  DNA  sequence 
variation  (eQTL)  that  causes  the  observed  variation  in  tran-
script  abundance.  Furthermore,  eQTL  data  enable  the  mod-
eling  of  genetic  regulatory  networks  and  provide  a  better 
understanding of the underlying phenotypic variation.

Expression  QTLs  are  empirically  divided  into  two  classes: 
cis and trans. In the former, the sequence variation controlling 
transcript levels is assumed to be determined by the sequence 
variation that lies within or in close proximity to the gene. A 
cis-eQTL  coincides  with  the  location  of  the  underlying  gene. 
In  case  of  trans-eQTL,  the  observed  location  of  the  eQTL 
does not coincide with the location of the gene. This implies 
that the observed eQTL represents the position of a locus that 
controls the expression of the target gene. Target gene expres-
sion can be controlled by a combination of both cis- and trans-
acting elements (Arnis et al., 2010). Expression QTL analysis 
has  been  demonstrated  in  Arabidopsis,  maize,  barley,  wheat, 

poplar, and eucalyptus (Kirst et al., 2005; Street et al., 2006; 
Jordan  et  al.,  2007;  Keurentjes  et  al.,  2007;  Shi  et  al.,  2007; 
West et al., 2007; Druka et al., 2008; Potokina et al., 2008).

Chemical genetics
Chemical  genetics  is  a  powerful  new  discipline  in  plant  sci-
ence. Bioactive small molecules can be used to identify novel 
signaling  pathways  and  unravel  redundant  networks.  Small 
molecules  are  used  to  alter  protein  function  and  explore 
biological  roles  of  these  target  proteins.  In  principle,  small 
molecules  allow  rapid,  conditional,  and  reversible  altera-
tion of biological functions; therefore they can generate new 
and  often  complementary  information  compared  to  classical 
genetic studies. Small molecules can also overcome limitations 
of  genetic  approaches  such  as  lethality,  genetic  redundancy, 
and pleiotropic effects observed in genetic mutants (Tóth and 
van  der  Hoorn,  2010).  A  chemical  genetic  approach  helped 
reveal  the  hormone  signaling  pathways  of  auxin  (Hayashi 
et  al.,  2008),  brassinosteroid  (De  Rybel  et  al.,  2009),  and 
abscisic acid (Park et al., 2009).

Application of DNA markers to breeding

DNA  markers  have  been  applied  in  plant  breeding  programs 
for various purposes in addition to the identification of genes 
of interest and the development of MAS. These applications 
include  identification  of  individual  plants  and  plant  popula-
tions,  assessment  of  genetic  distances  (phylogeny),  iden-
tification  of  parents  for  the  production  of  hybrid  seeds,  and 
significant  decreases  of  the  number  of  backcross  generations 
needed to achieve gene introgression.

Identification
The ability to identify individual plants is at the core of many 
applications.  In  many  cases,  it  is  necessary  to  individually 
characterize the sampled genotypes. The use of DNA markers 
in  cultivar  identification  is  particularly  important  for  protec-
tion of proprietary germplasm. DNA markers have also been 
useful  in  pedigree  analysis  and  parental  identification  (Joshi 
et al, 1999).

Most forest tree species exhibit high levels of genetic diver-
sity  that  can  be  used  to  trace  the  origin  of  living  plants  or 
their products such as timber and processed wood. Molecular 
tools  are  applied  to  test  the  origin  of  forest  reproductive 
material  used  for  the  establishment  of  plantations  and  in 
international  trade  of  timber  and  wood  products  (Finkeldey 
et  al.,  2010).  DNA  markers  are  also  used  to  confirm  purity, 
especially  in  hybrid  cultivars  where  the  maintenance  of  high 
levels  of  genetic  purity  is  essential  (Collard  and  Mackill, 
2008).

Improving classical breeding projects
The  major  applications  of  DNA  markers  for  the  improve-
ment  of  classical  breeding  projects  include  conserving  the 
genetic diversity of parental stocks, selecting the suitable par-
ents for the generation of heterosis, decreasing the number of 

173

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

backcross generations in gene introgression projects, and pyra-
miding various genes in the same cultivar.

Conserving diversity
To achieve progress in a breeding program, breeders need to care-
fully select the appropriate parents. In addition to the perform-
ance of the parental lines, their genetic diversity should be taken 
into account as well. Using diverse cultivars as the core breed-
ing  material  increases  the  chances  of  achieving  new  combina-
tions and new elite strains excelling in various agricultural traits. 
Therefore, the assessment of biodiversity is crucial for parental 
selection in breeding programs (Collard and Mackill, 2008).

Understanding  the  critical  role  of  genetic  information  has 
played an important part in the development of conservation 
biology.  Genetic  drift  generates  loss  of  genetic  variation  and 
dramatically affects small populations. The potential of future 
adaptation  to  a  changing  environment  depends  on  the  scope 
of  genetic  variation.  A  second  consequence  of  the  loss  of 
genetic variation is that the number of homozygous individu-
als within a population necessarily increases. Such inbreeding 
may be associated with a reduction in individual fitness. Thus, 
maintenance of genetic variation is regarded as a primary goal 
in conservation efforts and breeding projects (Milligan et al., 
1994).

Selection of parents for the generation of heterosis
Heterosis  refers  to  the  superior  phenotypes  observed  in 
hybrids  relative  to  their  inbred  parents  with  respect  to 
traits  such  as  growth  rate,  reproductive  success,  and  yield. 
Heterosis  was  discovered  in  maize  about  a  century  ago  and 
has  subsequently  been  found  to  occur  in  many  crop  species. 
The  increase  in  yield  as  a  result  of  the  cultivation  of  hybrid 
offspring  ranges  from  15  to  50%,  depending  on  the  crop 
(Lippman and Zamir, 2007).

The  theory  of  quantitative  genetics  predicts  a  positive 
correlation  between  parental  divergence  and  the  estimated 
degree  of  heterosis  (Falconer  and  Mackay,  1996).  However, 
the data obtained to date in support of this correlation are not 
conclusive, and the ability to predict levels of heterosis based 
on the genetic distance between parents varies with different 
traits and crops (Flint-Garcia et al., 2009).

Introgression
Commercial elite cultivars may often be improved by a desir-
able allele (like resistance to a specific disease), which exists 
in a distantly related (and even a wild-type) genotype. Gene 
introgression  can  be  achieved  by  crossing  the  elite  cultivar 
with  the  donor  plant,  and  then  by  repeated  backcrossing  of 
the progeny with the recipient line, while selecting the desir-
able  allele  in  each  generation.  The  problem  is  that  about  six 
(and  more)  generations  are  needed  to  achieve  this  goal.  The 
use of DNA markers can improve and shorten the introgres-
sion  program  by  minimizing  linkage  drag  and  reducing  the 
number  of  necessary  backcrosses.  In  this  context,  markers 
distinguishing between the two parents are used to select the 
desired genotype even after one or two backcross generations 
(Figure 11.3).

The objective of application of DNA markers is to recover, 
as  rapidly  as  possible,  the  maximum  proportion  of  recurrent 

174

regions of the parent genome at non-target loci through many 
markers  that  are  distributed  evenly  throughout  the  genome. 
Data  from  simulation  studies  suggest  that  two  or  three 
backcross  generations  may  be  sufficient  (Hillel  et  al.,  1990; 
Visscher  et  al.,  1996;  Hospital  and  Charcosset,  1997;  Frisch 
et al., 1999).

Pyramiding
Pyramiding  is  the  accumulation  of  several  desired  alleles  in 
a single line or cultivar (Pedersen and Leath, 1988). Marker-
based  selection  is  a  very  useful  approach  to  maximal  utiliza-
tion of the existent gene resources. Genes controlling various 
agronomic  traits  can  be  theoretically  combined  together  in  a 
single plant. Furthermore, genes responsible for resistance to 
different diseases or insect pests can be pyramided to gener-
ate a variety/cultivar exhibiting multiresistance to pathogens.

When  several  favorable  genes  are  hosted  by  two  different 
parents, the simplest strategy involves the production of a seg-
regating population and subsequent screening of the progeny 
on the basis of molecular markers for individuals homozygous 
at the targeted loci. Pyramiding of multiple genes from vari-
ous  parental  lines  is  more  complex  and  can  be  achieved  by 
several generations of pairwise crossing (Servin et al., 2004). 
In  the  past,  it  has  been  difficult  to  pyramid  multiple  resist-
ance  genes  because  they  generally  exhibit  identical  pheno-
types  and  progeny  testing  is  required  to  determine  which 
plants carry more than one desired gene. DNA markers may 
facilitate  the  pyramiding  process  because  DNA  markers  for 
multiple  specific  genes  or  QTLs  can  be  tested  using  a  single 
DNA  sample  without  the  need  for  phenotyping.  Such  pyra-
mids have been developed in rice against bacterial blight and 
blast.  Kottapalli  et  al.  (2010)  introgressed  three  bacterial 
blight resistance genes, xa5, xa13, and Xa21, into a fine rice 
grain  variety.  Another  successful  pyramiding  was  achieved  in 
wheat  by  combining  several  QTLs  conferring  resistance  to 
 F. pseudograminearum (Bovill et al., 2010).

MAS in breeding programs

It  has  been  predicted  for  over  two  decades  that  molecular 
marker  technology  would  reshape  breeding  programs  and 
facilitate  rapid  gains  from  selection.  About  14  years  ago, 
Concibido et al. (1996) described the application of MAS for 
breeding of cyst nematode (Heterodera glycines) resistance in 
soybean. However, while MAS is effectively used in breeding 
of various monogenic traits, it has not been significantly suc-
cessful in the breeding of polygenic traits, especially in cases 
where many alleles of small effect are involved in producing a 
specific phenotype (Jannink et al., 2010).

MAS has been widely used in breeding programs for gene 
introgression  and  gene  pyramiding,  particularly  for  disease 
resistance genes in the major crops, but also in crops of lesser 
economic  importance.  For  obvious  reasons,  most  breeders 
do  not  reveal  their  efforts  to  apply  MAS  in  their  breeding 
projects. Thus, references are not available for many of these 
activities.  The  information  we  have  gained  from  breeders  at 
both  research  institutes  and  commercial  companies  (see  the 
Acknowledgments section) is that most efforts are invested in 

Parents

BC1

P1

F1

BC1

progeny

Desired
genome

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

X

X

P2

F2

No. of individuals (BC1)

50

75

100

i

i

 

%
R
e
c
p
e
n
t
 
g
e
n
o
m
e

Figure 11.3 l Gene introgression l  Carried out by crossing a donor parent (P1; represented by a red line) and a recipient parent (P2; 
represented by a black line) followed by repeated backcrosses (BC) of the F1 with the recipient parent to recover the recipient genome. 
The target gene (star) is selected for in each of the backcross generations. The average content of the recipient genome (black and red 
continuous line) in BC1 progeny is 75%. However, the content varies among the progeny from 50 to 100% and is characterized by a normal 
distribution curve (right graph). Recovery of the recipient genome can be enhanced by using DNA markers distributed across the entire 
genome and distinguishing the two parents. Thus, by the proper use of DNA markers one can significantly decrease the number of required 
back crosses. 

applying MAS to the improvement of commercially important 
crops such as wheat, rice, corn, soybean, and some vegetables 
like tomato and pepper. Public funding to support validation 
and  refinement  of  MAS  techniques  and  its  applications  in 
field breeding has been limited (Xu and Crouch, 2008), and 
most successes are with traits controlled by single genes.

A  large  number  of  monogenic  traits  or  major  QTLs  have 
been  targeted  for  wheat  improvement  through  MAS.  These 
traits  include  resistance  to  various  rusts,  FHB,  barley  yellow 
dwarf  virus  (BYDV),  nematodes,  and  Hessian  fly/Russian 
wheat  aphid.  Also  included  are  some  quality  traits  such  as 
grain protein content, grain hardness, tolerance to pre-harvest 
sprouting, grain color, bread-making quality, grain texture, and 
gluten strength (Gupta et al., 2010).

Among  the  abiotic  stresses,  drought  and  salinity  are  the 
major ones. Certain progress has been achieved in developing 
drought- and salt-tolerant cultivars using conventional breed-
ing approaches.

Numerous QTLs affecting drought and salt tolerance have 
been  identified.  For  example,  the  AtNHX1  antiporter  is 
involved  in  the  sub-cellular  compartmentalization  of  potas-
sium,  which  in  turn  affects  potassium  nutrition  and  sodium 
(Na) tolerance (Leidi et al., 2010). The phosphate transporter 
PHT4;6  was  identified  to  be  a  determinant  of  salt  tolerance 
localized in the Golgi apparatus of Arabidopsis (Cubero et al., 
2009). Zhang et al. (2005) showed the effect of a change in 

the  membrane  fatty  acid  on  tolerance  to  drought  and  salin-
ity. However, to our knowledge, the degree of application of 
these findings to plant breeding projects is limited.

Some  progress  has  been  made  at  the  International  Rice 
Research  Institute  (IRRI)  by  the  development  of  toler-
ant introgression lines in elite genetic backgrounds (Li et al., 
2007). A number of QTLs conferring drought tolerance were 
mapped  in  barley.  These  include  several  physiological/bio-
chemical  traits  such  as  osmotic  adjustment  capacity,  proline 
content,  stomatal  conductance,  water  soluble  carbohydrates, 
relative  water  content,  leaf  turgor,  ABA  content,  and  vari-
ous morphological traits, but the challenges of application of 
MAS still remain (Li et al., 2007). Despite considerable tra-
ditional  and  molecular  studies  in  tomato,  there  is  no  report 
of  any  commercial  tomato  cultivar  with  salt  or  drought  tol-
erance (Foolad, 2007a). Attempts to generate tolerant potato 
cultivars  by  introducing  genes  such  as  osmotin-like  protein, 
GPD, and trehalose synthesis protein have not been success-
ful  (Byun  et  al.,  2007),  and  QTL  mapping  for  salt  tolerance 
in  cotton  is  moving  very  slowly  (Lubbers  et  al.,  2007).  It  is 
believed  that  the  complexity  of  these  traits  slows  down  the 
progress along this line.

Next  are  some  examples  of  the  application  of  MAS  in 
various  crops.  In  tomatoes,  P.  Lindhout  (Bai  and  Lindhout, 
2007)  reviewed  the  tools  used  in  tomato  breeding.  The  most 
prominent  application  of  MAS  in  tomato  breeding  is  for  the 

175

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

introduction  of  resistance  genes  for  diseases  and  pests  such 
as  bacterial  canker,  Fusarium  wilt,  tobacco  mosaic  virus,  and 
Verticillium  wilt.  In  addition,  MAS  has  been  used  for  selec-
tion  of  self-pruning  (determinant  vs.  indeterminant)  cultivars. 
Mutant  genes  that  delay  maturation  (rin  and  nor)  have  been 
incorporated into local cultivars and the abscission related gene 
JOINTLESS-2 has been used for selection of low fruit removal 
force  (FRF)  cultivars  (Foolad,  2007b).  Zamir  et  al.  (Krieger 
et  al.,  2010)  showed  that  the  flowering  gene  SINGLE 
FLOWER TRUSS (SFT) drives heterosis for yield in tomato.

Attempts  to  find  markers  for  fruit  color,  taste,  and  qual-
ity  are  in  their  infancy.  One  difficulty  is  that  environmental 
factors such as light and temperature tend to have an impact 
on the color, so that plants carrying the lycopene cyclase gene 
(generating  beta  carotene  from  lycopene)  vary  in  their  pig-
mentation (I. Levin, personal communication).

Regarding  fruit  quality,  the  major  locus,  Fgr  (Fructose  to 
glucose ratio), was mapped to chromosome 4, while a second 
locus was mapped to chromosome 6 near the loci for a fruc-
tokinase (FK2) and a hexokinase (Levin et al., 2006). The two 
loci show an epistatic relationship, with FK2hab further increas-
ing the Fgr only in the presence of the wild species allele for 
Fgr (Pedersen and Leath, 1988). Another gene that proved to 
be  useful  for  increasing  Brix  without  decreasing  yield  param-
eters is the AGPase-LS1 (Petreikov et al., 2006, 2009).

MAS is better applied in pre-breeding, where on the basis 
of  information  derived  from  ILs  (see  details  in  the  section 
RNA  Interference),  one  can  generate  cultivars  carrying  spe-
cific chromosomal segments known to have major alleles that 
affect  important  quantitative  traits  like  sugar  content  (Brix) 
and yield (E. Kopilevits, personal communication).

In pepper, MAS is applied to confer resistance to Tobamo-
viruses (Kim et al., 2008), tomato spotted wilt virus (Moury 
et al., 2000), root knot nematode (Wang et al., 2009), and for 
potyvirus (Yeam et al., 2005). In addition, there are markers 
for fruit color (yellow, red, and brown) and for fruit cracking.

Examples  from  crop  plants  are  reviewed  in  this  section.  
Dr. D.J. Makill of IRRI has been successful in the development 
of submergence — tolerant rice cultivars using the Sub1 locus 
(Septiningsih et al., 2009). Two varieties with the submergence 
tolerance gene SUB1 were released recently. MAS was applied 
to decrease the number of backcross (BC) generations (to two 
to  three  generations)  and  reduce  the  linkage  drag.  “Swarna-
Sub1” is grown in India and Bangladesh and IR64-Sub1 in the 
Philippines and Indonesia where submergence is a problem. Dr. 
R.K. Varshney of the International Crops Research Institute for 
the  Semi-Arid  Tropics  (ICRISAT)  and  Generation  Challenge 
Programme  (GCP)  stated  that  they  are  in  the  process  of 
introgressing a major QTL (controlling 30% of the phenotypic 
variation  for  root  traits)  to  chickpea.  Dr.  Y.  Xu  of  CIMMYT 
reported the identification of loci conferring drought resistance 
by using introgression lines of maize (Hao et al., 2009) and the 
use  of  the  Opaque2  mutant  for  the  improvement  of  protein 
quality (Xu et al., 2009).

Although quite a number of marker loci have been reported 
to be linked to various genes of interest, it is our feeling that 
only  a  few  of  these  markers  are  currently  used  routinely  in 
breeding  projects.  At  the  same  time,  it  needs  to  be  empha-
sized that application of MAS to breeding is on the rise.

176

Discussion

Bottlenecks and difficulties in the 
application of MAS

The  goal  of  breeding  is  to  develop  cultivars  with  improved 
agricultural  characteristics.  In  general  this  goal  can  be 
achieved either by incorporation of traits that do not exist in 
the current commercial cultivars or by pyramiding traits avail-
able in the primary gene pool into a specified cultivar. For the 
application of MAS, whenever new traits are considered, one 
needs first to identify markers that are linked to these traits. 
Thus,  linkage  or  association  analysis  based  on  phenotypic 
assessment  must  be  carried  out  because  breeders  need  to 
continue  to  assess  plants  in  the  field.  Once  linkage  has  been 
identified,  it  is  obvious  that  MAS  has  the  potential  to  be  an 
efficient tool for the breeder. When pyramiding is considered 
and  when  linkage  has  already  been  identified,  efficient  MAS 
would be a very useful tool for the breeder. As noted, breed-
ers  will  still  need  to  assess  the  plants  in  the  field  and  make 
sure  that  the  pyramiding  is  successful,  and  that  no  negative 
effects are associated with the new cultivars.

Efficient MAS is based on three requisites: (1) the ability to 
identify DNA variations by DNA markers or the genes them-
selves (see the section DNA Markers); (2) the analyzed popula-
tion (see the section Application of DNA Markers to Breeding); 
and (3) the statistical procedure for identifying linkage or asso-
ciation between a DNA marker and a gene of interest.

Successful MAS depends upon the availability of a very large 
number of DNA markers (to cover the whole genome) as well 
as the availability of efficient genotyping technologies to allow 
the  genotyping  of  a  large  number  of  individuals,  each  with 
numerous markers. If the human genome is to be the landmark 
for future developments in this area, SNPs are the marker of 
choice,  both  due  to  their  high  abundance  and  the  availability 
of  high-throughput  genotyping  technologies  for  SNPs.  CNV, 
(Iafrate  et  al.,  2004;  Sebat  et  al.,  2004),  which  has  not  been 
applied  to  plants,  represents  another  kind  of  DNA  variation 
that is associated with human disorders (Lee et al., 2007; Cook 
and  Scherer,  2008)  and  may  have  a  wider  significance  in  the 
future.  It  is  important  to  state  that  the  high  abundance  of 
SNPs  and  their  efficient  genotyping  technologies  compensate 
for their low level of polymorphism. Thus, it is expected that 
availability  of  greater  amounts  of  sequence  information  will 
increase the number of available SNPs in various plant species. 
Obviously, availability of full sequences of the analyzed individ-
uals will be the ultimate solution of this bottleneck.

One  of  the  major  advantages  of  plants  is  the  relative  ease 
(compared to other biological systems) of generating large seg-
regating  populations.  F2  and  F1  (in  the  case  of  heterozygous 
plants) as well as BCs are rather easy to generate in very large 
numbers  (hundreds,  thousands,  and  more).  The  major  bottle-
neck is the long juvenile period of some plant species, especially 
fruit trees. In addition, in some species like mango and avocado, 
it is not feasible to carry out artificial pollination to generate large 
populations,  and  alternative  procedures  such  as  caging  the  two 
parents under a net in the presence of a beehive must be used.

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

Once  the  population  is  generated,  the  phenotypes  need 
to be assessed. This assessment may be a major bottleneck in 
developing  efficient  MAS.  Dr.  A.  Blum  (personal  communi-
cation  and  http://www.plantstress.com/),  strongly  empha-
sized the need for the correct assessment of the phenotypes. 
It  is  clear  that  errors  in  the  phenotypic  assessment  lead  to 
either  false  negative  or  false  positive  identification  of  mark-
ers.  A  major  reason  for  errors  in  the  phenotypic  assessment 
is  the  wrong  choice  of  traits.  For  example,  since  yield  is  a 
very  complex  trait,  one  should  not  search  for  DNA  markers 
for this trait but rather identify its major components such as 
head  number,  grains  per  head,  and  grain  size  in  cereals,  and 
then  search  for  DNA  markers  that  are  linked  or  associated 
with these components. It should be noted that phenotyping, 
especially of agronomic and physiological traits in the field, is 
often difficult and sometimes even inaccurate.

In  this  chapter  we  have  not  elaborated  on  the  statistical 
tools for the identification of DNA markers genetically linked 
or  associated  with  the  gene(s)  controlling  important  agricul-
tural traits. However, a major bottleneck in the development 
of MAS is the ability to distinguish between false positive and 
true  significant  linkage  or  association  between  markers  and 
genes of interest. The large numbers of analyzed markers and 
individuals  necessary  for  the  development  of  MAS  creates  a 
major challenge for this analysis and a need to develop suitable 
tools. Identification of statistically significant results is a major 
task due to the multi-testing (i.e., the large number of com-
parisons).  Finally,  it  is  essential  to  be  able  to  identify  inter-
actions,  such  as  considering  the  possibility  that  the  desired 
phenotypes  may  result  from  the  interaction  between  differ-
ent genes and/or alleles and identifying the DNA markers that 
reflect these interactions. Although bioinformatic and statisti-
cal tools for these analyses are developing at a rapid pace, bet-
ter, more efficient and more accurate methods are needed.

The GWA has been applied in the last several years to the 
analyses of human disorders and has identified a large number 
of  DNA  variants  associated  with  various  diseases  (Rosenberg 
et  al.,  2010).  However,  there  are  also  some  difficulties;  for 
example,  GWA  aimed  at  identification  of  SNPs  associated 
with human height were carried out on tens of thousands of 
individuals genotyping 100–500,000 SNPs in each individual. 
These  studies  resulted  in  the  identification  of  40  DNA  vari-
ants  associated  with  height.  However,  these  variants  alto-
gether accounted for only about 5% of the genetic variation, 
even  though  heritability  of  human  height  is  estimated  to  be 
80–90%.  Similar  results  characterize  the  situation  in  various 
complex diseases in which the identified variants explain only 
a small part of the genetic variation (Maher, 2008). There can 
be  several  explanations  for  these  results:  (1)  the  causative 
DNA  variants  were  not  the  analyzed  SNPs,  but  rather  other 
DNA variants; (2) the desired phenotypes resulted from rare 
variants  or  variants  of  low  penetrance;  (3)  the  heritability  
estimates  were  wrong  and  the  actual  heritability  estimates 
are rather low; (4) phenotyping (in humans, the diagnosis of 
some disorders) was not accurate enough (see earlier informa-
tion); (5) the analyzed phenotypes are controlled by dominant 
or  epistatic  interactions  of  several  genes/alleles;  and  (6)  the 
phenotypes  are  controlled  by  epigenetic  factors  (like  DNA 
methylation).

It is our view that there are ways to overcome these bot-
tlenecks,  such  as  widening  the  types  of  genetic  variants  and 
increasing their numbers (eventually analyzing full sequences), 
increasing the number of analyzed individuals, and developing 
better statistical tools that will enable the detection of domi-
nant and epistatic interactions between several loci. Regarding 
the future of MAS in plants, we believe that the genotyping 
analyses of a high number of DNA variants (SNPs) in a large 
number of individuals originating from segregated populations 
(F1,  F2,  and  BC)  have  the  potential  to  generate  effective 
MAS and more efficient breeding projects.

Future prospects of application of genetic 
variations to breeding

The  ultimate  knowledge  of  genetic  variation  will  be  gener-
ated  from  comparisons  of  whole  genome  sequences  of  indi-
viduals from the same species. It is assumed that having the 
full sequence of the various phenotypes will allow the identi-
fication of the genes controlling these phenotypes. It can be 
argued  that  in  addition  to  the  sequence  information,  epige-
netics (such as methylation) plays a major role in controlling 
phenotypes  and  that  due  to  the  complexity  of  the  control 
of quantitative traits, having even the full sequence will not 
be sufficient for the understanding of the molecular mecha-
nisms  behind  the  important  agricultural  traits.  However, 
most  scientists  agree  that  full  genome  sequencing  is  highly 
desirable.  The  major  technical  developments  (described  in 
the  section  Modern  sequencing  technologies)  suggest  that 
it is probable that in the near future the genome sequences 
of more agricultural plant species will be available. The next 
step  will  then  be  the  full  sequencing  of  individuals  of  the 
same species having various phenotypes.

We expect that before the era of full sequencing, there will 
be  other  developments  related  to  genetic  variation  of  plant 
species.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  expected  that  an  approach 
similar to the application of high-throughput SNP analysis in 
animal husbandry (the analysis of tens of thousands of SNPS 
in both cattle and chickens) will be seen in some of the com-
mercially  important  plant  species.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
are already several examples of plant transcriptome analyses, 
and we believe that with the availability of various technolo-
gies  the  transcriptome  of  more  plant  species  will  be  ana-
lyzed.  Another  approach  is  knockout  (either  by  transposons, 
T-DNA, or RNAi). The problem with this approach is that it 
is  based  on  the  availability  of  a  transformation  methodology 
(usually based on regeneration capability), which is not avail-
able to all plant species. However, massive efforts have been 
invested  in  developing  transformation  systems  for  a  wider 
range  of  plant  species  and  to  make  the  available  ones  more 
efficient  in  terms  of  percent  of  successful  events  of  trans-
formation.  The  most  obvious  approach  that  will  widen  and 
deepen in terms of more genes and more plant species is the 
identification of important genes in various commercial plant 
species  on  the  basis  of  homology  with  known  genes  from 
“model” plants (the species in which these genes are currently 
known),  such  as  the  identification  of  orthologs  using  simple 
molecular techniques.

177

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

These  approaches  will  identify  important  genes  that  are 
of interest to the breeder who will then be able to make the 
breeding  projects  much  more  efficient  by  looking  for  the 
desirable alleles of these genes.

Finally,  we  would  like  to  emphasize  that  in  our  opinion, 
plants have some built-in advantages, which in view of the dif-
ficulties mentioned in the section Bottlenecks and difficulties in 
the application of MAS, make us rather optimistic regarding the 
future prospects of MAS in plants. These advantages include the:
l  Rather short juvenile period in some plant species 

(although this is not so for many fruit trees).

l  Ability (in some cases) to carry out self-pollinations or to 
generate dihaploids to generate homozygous plants. This 
advantage was applied to the citrus sequencing project (Nir 
Carmi, personal communication).

l  Ability to generate large populations in a “family 

structure.” It is noteworthy that one of the explanations for 
the limited “success” of human GWA projects is that the 
same phenotype could be generated by various genotypes 
(see section Genome-wide association). Analysis of the 
progeny of a certain cross should overcome this difficulty.

Acknowledgment

The authors are very thankful to those who contributed their 
knowledge  and  critical  views  on  the  subject  in  long  discus-
sions  and  in  e-mails:  Professor  G.  Ben-Haim,  ARO-Volcani 
Center,  Israel;  Dr.  A.  Blum,  plantstress.com;  Professor  A. 
Cahaner, the Faculty of Agriculture at the Hebrew University 
of Jerusalem, Israel; Dr. P. Cregan, the ARS-USDA, Beltsville, 
MD; Dr. Y. Elkind, the Faculty of Agriculture at the Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Israel; Dr. E. Kopilevits, the Faculty 
of Agriculture at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel; 
Dr.  I.  Levin,  ARO-Volcani  Center,  Israel;  Dr.  D.J.  Mackill, 
IRRI;  Dr.  M.  Moshelion,  the  Faculty  of  Agriculture  at  the 
Hebrew  University  of  Jerusalem,  Israel;  Dr.  I.  Paran,  ARO-
Volcani  Center,  Israel;  Dr.  M.  Ron,  ARO-Volcani  Center, 
Israel; Dr. R. K. Varshney, ICRISAT and GCP; Dr. N. Yonash, 
Hazera-Genetics Ltd, Israel; Professor D. Zamir, the Faculty 
of Agriculture at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel; 
and Dr. Y. Xu, CIMMYT. Special thanks to Dr. P. Cregan, the 
ARS-USDA,  Beltsville,  MD,  who  also  made  valuable  com-
ments on the manuscript.

References

Adamblondon, A. F., Sevignac, M., Dron, M., 
& Bannerot, H. (1994). A genetic-map of 
common bean to localize specific resistance 
genes against anthracnose. Genome, 37, 
915–924.

Akhunov, E., Nicolet, C., & Dvorak, J. (2009). 
Single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping 
in polyploid wheat with the Illumina 
GoldenGate assay. TAG Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 119, 507–517.

Akkaya, M. S., Bhagwat, A. A., & Cregan, P. B. 

(1992). Length polymorphisms of Simple 
Sequence Repeat DNA in soybean. Genetics, 
132, 1131–1139.

Alonso-Blanco, C., Aarts, M. G. M., Bentsink, 

L., Keurentjes, J. J. B., Reymond, M., & 
Vreugdenhil, D., et al. (2009). What has 
natural variation taught us about plant 
development, physiology, and adaptation? 
Plant Cell, 21, 1877–1896.

Alonso-Blanco, C., Bentsink, L., Hanhart, C. 

J., Vries, H. B. E., & Koornneef, M. (2003). 
Analysis of natural allelic variation at seed 
dormancy loci of Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Genetics, 164, 711–729.

Alonso-Blanco, C., Mendez-Vigo, B., & 

Koornneef, M. (2005). From phenotypic 
to molecular polymorphisms involved 
in naturally occurring variation of plant 
development. International Journal of 
Developmental Biology, 49, 717–732.

Andersson, L., & Georges, M. (2004). 

Domestic-animal genomics: Deciphering the 
genetics of complex traits. Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 5, 202–212.

Appleby, N., Edwards, D., & Batley, J. (2009). 
New technologies for ultra-high throughput 
genotyping in plants. In D. J. Somers, P. 
Langridge & J. P. Gustafson (Eds.), Plant 
genomics (pp. 19–39). New-York: Humana 
Press.

178

Arnis, D., Elena, P., Zewei, L., Ning, J., Xinwei, 

C., & Mike, K., et al. (2010). Expression 
quantitative trait loci analysis in plants. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 8, 10–27.
Ashraf, M., & Akram, N. A. (2009). 

Improving salinity tolerance of plants 
through conventional breeding and genetic 
engineering: An analytical comparison. 
Biotechnology Advances, 27, 744.

Ashraf, M. (2010). Inducing drought tolerance 

in plants: Recent advances. Biotechnology 
Advances, 28, 169–183.

Atwell, S., Huang, Y. S., Vilhjalmsson, B. J., 
Willems, G., Horton, M., & Li, Y., et al. 
(2010). Genome-wide association study 
of 107 phenotypes in Arabidopsis thaliana 
inbred lines. Nature, 465, 627–631.

Austin, D. F., & Lee, M. (1996). Genetic 

resolution and verification of quantitative 
trait loci for flowering and plant height with 
recombinant inbred lines of maize. Genome, 
39, 957–968.

Bai, Y., & Lindhout, P. (2007). Domestication 
and breeding of tomatoes: What have we 
gained and what can we gain in the future? 
Annals of Botany, 100, 1085–1094.

Barone, A., Di Matteo, A., Carputo, D., & 
Frusciante, L. (2009). High-throughput 
genomics enhances tomato breeding 
efficiency. Current Genomics, 10, 1–9.

Ben-Ari, G., Zenvirth, D., Sherman, A., David, 
L., Klutstein, M., & Lavi, U., et al. (2006). 
Four linked genes participate in controlling 
sporulation efficiency in budding yeast. PLoS 
Genetics, 2, e195.

Bentsink, L.  n., Jowett, J., Hanhart, C. J., & 
Koornneef, M. (2006). Cloning of DOG1, 
a quantitative trait locus controlling seed 
dormancy in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 103, 
17042–17047.

Bernatzky, R., & Tanksley, S. D. (1986). Toward 

a saturated linkage map in tomato based 
on isozymes and random cDNA sequences. 
Genetics, 112, 887–898.

Bernier, J., Atlin, G. N., Serraj, R., Kumar, A., 
& Spaner, D. (2008). Breeding upland rice 
for drought resistance. Journal of the Science 
of Food and Agriculture, 88, 927–939.

Bolibok-Bragoszewska, H., Heller-Uszynska, 
K., Wenzl, P., Uszynski, G., Kilian, A., & 
Rakoczy-Trojanowska, M. (2009). DArT 
markers for the rye genome – genetic 
diversity and mapping. BMC Genomics, 
10, 578.

Borevitz, J. O., & Chory, J. (2004). Genomics 
tools for QTL analysis and gene discovery. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 7, 
132–136.

Botstein, D., White, R. L., Skolnick, M., & 
Davis, R. W. (1980). Construction of a 
genetic-linkage map in man using restriction 
fragment length polymorphisms. American 
Journal of Human Genetics, 32, 314–331.

Bovill, W., Horne, M., Herde, D., Davis, 

M., Wildermuth, G., & Sutherland, 
M. (2010). Pyramiding QTL increases 
seedling resistance to crown rot (Fusarium 
pseudograminearum) of wheat (Triticum 
aestivum). TAG Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 121, 127–136.

Brachi, B., Faure, N., Horton, M., Flahauw, 
E., Vazquez, A., & Nordborg, M., et al. 
(2010). Linkage and association mapping 
of Arabidopsis thaliana flowering time in 
nature. PLoS Genetics, 6, e1000940.

Brandwagt, B. F., Mesbah, L. A., Takken, F. L., 

Laurent, P. L., Kneppers, T. J., & Hille, J., 
et al. (2000). A longevity assurance gene 
homolog of tomato mediates resistance 
to Alternaria alternata f. sp. lycopersici 
toxins and fumonisin B1. Proceedings of the 

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 97, 4961–4966.

Cullinan, A., & Cantor, C. (2008). Sequenom, 

Inc. Pharmacogenomics, 9, 1211–1215.

Buckler, E. S., Holland, J. B., Bradbury, P. J., 

Acharya, C. B., Brown, P. J., & Browne, 
C., et al. (2009). The genetic architecture 
of maize flowering time. Science, 325, 
714–718.

Buerstmayr, H., Ban, T., & Anderson, J. A. (2009). 

QTL mapping and marker-assisted selection 
for Fusarium head blight resistance in wheat: 
A review. Plant Breeding, 128, 1–26.

Burton, P. R., Cardon, L. R., Craddock, N., 

Deloukas, P., Duncanson, A., & Kwiatowski, 
D. P., et al. (2007). Genome-wide 
association study of 14,000 cases of seven 
common diseases and 3,000 shaded controls. 
Nature, 447, 661–678.

Byun, M. -O., Kwon, H. -B., & Park, S. -C.  

(2007). Recent advances in genetic 
engineering of potato crops for drought and 
saline stress tolerance. In M. A. Jenks, P. M. 
Hasegawa & S. M. Jain (Eds.), Advances in 
molecular breeding toward drought and salt 
solerant crops (pp. 713–737). Dordrecht: 
Springer.

Chan, E. K. F., Rowe, H. C., & Kliebenstein,  

D. J. (2009). Understanding the evolution of 
defense metabolites in Arabidopsis thaliana 
using Genome-Wide Association mapping. 
Genetics, 109, 108522.

Chin, J., Lu, X., Haefele, S., Gamuyao, R., 
Ismail, A., & Wissuwa, M., et al. (2010). 
Development and application of gene-based 
markers for the major rice QTL phosphorus 
uptake 1. TAG Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 120, 1073–1086.

Colbert, T., Till, B. J., Tompa, R., Reynolds, S., 
Steine, M. N., & Yeung, A. T., et al. (2001). 
High-throughput screening for induced point 
mutations. Plant Physiology, 126, 480–484.

Collard, B. C. Y., & Mackill, D. J. (2008). 

Marker-assisted selection: An approach for 
precision plant breeding in the twenty-first 
century. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B-Biological Sciences, 363, 
557–572.

Collins, F. S. (1992). Positional cloning: Let’s 

not call it reverse anymore. Nature Genetics, 
1, 3–6.

Collins, N. C., Tardieu, F., & Tuberosa, R. 

(2008). Quantitative Trait Loci and crop 
performance under abiotic stress: Where do 
we stand? Plant Physiology, 147, 469–486.
Concibido, V. C., Denny, R. L., Lange, D. A., 
Orf, J. H., & Young, N. D. (1996). RFLP 
mapping and Marker-Assisted Selection 
of Soybean cyst nematode resistance in PI 
209332. Crop Science, 36, 1643–1650.
Cook, E. H., Jr, & Scherer, S. W. (2008). 

Copy-number variations associated with 
neuropsychiatric conditions. Nature, 455, 
919–923.

Cooper, J., Till, B., Laport, R., Darlow, M., 
Kleffner, J., & Jamai, A., et al. (2008). 
TILLING to detect induced mutations in 
soybean. BMC Plant Biology, 8, 9.

Cubero, B., Nakagawa, Y., Jiang, X. -Y., Miura, K. 
-J., Li, F., & Raghothama, K. G., et al. (2009). 
The phosphate transporter PHT4;6 is a 
determinant of salt tolerance that is localized 
to the golgi apparatus of Arabidopsis. 
Molecular Plant, 2, 535–552.

De Rybel, B., Audenaert, D., Vert, G., Rozhon, 

W., Mayerhofer, J., & Peelman, F., et al. 
(2009). Chemical inhibition of a subset of 
Arabidopsis thaliana GSK3-like kinases 
activates brassinosteroid signaling. Chemistry 
& Biology, 16, 594–604.

Dekkers, J. C. M., & Hospital, F. (2002). 

The use of molecular genetics in the 
improvement of agricultural populations. 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 3, 22–32.
Devos, K. M., & Gale, M. D. (1997). 

Comparative genetics in the grasses. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 35, 3–15.

Devos, K. M., & Gale, M. D. (2000). Genome 

relationships: The grass model in current 
research. Plant Cell, 12, 637–646.

Doebley, J., Stec, A., & Hubbard, L. (1997). 

The evolution of apical dominance in maize. 
Nature, 386, 485–488.

Doerge, R. W. (2002). Mapping and analysis 
of quantitative trait loci in experimental 
populations. Nature Reviews Genetics, 3, 
43–52.

Druka, A., Druka, I., Centeno, A. G., Li, H. 
Q., Sun, Z. H., & Thomas, W. T. B., et al. 
(2008). Towards systems genetic analyses in 
barley: Integration of phenotypic, expression 
and genotype data into GeneNetwork. BMC 
Genetics, 9, 73.

Dudley, J. W. (1993). Molecular markers in 

plant improvement – Manipulation of genes 
affecting quantitative traits. Crop Science, 
33, 660–668.

Edwards, A., Civitello, A., Hammond, H. 

A., & Caskey, C. T. (1991). DNA typing 
and genetic-mapping with trimeric and 
tetrameric tandem repeats. American 
Journal of Human Genetics, 49, 746–756.

Edwards, D., & Batley, J. (2010). Plant 

genome sequencing: Applications for crop 
improvement. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 
8, 2–9.

Ellis, R. P., Forster, B. P., Gordon, D. C., 

Handley, L. L., Keith, R. P., & Lawrence, 
P., et al. (2002). Phenotype/genotype 
associations for yield and salt tolerance in a 
barley mapping population segregating for 
two dwarfing genes. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 53, 1163–1176.

Ellis, R. P., Forster, B. P., Waugh, R., Bonar, 
N., Handley, L. L., & Robinson, D., et al. 
(1997). Mapping physiological traits in 
barley. New Phytologist, 137, 149–157.

Eshed, Y., & Zamir, D. (1995). An introgression 

line population of Lycopersicon pennellii 
in the cultivated tomato enables the 
identification and fine mapping of yield-
associated QTL. Genetics, 141, 1147–1162.

Falconer, D. S., & Mackay, T. F. C. (1996). 
Introduction to quantitative genetics (4th 
ed.). pp. 253–261 Harlow, Essex, UK: 
Longmans Green. 

Fatokun, C. A., Menanciohautea, D. I., Danesh, 

D., & Young, N. D. (1992). Evidence for 
orthologous seed weight genes in cowpea 
and mung bean based on RFLP mapping. 
Genetics, 132, 841–846.

Finkeldey, R., Leinemann, L., & Gailing, O. 

(2010). Molecular genetic tools to infer the 

origin of forest plants and wood. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 85, 1251–
1258.

Flint-Garcia, S. A., Buckler, E. S., Tiffin, 

P., Ersoz, E., & Springer, N. M. (2009). 
Heterosis is prevalent for multiple traits in 
diverse maize germplasm. PLoS ONE, 4, 
e7433.

Flowers, T. J., Koyama, M. L., Flowers, S. A., 

Sudhakar, C., Singh, K. P., & Yeo, A. R. 
(2000). QTL: Their place in engineering 
tolerance of rice to salinity. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 51, 99–106.

Foolad, M. R. (2007a). Current status of 

breeding tomatoes for salt and drought 
tolerance. In M. A. Jenks, P. M. Hasegawa 
& S. M. Jain (Eds.), Advances in molecular 
breeding toward drought and salt solerant 
crops (pp. 669–700). Dordrecht: Springer.
Foolad, M. R. (2007b). Genome mapping and 
molecular breeding of tomato. International 
Journal of Plant Genomics, 2007, 64358.

Foolad, M. R., Chen, F. Q., & Lin, G. Y. 

(1998). RFLP mapping of QTLs conferring 
salt tolerance during germination in an 
interspecific cross of tomato. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 97, 1133–1144.

Foolad, M. R., Zhang, L. P., & Lin, G. Y. (2001). 

Identification and validation of QTLs for 
salt tolerance during vegetative growth in 
tomato by selective genotyping. Genome, 44, 
444–454.

Frary, A., Nesbitt, T. C., Frary, A., Grandillo, S., 
van der Knaap, E., & Cong, B., et al. (2000). 
fw2.2: A quantitative trait locus key to the 
evolution of tomato fruit size. Science, 289, 
85–88.

Frascaroli, E., Cane, M. A., Landi, P., Pea, 

G., Gianfranceschi, L., & Villa, M., et al. 
(2007). Classical genetic and quantitative 
trait loci analyses of heterosis in a maize 
hybrid between two elite inbred lines. 
Genetics, 176, 625–644.

Frisch, M., Bohn, M., & Melchinger, A. E. 

(1999). Comparison of selection strategies 
for marker-assisted backcrossing of a gene. 
Crop Science, 39, 1295–1301.

Gailing, O., Vornam, B., Leinemann, L., & 

Finkeldey, R. (2009). Genetic and genomic 
approaches to assess adaptive genetic 
variation in plants: Forest trees as a model. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 137, 509–519.

Ganal, M. W., Altmann, T., & Roder, M. S. 

(2009). SNP identification in crop plants. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 12, 
211–217.

Ge, D., Fellay, J., Thompson, A. J., Simon, J. S., 
Shianna, K. V., & Urban, T. J., et al. (2009). 
Genetic variation in IL28B predicts hepatitis 
C treatment-induced viral clearance. Nature, 
461, 399–401.

Gebhardt, C., Walkemeier, B., Henselewski, 

H., Barakat, A., Delseny, M., & Stuber, 
K. (2003). Comparative mapping 
between potato (Solanum tuberosum) and 
Arabidopsis thaliana reveals structurally 
conserved domains and ancient duplications 
in the potato genome. Plant Journal, 34, 
529–541.

Gimelfarb, A., & Lande, R. (1994). Simulation 
of Marker Assisted Selection for nonadditive 
traits. Genetical Research, 64, 127–136.

179

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Glazier, A. M., Nadeau, J. H., & Aitman, T. J. 

(2002). Finding genes that underlie complex 
traits. Science, 298, 2345–2349.

Graeber, K., Linkies, A., Muller, K., Wunchova, 
A., Rott, A., & Leubner-Metzger, G. (2010). 
Cross-species approaches to seed dormancy 
and germination: Conservation and 
biodiversity of ABA-regulated mechanisms 
and the Brassicaceae DOG1 genes. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 73, 67–87.

Guo, W. Z., Wang, W., Zhou, B. L., & Zhang, 
T. Z. (2006). Cross-species transferability 
of G-arboreum-derived EST-SSRs in the 
diploid species of Gossypium. Theoretical 
and Applied Genetics, 112, 1573–1581.
Gupta, P., Langridge, P. & Mir, R. (2010). 

Marker-assisted wheat breeding: Present 
status and future possibilities. Molecular 
Breeding, 10.1007/s11032-009-9359-7.
Hao, Z., Liu, X., Li, X., Xie, C., Li, M., & 

Zhang, D., et al. (2009). Identification of 
quantitative trait loci for drought tolerance 
at seedling stage by screening a large 
number of introgression lines in maize. Plant 
Breeding, 128, 337–341.

Hayashi, K., Tan, X., Zheng, N., Hatate, T., 
Kimura, Y., & Kepinski, S., et al. (2008). 
Small-molecule agonists and antagonists 
of F-box protein-substrate interactions in 
auxin perception and signaling. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 105, 
5632–5637.

Hillel, J., Plotzky, Y., Gal, O., Haberfeld, A., 
Lavi, U., Dunnington, E. A., et al. (1989). 
DNA fingerprints in chickens. In Proceedings 
of the thirty-first British poultry breeders’ 
roundtable reading (pp. 1–11). England.

Hillel, J., Schaap, T., Haberfeld, A., Jeffreys, 

A. J., Plotzky, Y., & Cahaner, A., et al. 
(1990). DNA fingerprints applied to gene 
introgression in breeding programs. Genetics, 
124, 783–789.

Hippolyte, I., Bakry, F., Seguin, M., Gardes, 

L., Rivallan, R., & Risterucci, A. -M., et al. 
(2010). A saturated SSR/DArT linkage 
map of Musa acuminata addressing genome 
rearrangements among bananas. BMC Plant 
Biology, 10, 65.

Hirschhorn, J. N., & Daly, M. J. (2005). 
Genome-wide association studies for 
common diseases and complex traits. Nature 
Reviews Genetics, 6, 95–108.

Hospital, F., & Charcosset, A. (1997). Marker-

assisted introgression of quantitative trait 
loci. Genetics, 147, 1469–1485.

Hyten, D. L., Choi, I. -Y., Song, Q., Specht, J. E., 

Carter, T. E., Jr., & Shoemaker, R. C.,  
et al. (2010). A high density integrated 
genetic linkage map of Soybean and the 
development of a 1536 universal soy linkage 
panel for Quantitative Trait Locus mapping. 
Crop Science, 50, 960–968.

Iafrate, A. J., Feuk, L., Rivera, M. N., 

Listewnik, M. L., Donahoe, P. K., & Qi, 
Y., et al. (2004). Detection of large-scale 
variation in the human genome. Nature 
Genetics, 36, 949–951.

Jaccoud, D., Peng, K., Feinstein, D., & Kilian, 

A. (2001). Diversity arrays: A solid state 
technology for sequence information 
independent genotyping. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 29, E25.

180

Jander, G., Norris, S. R., Rounsley, S. D., Bush, 

D. F., Levin, I. M., & Last, R. L. (2002). 
Arabidopsis map-based cloning in the 
Post-Genome Era. Plant Physiology, 129, 
440–450.

Jannink, J. -L., Lorenz, A. J., & Iwata, H. 

(2010). Genomic selection in plant 
breeding: From theory to practice. Briefings 
in Functional Genomics, 9, 166–177.

Jordan, M. C., Somers, D. J., & Banks, T. W. 
(2007). Identifying regions of the wheat 
genome controlling seed development by 
mapping expression quantitative trait loci. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 5, 442–453.

Joshi, S. P., Ranjekar, P. K., & Gupta, V. S. 

(1999). Molecular markers in plant genome 
analysis. Current Science, 77, 230–240.
Jurinke, C., Boom, D., Cantor, C. R., & 

Köster, H. (2001). Automated genotyping 
using the DNA MassArray™ technology. In 
J. B. (2001). Rampal (Ed.), DNA arrays: 
Methods and protocols (Vol. 170, pp. 103–
116). New-York: Humana Press.

Keurentjes, J. J. B., Fu, J. Y., Terpstra, I. R., 

Garcia, J. M., van den Ackerveken, G., 
& Snoek, L. B., et al. (2007). Regulatory 
network construction in Arabidopsis 
by using genome-wide gene expression 
quantitative trait loci. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of  
the United States of America, 104, 
1708–1713.

Kim, H. J., Han, J. H., Yoo, J. H., Cho, H. 

J., & Kim, B. D. (2008). Development of 
a sequence characteristic amplified region 
marker linked to the L-4 locus conferring 
broad spectrum resistance to tobamoviruses 
in pepper plants. Molecules and Cells, 25, 
205–210.

Kim, N. S., Armstrong, K. C., Fedak, G., Ho, 
K., & Park, N. I. (2002). A microsatellite 
sequence from the rice blast fungus 
(Magnaporthe grisea) distinguishes between 
the centromeres of Hordeum vulgare and 
H-bulbosum in hybrid plants. Genome, 45, 
165–174.

Kirst, M., Basten, C. J., Myburg, A. A., Zeng, 

Z. B., & Sederoff, R. R. (2005). Genetic 
architecture of transcript-level variation in 
differentiating xylem of a eucalyptus hybrid. 
Genetics, 169, 2295–2303.

Kliebenstein, D. J., Lambrix, V. M., Reichelt, 

M., Gershenzon, J., & Mitchell-Olds, 
T. (2001). Gene duplication in the 
diversification of secondary metabolism: 
Tandem 2-oxoglutarate-dependent 
dioxygenases control glucosinolate 
biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 
13, 681–693.

Kopecky, D., Bartos, J., Lukaszewski, A., Baird, 
J., Cernoch, V., & Kolliker, R., et al. (2009). 
Development and mapping of DArT markers 
within the Festuca–Lolium complex. BMC 
Genomics, 10, 473.

Korstanje, R., & Paigen, B. (2002). From 

QTL to gene: The harvest begins. Nature 
Genetics, 31, 235–236.

Kottapalli, K., Lakshmi Narasu, M., & Jena, K. 

(2010). Effective strategy for pyramiding 
three bacterial blight resistance genes into 
fine grain rice cultivar, Samba Mahsuri, using 
sequence tagged site markers. Biotechnology 
Letters, 32, 989–996.

Koyama, M. L., Levesley, A., Koebner, R. M. 

D., Flowers, T. J., & Yeo, A. R. (2001). 
Quantitative Trait Loci for component 
physiological traits determining salt 
tolerance in rice. Plant Physiology, 125, 
406–422.

Krause, J., Fu, Q., Good, J. M., Viola, B., 
Shunkov, M. V., & Derevianko, A. P.,  
et al. (2010). The complete mitochondrial 
DNA genome of an unknown hominin from 
southern Siberia. Nature, 464, 894–897.

Krieger, U., Lippman, Z. B., & Zamir, D. 
(2010). The flowering gene SINGLE 
FLOWER TRUSS drives heterosis for yield 
in tomato. Nature Genetics, 42, 459–463.
Ku, C. S., Loy, E. Y., Pawitan, Y., & Chia, K. 
S. (2010). The pursuit of genome-wide 
association studies: Where are we now? 
Journal of Human Genetics, 55, 195–206.
Kumar, L. S. (1999). DNA markers in plant 
improvement: An overview. Biotechnology 
Advances, 17, 143–182.

Kusterer, B., Muminovic, J., Utz, H. F., Piepho, 

H. P., Barth, S., & Heckenberger, M.,  
et al. (2007). Analysis of a triple testcross 
design with recombinant inbred lines reveals 
a significant role of epistasis in heterosis 
for biomass-related traits in Arabidopsis. 
Genetics, 175, 2009–2017.

Kwon, Y. -S., Tang, K., Cantor, C. R., Koster, 
H., & Kang, C. (2001). DNA sequencing 
and genotyping by transcriptional synthesis 
of chain-terminated RNA ladders and 
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 29, e11.

Lande, R., & Thompson, R. (1990). Efficiency 

of Marker-Assisted Selection in the 
improvement of quantitative traits. Genetics, 
124, 743.

Lander, E. S., & Botstein, D. (1989). Mapping 
Mendelian factors underlying quantitative 
traits using RFLP linkage maps. Genetics, 
121, 185–199.

Lee, G. J., Boerma, H. R., Villagarcia, M. 

R., Zhou, X., Carter, T. E., & Li, Z., et al. 
(2004). A major QTL conditioning salt 
tolerance in S-100 soybean and descendent 
cultivars. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
109, 1610–1619.

Lee, J. A., Carvalho, C. M. B., & Lupski, J. R. 
(2007). A DNA replication mechanism for 
generating nonrecurrent rearrangements 
associated with genomic disorders. Cell, 
131, 1235–1247.

Lee, M. (1995). DNA markers and plant 

breeding programs. In D. L. Sparks (Ed.), 
Advances in agronomy (Vol. 55, pp. 265–
344). San Diego: Academic Press Inc.
Lee, S. Y., Ahn, J. H., Cha, Y. S., Yun, D. 

W., Lee, M. C., & Ko, J. C., et al. (2006). 
Mapping of quantitative trait loci for salt 
tolerance at the seedling stage in rice. 
Molecules and Cells, 21, 192–196.
Leidi, E. O., Barragan, V., Rubio, L., El-

Hamdaoui, A., Ruiz, M. T., & Cubero, B., 
et al. (2010). The AtNHX1 exchanger 
mediates potassium compartmentation in 
vacuoles of transgenic tomato. Plant Journal, 
61, 495–506.

Levin, I., Gilboa, N., Cincarevsky, F., Oguz, 

I., Petreikov, M., & Yeselson, Y., et al. 
(2006). Epistatic interaction between 
the Fgr and FK2 genes determines the 

fructose to glucose ratio in mature tomato 
fruit. Israel Journal of Plant Sciences, 54, 
215–222.

Li, C., Zhang, G., & Lance, R. (2007). Recent 
advances in breeding barley for drought and 
saline stress tolerance. In M. A. Jenks, P. M. 
Hasegawa & S. M. Jain (Eds.), Advances in 
molecular breeding toward drought and salt 
solerant crops (pp. 603–626). Dordrecht: 
Springer.

Li, Z. K., Fu, B. Y., Gao, Y. M., Xu, J. L., Ali, J., 

& Lafitte, H. R., et al. (2005). ). Genome-
wide introgression lines and their use in 
genetic and molecular dissection of complex 
phenotypes in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant 
Molecular Biology, 59, 33–52.

Li, Z. K., Luo, L. J., Mei, H. W., Wang, D. 

L., Shu, Q. Y., & Tabien, R., et al. (2001). 
Overdominant epistatic loci are the primary 
genetic basis of inbreeding depression and 
heterosis in rice. I. Biomass and grain yield. 
Genetics, 158, 1737–1753.

Lin, H. X., Zhu, M. Z., Yano, M., Gao, J. P., 
Liang, Z. W., & Su, W. A., et al. (2004). 
QTLs for Na and K uptake of the shoots 
and roots controlling rice salt tolerance. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 108, 
253–260.

Lippman, Z. B., & Zamir, D. (2007). Heterosis: 
Revisiting the magic. Trends in Genetics, 23, 
60–66.

Litt, M., & Luty, J. A. (1989). A hypervariable 

microsatellite revealed by in vitro 
amplification of a dinucleotide repeat within 
the cardiac-muscle actin gene. American 
Journal of Human Genetics, 44, 397–401.

Liu, J., Cong, B., & Tanksley, S. D. (2003). 
Generation and analysis of an artificial 
gene dosage series in tomato to study 
the mechanisms by which the cloned 
Quantitative Trait Locus fw2.2 controls fruit 
size. Plant Physiology, 132, 292–299.

Lubbers, E. L., Chee, P. W., Saranga, Y., & 

Paterson, A. H. (2007). Recent advances and 
future prospective in molecular breeding 
of cotton for drought and salinity stress 
tolerance. In M. A. Jenks, P. M. Hasegawa 
& S. M. Jain (Eds.), Advances in molecular 
breeding toward drought and salt solerant 
crops (pp. 775–796). Dordrecht: Springer.
Lukowitz, W., Gillmor, C. S., & Scheible, W. 

R. (2000). Positional cloning in Arabidopsis. 
Why it feels good to have a genome initiative 
working for you. Plant Physiology, 123, 
795–805.

Ma, L. Q., Zhou, E. F., Huo, N. X., Zhou, R. 

H., Wang, G. Y., & Jia, J. Z. (2007). Genetic 
analysis of salt tolerance in a recombinant 
inbred population of wheat (Triticum 
aestivum L.). Euphytica, 153, 109–117.
Maccaferri, M., Sanguineti, M. C., Corneti, 
S., Ortega, J. L. A., Salem, M. B., & Bort, 
J., et al. (2008). Quantitative Trait Loci for 
grain yield and adaptation of Durum wheat 
(Triticum durum Desf.) across a wide range 
of water availability. Genetics, 178, 489–511.

Mackay, I., & Powell, W. (2007). Methods for 

linkage disequilibrium mapping in crops. 
Trends in Plant Science, 12, 57–63.

Mackay, T. F. C., Stone, E. A., & Ayroles, J. F. 
(2009). The genetics of quantitative traits: 
Challenges and prospects. Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 10, 565–577.

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

Maher, B. (2008). Personal genomes: The case 

of the missing heritability. Nature, 456, 
18–21.

Mano, Y., & Takeda, K. (1997). Mapping 
quantitative trait loci for salt tolerance 
at germination and the seedling stage in 
barley (Hordeum vulgare L). Euphytica, 94, 
263–272.

Margulies, M., Egholm, M., Altman, W. E., 

Attiya, S., Bader, J. S., & Bemben, L. 
A., et al. (2005). Genome sequencing 
in microfabricated high-density picolitre 
reactors. Nature, 437, 376–380.

Martin, G. B., Brommonschenkel, S. H., 

Chunwongse, J., Frary, A., Ganal, M. W., 
& Spivey, R., et al. (1993). Map-based 
cloning of a protein kinase gene conferring 
disease resistance in tomato. Science, 262, 
1432–1436.

Martin, G. B., Frary, A., Wu, T., 

Brommonschenkel, S., Chunwongse, J., & 
Earle, E. D., et al. (1994). A member of the 
tomato Pto gene family confers sensitivity to 
fenthion resulting in rapid cell death. Plant 
Cell, 6, 1543–1552.

Masojc, P. (2002). The application of molecular 
markers in the process of selection. Cellular 
& Molecular Biology Letters, 7, 499–509.
McCaffrey, A. P., Meuse, L., Pham, T. T. T., 

Conklin, D. S., Hannon, G. J., & Kay, 
M. A. (2002). Gene expression – RNA 
interference in adult mice. Nature, 418, 
38–39.

McCallum, C. M., Comai, L., Greene, E. A., & 
Henikoff, S. (2000a). Targeted screening for 
induced mutations. Nature Biotechnology, 
18, 455–457.

McCallum, C. M., Comai, L., Greene, E. A., 
& Henikoff, S. (2000b). Targeting Induced 
Local Lesions IN Genomes (TILLING) for 
plant functional genomics. Plant Physiology, 
123, 439–442.

Meksem, K., Leister, D., Peleman, J., Zabeau, 
M., Salamini, F., & Gebhardt, C. (1995). A 
high-resolution map of the vicinity of the 
R1 locus on chromosome-V of potato based 
on RFLP and AFLP markers. Molecular & 
General Genetics, 249, 74–81.

Melchinger, A. E., Piepho, H. P., Utz, H. F., 

Muminovic, J., Wegenast, T., & Torjek, O., 
et al. (2007). Genetic basis of heterosis 
for growth-related traits in Arabidopsis 
investigated by testcross progenies of near-
isogenic lines reveals a significant role of 
epistasis. Genetics, 177, 1827–1837.
Meudt, H. M., & Clarke, A. C. (2007). 

Almost forgotten or latest practice? AFLP 
applications, analyses and advances. Trends 
in Plant Science, 12, 106–117.

Michelmore, R. W., Paran, I., & Kesseli, R. V. 

(1991). Identification of markers linked 
to disease-resistance genes by bulked 
segregant analysis – a rapid method to detect 
markers in specific genomic regions by using 
segregating populations. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 88, 9828–9832.

Milligan, B. G., Leebensmack, J., & Strand, A. 
E. (1994). Conservation genetics – beyond 
the maintenance of marker diversity. 
Molecular Ecology, 3, 423–435.

Mitchell-Olds, T. (2010). Complex-trait 

analysis in plants. Genome Biology, 11, 113.

Moore, G., Devos, K. M., Wang, Z., & Gale, 
M. D. (1995). Cereal genome evolution – 
grasses, line up and form a circle. Current 
Biology, 5, 737–739.

Moore, G., Foote, T., Helentjaris, T., Devos, K., 
Kurata, N., & Gale, M. (1995). Was there a 
single ancestral cereal chromosome? Trends 
in Genetics, 11, 81–82.

Moury, B., Pflieger, S., Blattes, A., Lefebvre, 

V., & Palloix, A. (2000). A CAPS marker to 
assist selection of tomato spotted wilt virus 
(TSWV) resistance in pepper. Genome, 43, 
137–142.

Mueller, U. G., & Wolfenbarger, L. L. (1999). 
AFLP genotyping and fingerprinting. Trends 
in Ecology & Evolution, 14, 389–394.

Muth, J., Hartje, S., Twyman, R. M., 

Hofferbert, H. R., Tacke, E., & Prufer, D. 
(2008). Precision breeding for novel starch 
variants in potato. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 6, 576–584.

Myles, S., Peiffer, J., Brown, P. J., Ersoz, E. S., 
Zhang, Z., & Costich, D. E., et al. (2009). 
Association mapping: Critical considerations 
shift from genotyping to experimental 
design. Plant Cell, 21, 2194–2202.

Nakayashiki, H., Kadotani, N., & Mayama, 

S. (2006). Evolution and diversification of 
RNA silencing proteins in fungi. Journal of 
Molecular Evolution, 63, 127–135.

Napoli, C., Lemieux, C., & Jorgensen, R. 

(1990). Introduction of a chimeric chalcone 
synthase gene into Petunia results in 
reversible co-suppression of homologous 
genes in trans. Plant Cell, 2, 279–289.

Neil, J., Helen, O., Howard, T., & Izolda, P.  A. 

(2009). Markers and mapping revisited: 
Finding your gene. New Phytologist, 183, 
935–966.

Neimann-Sorensen, A., & Robertson, A. (1961). 

The association between blood groups and 
several production characteristics in three 
danish cattle breeds. Acta Agriculturae 
Scandinavica, 11, 163–196.

Nevo, E., & Chen, G. X. (2010). Drought and 

salt tolerances in wild relatives for wheat 
and barley improvement. Plant Cell and 
Environment, 33, 670–685.

Nordborg, M., & Weigel, D. (2008). Next-

generation genetics in plants. Nature, 456, 
720–723.

Okada, M., Lanzatella, C., Saha, M. C., 

Bouton, J., Wu, R., & Tobias, C. M. (2010). 
Complete switchgrass genetic maps reveal 
subgenome collinearity, preferential pairing, 
and multilocus interactions. Genetics, 
genetics, 110, 113910.

Paran, I., Kesseli, R., & Michelmore, R. (1991). 

Identification of Restriction-Fragment-
Length-Polymorphism and Random 
Amplified Polymorphic DNA markers linked 
to downy mildew resistance genes in lettuce, 
using near-isogenic lines. Genome, 34, 
1021–1027.

Park, S. Y., Fung, P., Nishimura, N., Jensen, 
D. R., Fujii, H., & Zhao, Y., et al. (2009). 
Abscisic acid inhibits type 2C protein 
phosphatases via the PYR/PYL family of 
START proteins. Science, 324, 1068–1071.

Parry, D. W., Jenkinson, P., & McLeod, L. 

(1995). Fusarium ear blight (Scab) in small-
grain cereals – A review. Plant Pathology, 44, 
207–238.

181

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Paterson, A. H., Damon, S., Hewitt, J. D., 

Zamir, D., Rabinowitch, H. D., & Lincoln, 
S. E., et al. (1991). Mendelian factors 
underlying quantitative traits in tomato – 
comparison across species, generations, and 
environments. Genetics, 127, 181–197.

Paterson, A. H., Lander, E. S., Hewitt, J. D., 
Peterson, S., Lincoln, S. E., & Tanksley, S. 
D. (1988). Resolution of quantitative traits 
into Mendelian factors by using a complete 
linkage map of restriction fragment length 
polymorphisms. Nature, 335, 721–726.

Pedersen, W. L., & Leath, S. (1988). 

Pyramiding major genes for resistance to 
maintain residual effects. Annual Review of 
Phytopathology, 26, 369–378.

Pestsova, E. G., Borner, A., & Roder, M. S. 

(2006). Development and QTL assessment 
of Triticum aestivum–Aegilops tauschii 
introgression lines. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 112, 634–647.

Peterhansel, C., Freialdenhoven, A., Kurth, J., 

Kolsch, R., & Schulze-Lefert, P. (1997). 
Interaction analyses of genes required for 
resistance responses to powdery mildew in 
barley reveal distinct pathways leading to 
leaf cell death. Plant Cell, 9, 1397–1409.

Peters, J. L., Cnudde, F., & Gerats, T. (2003). 

Forward genetics and map-based cloning 
approaches. Trends in Plant Science, 8, 
484–491.

Petreikov, M., Shen, S., Yeselson, Y., Levin, I., 
Bar, M., & Schaffer, A. (2006). Temporally 
extended gene expression of the ADP-Glc 
pyrophosphorylase large subunit (AgpL1) 
leads to increased enzyme activity in 
developing tomato fruit. Planta, 224, 
1465–1479.

Petreikov, M., Yeselson, L., Shen, S., Levin, I., 
Schaffer, A. A., & Efrati, A., et al. (2009). 
Carbohydrate balance and accumulation 
during development of near-isogenic 
tomato lines differing in the AGPase-L1 
allele. Journal of the American Society for 
Horticultural Science, 134, 134–140.

Plotsky, Y., Cahaner, A., Haberfeld, A., Lavi, 
U. & Hillel, J. (1990). Analysis of genetic 
association between DNA fingerprint bands 
and quantitative traits by DNA mixes. In 
Proceedings of the fourth world congress on 
genetics applied to livestock production (pp. 
133–136), Edinburgh, Scotland.

Potokina, E., Druka, A., Luo, Z. W., Wise, R., 

Waugh, R., & Kearsey, M. (2008). Gene 
expression quantitative trait locus analysis 
of 16,000 barley genes reveals a complex 
pattern of genome-wide transcriptional 
regulation. Plant Journal, 53, 90–101.

Prasad, S. R., Bagali, P. G., Hittalmani, S., & 

Shashidhar, H. E. (2000). Molecular mapping 
of quantitative trait loci associated with 
seedling tolerance to salt stress in rice (Oryza 
sativa L.). Current Science, 78, 162–164.

Provan, J., Soranzo, N., Wilson, N. J., McNicol, 

J. W., Forrest, G. I., & Cottrell, J., et al. 
(1998). Gene-pool variation in Caledonian 
and European Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris 
L.) revealed by chloroplast simple-sequence 
repeats. Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London Series B-Biological Sciences, 265, 
1697–1705.

Pumphrey, M. O., Bernardo, R., & Anderson, 

J. A. (2007). Validating the Fhb1 QTL 
for Fusarium head blight resistance in 

182

near-isogenic wheat lines developed from 
breeding populations. Crop Science, 47, 
200–206.

Quarrie, S. A., Gulli, M., Calestani, C., Steed, 

A., & Marmiroli, N. (1994). Location 
of a gene regulating drought-induced 
abscisic-acid production on the long arm of 
chromosome 5a of wheat. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 89, 794–800.

Quarrie, S. A., Steed, A., Calestani, C., 

Semikhodskii, A., Lebreton, C., & Chinoy, 
C., et al. (2005). A high-density genetic 
map of hexaploid wheat (Triticum aestivum 
L.) from the cross Chinese Spring X SQ1 
and its use to compare QTLs for grain yield 
across a range of environments. Theoretical 
and Applied Genetics, 110, 865–880.

Quesada, V., Garcia-Martinez, S., Piqueras, 
P., Ponce, M. R., & Micol, J. L. (2002). 
Genetic architecture of NaCl tolerance 
in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 130, 
951–963.

Radoev, M., Becker, H. C., & Ecke, W. (2008). 

Genetic analysis of heterosis for yield and 
yield components in rapeseed (Brassica 
napus L.) by quantitative trait locus 
mapping. Genetics, 179, 1547–1558.

Rafalski, A. (2002). Applications of single 

nucleotide polymorphisms in crop genetics. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 5, 
94–100.

Rafalski, J. A. (2010). Association genetics 

in crop improvement. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology, 13, 174–180.

Raina, K., & Crews, C. M. (2010). Chemical 
inducers of targeted protein degradation. 
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 285, 
11057–11060.

Reiter, R. S., Williams, J. G. K., Feldmann, K. 
A., Rafalski, J. A., Tingey, S. V., & Scolnik, 
P. A. (1992). Global and local genome 
mapping in Arabidopsis-thaliana by using 
recombinant inbred lines and Random 
Amplified Polymorphic DNAs. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 89, 1477–1481.

Ren, Z. H., Gao, J. P., Li, L. G., Cai, X. L., 

Huang, W., & Chao, D. Y., et al. (2005). A 
rice quantitative trait locus for salt tolerance 
encodes a sodium transporter. Nature 
Genetics, 37, 1141–1146.

Rosenberg, N. A., Huang, L., Jewett, E. M., 

Szpiech, Z. A., Jankovic, I., & Boehnke, M. 
(2010). Genome-wide association studies 
in diverse populations. Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 11, 356–366.

Rothberg, J. M., & Leamon, J. H. (2008). The 

development and impact of 454 sequencing. 
Nature Biotechnology, 26, 1117–1124.

Ruiz-Ferrer, V., & Voinnet, O. (2009). Roles of 
plant small RNAs in biotic stress responses. 
Annual Review of Plant Biology, 60, 485–510.

Saidou, A. -A., Mariac, C., Luong, V., Pham, 

J. -L., Bezancon, G., & Vigouroux, Y. 
(2009). Association studies identify natural 
variation at PHYC linked to flowering time 
and morphological variation in pearl millet. 
Genetics, 182, 899–910.

Salvi, S., & Tuberosa, R. (2005). To clone or 

not to clone plant QTLs: Present and future 
challenges. Trends in Plant Science, 10, 
297–304.

Sanchez, A. C., Subudhi, P. K., Rosenow, 

D. T., & Nguyen, H. T. (2002). Mapping 

QTLs associated with drought resistance in 
sorghum (Sorghum bicolor L. Moench). 
Plant Molecular Biology, 48, 713–726.

Sanseverino, W., Roma, G., De Simone, M., 
Faino, L., Melito, S., & Stupka, E., et al. 
(2010). PRGdb: A bioinformatics platform 
for plant resistance gene analysis. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 38, D814–21.

Saranga, Y., Menz, M., Jiang, C. X., Wright, 

R. J., Yakir, D., & Paterson, A. H. 
(2001). Genomic dissection of genotype 
x environment interactions conferring 
adaptation of cotton to arid conditions. 
Genome Research, 11, 1988–1995.

Sari-Gorla, M., Krajewski, P., Di Fonzo, N., 

Villa, M., & Frova, C. (1999). Genetic 
analysis of drought tolerance in maize by 
molecular markers. II. Plant height and 
flowering. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
99, 289–295.

Sax, K. (1923). The association of size 

differences with seed-coat pattern and 
pigmentation in Phaseolus vulgaris. Genetics, 
8, 552–560.

Scascitelli, M., Whitney, K. D., Randell, R. 

A., King, M., Buerkle, C. A., & Rieseberg, 
L. H. (2010). Genome scan of hybridizing 
sunflowers from Texas (Helianthus annuus 
and H. debilis) reveals asymmetric patterns 
of introgression and small islands of genomic 
differentiation. Molecular Ecology, 19, 
521–541.

Sebat, J., Lakshmi, B., Troge, J., Alexander, J., 
Young, J., & Lundin, P., et al. (2004). Large-
scale copy number polymorphism in the 
human genome. Science, 305, 525–528.

Semel, Y., Nissenbaum, J., Menda, N., Zinder, 
M., Krieger, U., & Issman, N., et al. (2006). 
Overdominant quantitative trait loci for 
yield and fitness in tomato. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 103, 
12981–12986.

Septiningsih, E. M., Pamplona, A. M., Sanchez, 

D. L., Neeraja, C. N., Vergara, G. V., & 
Heuer, S., et al. (2009). Development of 
submergence-tolerant rice cultivars: The 
Sub1 locus and beyond. Annals of Botany, 
103, 151–160.

Servin, B., Martin, O. C., Mezard, M., & 

Hospital, F. (2004). Toward a theory of 
marker-assisted gene pyramiding. Genetics, 
168, 513–523.

Sherry, A. F. -G., Anne-Céline, T., Jianming, 

Y., Gael, P., Susan, M. R., & Sharon, E. M., 
et al. (2005). Maize association population: 
A high-resolution platform for quantitative 
trait locus dissection. The Plant Journal, 44, 
1054–1064.

Shi, C., Uzarowska, A., Ouzunova, M., Landbeck, 

M., Wenzel, G., & Lubberstedt, T.  
(2007). Identification of candidate genes 
associated with cell wall digestibility and 
eQTL (expression quantitative trait loci) 
analysis in a Flint x Flint maize recombinant 
inbred line population. BMC Genomics, 8, 22.

Smith, C., & Simpson, S. P. (1986). The use 

of genetic polymorphisms in livestock 
improvement. Journal of Animal Breeding 
and Genetics, 103, 205–217.

Smith, C. (1967). Improvement of metric 

traits through specific genetic loci. Animal 
Production, 9, 349–358.

Smith, C. J. S., Watson, C. F., Bird, C. R.,  

Ray, J., Schuch, W., & Grierson, D. 

(1990). Expression of a truncated tomato 
polygalacturonase gene inhibits expression 
of the endogenous gene in transgenic 
plants. Molecular & General Genetics, 224, 
477–481.

Soller, M., & Beckmann, J. S. (1983). Genetic-

polymorphism in varietal identification 
and genetic-improvement. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 67, 25–33.

Soller, M. (1978). The use of loci associated 

with quantitative effects in dairy cattle 
improvement. Animal Production, 27, 
133–139.

Srinivasachary, , Dida, M. M., Gale, M. D., & 

Devos, K. M. (2007). Comparative analyses 
reveal high levels of conserved colinearity 
between the finger millet and rice genomes. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 115, 
489–499.

Stracke, S., Haseneyer, G., Veyrieras, J. -B., 
Geiger, H., Sauer, S., & Graner, A., et al. 
(2009). Association mapping reveals gene 
action and interactions in the determination 
of flowering time in barley. TAG Theoretical 
and Applied Genetics, 118, 259–273.

Street, N. R., Skogstrom, O., Sjodin, A., Tucker, 
J., Rodriguez-Acosta, M., & Nilsson, P., et al. 
(2006). The genetics and genomics of the 
drought response in Populus. Plant Journal, 
48, 321–341.

Stuber, C. W., Goodman, M. M., & Moll, R. 
H. (1982). Improvement of yield and ear 
number resulting from selection at allozyme 
loci in a maize population. Crop Science, 22, 
737–740.

Tabor, H. K., Risch, N. J., & Myers, R. M. 
(2002). Candidate-gene approaches for 
studying complex genetic traits: Practical 
considerations. Nature Reviews Genetics, 3, 
391–397.

Tanksley, D., Medina-Filho, H., & Rick, C. M. 

(1981). The effect of isozyme selection 
on metric characters in an interspecific 
backcross of tomato — basis of an early 
screening procedure. TAG Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 60, 291.

Tanksley, S. D., Ganal, M. W., & Martin, G. B. 
(1995). Chromosome landing – a paradigm 
for map-based gene cloning in plants with 
large genomes. Trends in Genetics, 11, 63–68.

Tanksley, S. D., Ganal, M. W., Prince, J. P., 

Devicente, M. C., Bonierbale, M. W., 
& Broun, P., et al. (1992). High-density 
molecular linkage maps of the tomato and 
potato genomes. Genetics, 132, 1141–1160.

Tester, M., & Langridge, P. (2010). Breeding 

technologies to increase crop production in a 
changing world. Science, 327, 818–822.
Teulat, B., Monneveux, P., Wery, J., Borries, 

C., Souyris, I., & Charrier, A., et al. (1997). 
Relationships between relative water content 
and growth parameters under water stress in 
barley: A QTL study. New Phytologist, 137, 
99–107.

Thomas, D. L., Thio, C. L., Martin, M. P., Qi, 
Y., Ge, D., & O’hUigin, C., et al. (2009). 
Genetic variation in IL28B and spontaneous 
clearance of hepatitis C virus. Nature, 461, 
798–801.

Thomson, M. J., Ismail, A. M., McCouch, S. 

R., & Mackill, D. J. (2010). Marker Assisted 
Breeding. In A. Pareek, S. K. Sopory, H. J. 
Bohnert Govindjee (Eds.), Abiotic stress 

Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding

C H A P T E R   1 1

adaptation in plants: Physiological, molecular 
and genomic foundation (pp. 451–469). 
Dordrecht: Springer.

Till, B. J., Reynolds, S. H., Weil, C., Springer, 
N., Burtner, C., & Young, K., et al. (2004). 
Discovery of induced point mutations in 
maize genes by TILLING. BMC Plant 
Biology, 4, 12.

Till, B., Cooper, J., Tai, T., Colowit, P., Greene, 
E., & Henikoff, S., et al. (2007). Discovery 
of chemically induced mutations in rice by 
TILLING. BMC Plant Biology, 7, 19.

Tóth, R., & van der Hoorn, R. A. L. (2010). 

Emerging principles in plant chemical 
genetics. Trends in Plant Science, 15, 81–88.

Tozlu, I., Guy, C. L., & Moore, G. A. (1999). 

QTL analysis of morphological traits in 
an intergeneric BC1 progeny of Citrus 
and Poncirus under saline and non-saline 
environments. Genome, 42, 1020–1029.

Uauy, C., Paraiso, F., Colasuonno, P., Tran, R. 

K., Tsai, H., & Berardi, S., et al. (2009). 
A modified TILLING approach to detect 
induced mutations in tetraploid and 
hexaploid wheat. BMC Plant Biology, 9, 
115.

Udagawa, H., Ishimaru, Y., Li, F., Sato, Y., 

Kitashiba, H. & Nishio, T. (2010). Genetic 
analysis of interspecific incompatibility 
in Brassica rapa. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 121(4), 689–696.

Van Der Krol, A. R., Mur, L. A., Beld, M., 
Mol, J. N. M., & Stuitje, A. R. (1990). 
Flavonoid genes in Petunia: Addition of a 
limited number of gene copies may lead to 
a suppression of gene expression. Plant Cell, 
2, 291–299.

Varshney, R. K., & Dubey, A. (2009). Novel 

genomic tools and modern genetic and 
breeding approaches for crop improvement. 
Journal of Plant Biochemistry & 
Biotechnology, 18, 127–138.

Varshney, R. K. (2010). Gene-based marker 

systems in plants: High throughput 
approaches for marker discovery and 
genotyping. In S. M. Jain & D. S. Brar 
(Eds.), Molecular techniques in crop 
improvement (pp. 119–142). Dordrecht: 
Springer.

Varshney, R. K., Hoisington, D. A., & Tyagi, 

A. K. (2006). Advances in cereal genomics 
and applications in crop breeding. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 24, 490–499.

Varshney, R. K., Hoisington, D. A., Nayak, S. 
N., & Graner, A. (2009). Molecular plant 
breeding: Methodology and achievements. In 
D. J. Somers, P. Langridge & J. P. Gustafson 
(Eds.), Plant Genomics (pp. 283–304). New-
York: Humana Press.

Varshney, R. K., Nayak, S. N., May, G. D., & 

Jackson, S. A. (2009). Next-generation 
sequencing technologies and their 
implications for crop genetics and breeding. 
Trends in Biotechnology, 27, 522–530.

Vaucheret, H. (2006). Post-transcriptional 

small RNA pathways in plants: Mechanisms 
and regulations. Genes & Development, 20, 
759–771.

Villalta, I., Bernet, G. P., Carbonell, E. A., & 

Asins, M. J. (2007). Comparative QTL 
analysis of salinity tolerance in terms of fruit 
yield using two solanum populations of F-7 
lines. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 114, 
1001–1017.

Villalta, I., Reina-Sanchez, A., Bolarin, M. C., 

Cuartero, J., Belver, A., & Venema, K.,  
et al. (2008). Genetic analysis of Na 
and K concentrations in leaf and stem as 
physiological components of salt tolerance in 
Tomato. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
116, 869–880.

Visscher, P. M., Haley, C. S., & Thompson, R. 

(1996). Marker-assisted introgression in 
backcross breeding programs. Genetics, 144, 
1923–1932.

Vos, P., Hogers, R., Bleeker, M., Reijans, M., 
Vandelee, T., & Hornes, M., et al. (1995). 
AFLP – A new technique for DNA-
fingerprinting. Nucleic Acids Research, 23, 
4407–4414.

Walter, S., Nicholson, P., & Doohan, F. M. 
(2010). Action and reaction of host and 
pathogen during Fusarium head blight 
disease. New Phytologist, 185, 54–66.
Wang, D. -K., Sun, Z. -X., & Tao, Y. -Z. 

(2006). Application of TILLING in plant 
improvement. Acta Genetica Sinica, 33, 
957–964.

Wang, J. P., Drayton, M. C., George, J., Cogan, 

N. O. I., Baillie, R. C., & Hand, M. L.,  
et al. (2010). Identification of genetic 
factors influencing salt stress tolerance in 
white clover (Trifolium repens L.) by QTL 
analysis. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
120, 607–619.

Wang, L. H., Gu, X. H., Hua, M. Y., Mao, 
S. L., Zhang, Z. H., & Peng, D. L., et al. 
(2009). A SCAR marker linked to the N 
gene for resistance to root knot nematodes 
(Meloidogyne spp.) in pepper (Capsicum 
annuum L.). Scientia Horticulturae, 122, 
318–322.

Weber, A. L., Briggs, W. H., Rucker, J., Baltazar, 

B. M., Sanchez-Gonzalez, J. D., & Feng, P., 
et al. (2008). The genetic architecture of 
complex traits in Teosinte (Zea mays ssp 
parviglumis): New evidence from association 
mapping. Genetics, 180, 1221–1232.

Welsh, J., & McClelland, M. (1990). 

Fingerprinting genomes using PCR with 
arbitrary primers. Nucleic Acids Research, 
18, 7213–7218.

Wenzl, P., Carling, J., Kudrna, D., Jaccoud, 
D., Huttner, E., & Kleinhofs, A., et al. 
(2004). Diversity Arrays Technology (DArT) 
for whole-genome profiling of barley. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
101, 9915–9920.

West, M. A. L., Kim, K., Kliebenstein, D. J., van 
Leeuwen, H., Michelmore, R. W., & Doerge, 
R. W., et al. (2007). Global eQTL mapping 
reveals the complex genetic architecture 
of transcript-level variation in Arabidopsis. 
Genetics, 175, 1441–1450.

Whittaker, J. C., Haley, C. S., & Thompson, R. 

(1997). Optimal weighting of information 
in marker-assisted selection. Genetical 
Research, 69, 137–144.

Williams, J. G. K., Kubelik, A. R., Livak, K. 
J., Rafalski, J. A., & Tingey, S. V. (1990). 
DNA polymorphisms amplified by arbitrary 
primers are useful as genetic-markers. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 18, 6531–6535.
Wing, R. A., Zhang, H. B., & Tanksley, S. D. 

(1994). Map-based cloning in crop plants – 
tomato as a model system .1. Genetic and 

183

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

physical mapping of JOINTLESS. Molecular 
& General Genetics, 242, 681–688.

Xiao, S., Ellwood, S., Calis, O., Patrick, E., Li, 

T., & Coleman, M., et al. (2001). Broad-
spectrum mildew resistance in Arabidopsis 
thaliana mediated by RPW8. Science, 291, 
118–120.

Xu, Y., & Crouch, J. H. (2008). Marker-

Assisted Selection in plant breeding: From 
publications to practice. Crop Science, 48, 
391–407.

Xu, Y. (2010). Molecular plant breeding. 

pp. 292–389 Wallingford: CABI publication. 

Xu, Y., Skinner, D. J., Wu, H., Palacios-Rojas, 

N., Araus, J. L., & Yan, J., et al. (2009). 
Advances in maize genomics and their value 
for enhancing genetic gains from breeding. 
International Journal of Plant Genomics, 
2009, 957602.

Xue, D. W., Feng, S. G., Zhao, H. Y., Jiang, H., 

Shen, B., & Shi, N. N., et al. (2010). The 
linkage maps of Dendrobium species based 
on RAPD and SRAP markers. Journal of 
Genetics and Genomics, 37, 197–204.

Xue, Z. -Y., Zhi, D. -Y., Xue, G. -P., Zhang, 
H., Zhao, Y. -X., & Xia, G. -M. (2004). 
Enhanced salt tolerance of transgenic wheat 
(Tritivum aestivum L.) expressing a vacuolar 
Na/H antiporter gene with improved 
grain yields in saline soils in the field and 
a reduced level of leaf Na. Plant Science, 
167, 849–859.

Yang, X., Yan, J., Shah, T., Warburton, M., Li, 

Q., Li, L., et al. (2010). Genetic analysis and 
characterization of a new maize association 
mapping panel for quantitative trait loci 
dissection. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
121(3), 417–431.

Yano, M. (2001). Genetic and molecular 

dissection of naturally occurring variation. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 4, 
130–135.

Yeam, I., Kang, B. -C., Lindeman, W., Frantz, J., 
Faber, N., & Jahn, M. (2005). Allele-specific 
CAPS markers based on point mutations in 
resistance alleles at the pvr1 locus encoding 
eIF4E in Capsicum. TAG Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 112, 178–186.

Young, N. D. (1999). A cautiously optimistic 

vision for marker-assisted breeding. 
Molecular Breeding, 5, 505–510.

Zhang, M., Barg, R., Yin, M., Gueta-Dahan, 

Y., Leikin-Frenkel, A., & Salts, Y., et al. 
(2005). Modulated fatty acid desaturation 
via overexpression of two distinct omega-3 
desaturases differentially alters tolerance to 
various abiotic stresses in transgenic tobacco 
cells and plants. The Plant Journal, 44, 
361–371.

Zhang, W., & Smith, C. (1992). Computer-
simulation of Marker-Assisted Selection 
utilizing linkage disequilibrium. Theoretical 
and Applied Genetics, 83, 813–820.

Zhao, X. P., & Kochert, G. (1993). Phylogenetic 
distribution and genetic-mapping of a (GGC)
(N) microsatellite from rice (Oryza-sativa l). 
Plant Molecular Biology, 21, 607–614.

Zhu, C., Gore, M., Buckler, E. S., & Yu, J. 

(2008). Status and prospects of association 
mapping in plants. The Plant Genome, 1, 
5–20.

184

Advances in identifying and exploiting 
natural genetic variation

13

Christian S. Hardtke  Kaisa Nieminen
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Natural Genetic Variation in Crop Breeding: From  
Prehistory to the Green Revolution  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 195
The Genetic Limits of Evolving Domesticated Crops  .  .  .  . 196

Tapping the natural genetic variation  
present in wild ancestors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .196
Natural Genetic Variation in Arabidopsis .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 197
QTL Analyses in Arabidopsis  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 197

Novel Arabidopsis genes isolated 
through the natural variation approach . . . . . . . . . . . .198

What to Expect: Intraspecific Variation  
in Gene Structure and Content   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 198

Structural genome variation: Higher  
than expected?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .198
QTL Analysis and Sequence Variation in Crops  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 199
Domestication genes of maize . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .199
Examples from rice  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .199
Examples from other cereals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .200

Toward Prediction of Variation in Molecular  
Function: Why Model Organisms are here to Stay  .  .  .  .  .  . 200

Crucial support from model organism  
candidate genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .200
Model systems as references to  
characterize allele activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .201

Beyond Simple Traits: Epigenetics,  
Heterosis, Genetic Incompatibility, and Trade-offs  .  .  .  .  .  . 201
Incompatibility between natural accessions  . . . . . . . .201
Trade-offs between different beneficial traits . . . . . . . .202

Extending the Toolbox: Genome-wide  
Association Mapping  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 202
The Route to Effectively Exploit Natural  
Variation for Plant Biotechnology   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 202

Natural Genetic Variation in Crop 
Breeding: From Prehistory to the 
Green Revolution

The  creation  of  crops  adapted  for  human  use  through  plant 
breeding  marks  a  major  transition  in  human  history  from  a 
sedentary  to  a  mainly  sessile  lifestyle.  This  was  achieved  by 
domestication  of  wild  plants  through  selection  of  pheno-
typic  characteristics  that  are  beneficial  for  human  consump-
tion  (Purugganan  and  Fuller,  2009).  The  selection  process 
relied  on  the  natural  genetic  variation  present  in  the  ances-
tors  of  domesticated  crop  species,  and  on  occasional  sponta-
neous  mutations  that  contributed  to  within-species  natural 
genotypic  variation.  Today,  the  natural  variation  present  in 
domesticated  crop  species  is  much  lower  than  in  their  wild 
ancestor  populations  (Tanksley  and  McCouch,  1997;  Wright 
et  al.,  2005),  as  it  has  been  largely  eliminated  over  centu-
ries  of  active  selection  for  agriculturally  adaptive  traits  and 
exclusive  mating  within  a  domesticated  population  of  a  lim-
ited  size  (Buckler  et  al.,  2001;  Doebley  et  al.,  2006).  The 
out-crossing  of  the  domesticated  cultivars  with  their  wild 
varieties  was  deliberately  avoided  by  breeders,  as  this  would 
have  diluted  many  of  the  beneficial  features  accumulated 
during  the  domestication  process.  Natural  variation  avail-
able for selective breeding was thus limited, even if in some 
cases  domestication  might  have  occurred  multiple  times 
independently  (Allaby  et  al.,  2008;  Brown  et  al.,  2009), 
and  most  of  the  crop  species  varieties  stayed  relatively  inert 
from the ancient times up to the twentieth century. By then, 
more  artificial  variation  was  introduced  by  induced  muta-
tions  through  deliberate  human  activity,  such  as  chemical  or 
radiation  mutagenesis  (Waugh  et  al.,  2006).  This  artificial 
increase  in  the  mutation  spectrum  contributed  to  breeding 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00013-4

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

efforts; however, the so-called Green Revolution was initially 
driven  by  natural  germplasm.  The  key  event  that  dramati-
cally increased worldwide agricultural productivity during the 
Green Revolution was the generation of semi-dwarfed wheat 
varieties  with  increased  resistance  to  disease  and  lodging,  as 
well  as  proportionally  higher  grain  yield  by  Norman  Borlaug 
and  co-workers  (Huang  et  al.,  2002).  Notably,  the  dwarfing 
alleles were contributed by ancient germplasm from East Asia 
and  thus  were  supposedly  derived  from  spontaneous  muta-
tion events (Borojevic, 2005). Similar, existing natural dwarf-
ing alleles were also found in other crops, such as rice (Jodon 
and  Beachell,  1943),  or  later  induced  through  mutagenesis 
(Waugh et al., 2006).

Although a useful tool, mutagenesis of domesticated crops 
is  limited  in  its  ability  to  produce  novel  genetic  variation. 
Chemical  mutagenesis  mostly  introduces  point  mutations 
that  can  result  in  amino  acid  changes  in  the  encoded  pro-
teins or premature stop codons leading to truncated proteins. 
By  contrast,  radiation  generally  induces  larger  size  mutations, 
such  as  gene  deletions  or  other  structural  genome  rearrange-
ments. Both methods can also result in gene expression (pat-
tern)  changes  if  regulatory  sequences  are  affected.  Thus, 
mutagenesis has the potential to produce loss-of-function and 
gain-of-function alleles, including hypo- and hyperactive ones. 
However, in the short term mutagenesis is only able to modify 
existing genetic material, not to introduce novel genes into the 
genome. Given the emerging picture of significant copy num-
bers and gene variation between strains (see the next section), 
relying exclusively on mutagenesis would leave the large poten-
tial  of  natural  genetic  variation  untapped.  This  chapter  will 
focus on presenting an overview of the work on natural genetic 
variation,  including  selected  examples,  and  on  outlining  how 
this variation could be efficiently exploited for crop breeding.

The Genetic Limits of Evolving 
Domesticated Crops

The  yield 
improvement  through  the  Green  Revolution 
reached its peak in the 1960s with the creation of novel dwarf 
varieties  for  various  crops  and  the  improvement  of  agricul-
tural  traits  through  mutagenesis  approaches.  Since  then,  the 
success  of  crop  breeding  has  been  more  modest,  although 
significant  yield  increases  were  still  obtained  throughout  the 
remainder  of  the  twentieth  century  (Huang  et  al.,  2002; 
Wollenweber et al., 2005). However, the latter mainly repre-
sent  the  success  of  optimized  farming  practice  and  chemical 
inputs,  such  as  fertilizers,  herbicides,  and  insecticides.  The 
success of the Green Revolution has to some degree become 
a  bane  for  today’s  agricultural  environment,  as  on  the  one 
hand,  the  zeitgeist  demands  more  sustainable,  less  intensive 
agricultural schemes, while on the other, the global population 
growth  driven  by  the  Green  Revolution  creates  pressure  to 
ever improve and globally level crop productivity to feed the 
growing human population (Huang et al., 2002; Wollenweber 
et al., 2005). This is aggravated by the continuous race against 
the evolution of insects and diseases, and the deterioration of 
farm land, which will all decrease the yield of crop species if 
these are not continuously improved.

196

The far-reaching consequences of the reduction of genetic 
diversity in domesticated crops as compared to their wild pro-
genitors are only now being recognized. Beyond the avoidance 
of  out-crossing  of  domesticated  cultivars  to  wild  relatives  to 
preserve their beneficial features, this reduction is also a con-
sequence  of  the  presumably  small  effective  population  size 
involved  in  individual  domestication  events  (Buckler  et  al., 
2001; Doebley et al., 2006; Allaby et al., 2008; Brown et al., 
2009).  Genetic  diversity  was  further  constrained  by  selec-
tion  for  the  desired  agronomic  traits  that  distinguish  crops 
from their wild ancestors. This is because selection does not 
only  reduce  diversity  at  selected  loci  as  favorable  alleles  are 
increasing in frequency, but it also reduces diversity at geneti-
cally  linked  loci  (“genetic  hitchhiking”),  partly  by  increasing 
the extent of linkage disequilibrium (LD). This can, for exam-
ple, result in the linkage and fixation of a selected, favorable 
allele (e.g., for yield increase) of one gene with a hypoactive, 
eventually  detrimental  allele  of  another  (e.g.,  of  a  disease 
resistance gene).

Tapping the natural genetic variation 
present in wild ancestors

The  populations  of  the  wild  counterparts  have  been  evolv-
ing  without  the  pressure  of  human  selection,  thus  harboring 
a  larger  natural  variation  than  the  domesticated  crop  species 
(Tanksley  and  McCouch,  1997).  Plant  breeders  have  been 
aware of the lack of genetic diversity in crops for some time; 
however,  various  constraints  have  prevented  the  exploitation 
of natural genetic variation available in the wild ancestors for 
the  improvement  of  domesticated  crop  species.  The  most 
important  one  is  the  general  loss  of  the  beneficial,  selected 
characteristics of a crop in the progeny from a cross to a wild 
ancestor.  This  is  due  to  the  additive  effects  of  many  QTL 
alleles  that  have  accumulated  during  the  improvement  of  a 
crop  over  centuries,  a  genetic  constellation  that  is  re-created 
at very low frequency in the progeny from the out-cross. For 
instance, to improve a parental crop whose performance hypo-
thetically  depends  on  a  combination  of  ten  homozygous  loci 
by  introducing  one  additional  homozygous  locus  of  interest 
from  the  wild  ancestor  is  a  daunting  task.  The  desired  vari-
ety  carrying  all  11  loci  homozygously  would  statistically  only 
be  recovered  once  in  more  than  4  million  F2  progeny  (411), 
under the idealized assumption of free Mendelian segregation 
of all loci and no epistatic masking by other loci from the wild 
ancestor. Thus, this probability is even lower if problems arise, 
such  as  LD  between  one  of  the  crop  QTLs  and  the  allele  of 
interest from the wild ancestor. Therefore, in many ways the 
problem  faced  by  plant  breeders  in  bringing  in  more  natural 
variation is a purely quantitative one that could be solved by 
marker-assisted breeding (i.e., the selection of progeny accord-
ing to the genotypes of molecular markers known to be linked 
to  the  QTL),  ideally  combined  with  high-throughput  phe-
notyping.  The  complexity  can  be  further  reduced  by  a  mul-
tistep strategy, which identifies progeny that are homozygous 
for  some,  but  heterozygous  for  the  remaining  QTL,  and 
the  stepwise  identification  of  progeny  fully  homozygous 
for  all  QTL  in  the  successive  generations.  However,  this 

Advances in identifying and exploiting natural genetic variation

C H A P T E R   1 3

strategy  assumes  that  all  QTL  contributing  to  the  paren-
tal  crop’s  performance  are  known  and  genetically  tracta-
ble.  Since  this  is  not  the  case,  even  more  time-consuming  
introgression  of  loci  through  repeated  backcrossing  to  the 
parental  elite  variety  is  the  best  existing,  and  thus  practiced, 
alternative.

In an ideal situation the markers linked to the QTL and the 
identity  of  the  genes  underlying  those  QTL  and  their  allelic 
variants  of  interest  would  be  known,  which  would  allow 
direct genotyping of quantitative trait nucleotides (QTNs). In 
such a scenario, the isolation of any desired genotype derived 
from a cross would only depend on inherent biological limits, 
such as recombination or genetic incompatibilities and techni-
cal limits, such as the number of progeny that can be analyzed 
by  high-throughput  technology.  To  arrive  at  such  a  situation, 
the  major  technical  obstacles  to  routinely  identify  QTNs  of 
interest  have  to  be  overcome.  Progress  in  model  organisms 
in this respect over the last decade suggests that we might be 
getting close.

Natural Genetic Variation in 
Arabidopsis

In the 1980s, Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis) was chosen 
to be developed into a powerful model system for the inves-
tigation  of  the  molecular  basis  of  plant  growth  and  develop-
ment (Koornneef and Meinke, 2010). The focus of basic plant 
research on this model organism proved to be highly produc-
tive,  leading  to  the  isolation  of  molecular  players  in  nearly 
every  aspect  of  plant  development  and  physiology  through 
the  mutagenesis  approach.  Thus,  a  wealth  of  knowledge  on 
Arabidopsis genes and their role in various developmental and 
physiological processes was accumulated, together with excel-
lent biological and molecular genetic resources for their inves-
tigation  (e.g.,  Sussman  et  al.,  2000;  Initiative,  2000;  Alonso 
et al., 2003; Rhee et al., 2003).

The  need  to  develop  Arabidopsis  as  a  model  system  ini-
tially focused efforts toward a few isogenized standard geno-
types, so-called accessions, which had been selected for their 
growth habit and short generation time, such as Col-0, Ws-0, 
or  Ler-0.  Mutagenesis  approaches  were  usually  performed 
in  one  of  these  backgrounds  to  enable  direct  comparisons  of 
mutant  phenotypes  without  additional,  confounding  natu-
ral  genetic  variation  (i.e.,  through  genetic  modifiers).  The 
use of other accessions was mostly restricted to their role as 
crossing partners to allow map-based cloning of mutated loci 
of  interest  (Lukowitz  et  al.,  2000).  However,  the  pheno-
types that could be investigated in the standard backgrounds 
were  inherently  limited  because  of  the  characteristics  they 
were  chosen  for,  such  as  early  flowering  or  absence  of  ver-
nalization  requirement  (Johanson  et  al.,  2000).  Interestingly, 
these  characteristics  arise  from  partly  known  natural  muta-
tions  in  important  modifier  loci,  such  as  a  phytochrome  D 
loss-of-function  allele  in  Ws-0  that  affects  shade  avoidance, 
elongation  growth,  and  flowering  time  (Devlin  et  al.,  1999), 
or  a  loss-of-function,  mutation  in  the  pleiotropic  regula-
tor  of  plant  growth  and  architecture,  ERECTA,  in  Ler  (Torii 
et al., 1996; Godiard et al., 2003).

The utility of natural allelic Arabidopsis variants for mole-
cular genetics was first convincingly demonstrated by the iso-
lation of key regulators of vernalization, FRIGIDA (FRI) and 
FLOWERING  LOCUS  C  (FLC)  (Michaels  and  Amasino, 
1999;  Johanson  et  al.,  2000).  This  was  not  possible  in  the 
standard  backgrounds,  which  all  carry  null  alleles  of  fri  or 
its  target,  FLC,  and  do  not  require  vernalization  (Johanson 
et al., 2000; Caicedo et al., 2004; Shindo et al., 2005, 2006). 
However, the natural phenotypic variation of Arabidopsis had 
been a major interest of early Arabidopsis researchers, leaving 
a legacy of collections of isogenized natural accessions as well 
as crosses (Alonso-Blanco and Koornneef, 2000), such as the 
one  leading  to  the  identification  of  FRI  (Napp-Zinn,  1957). 
These  successes,  as  well  as  an  influential  review  (Alonso-
Blanco  and  Koornneef,  2000),  fueled  a  renewed  interest  in 
the natural variation of Arabidopsis. This coincided with a key 
achievement  in  developing  Arabidopsis  into  a  model  system, 
that is the deciphering of the complete genome sequence of 
the Arabidopsis reference strain Col-0 (Initiative, 2000), the 
first  genome  of  a  multicellular  eukaryote  to  be  sequenced. 
Availability of the genome sequence opened up the possibility 
of rapid identification of polymorphisms in other Arabidopsis 
accessions,  and  thus  easy  generation  of  molecular  mark-
ers  for  segregation  analyses  of  progeny  derived  from  crosses 
between accessions. Systematic surveys of disparate genomes 
did indeed yield hundreds of novel molecular markers, greatly 
accelerating, for example, map-based cloning efforts or molec-
ular  evolutionary  analyses  (Borevitz  et  al.,  2003;  Schmid 
et al., 2003; Nordborg et al., 2005; West et al., 2006; Clark 
et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2008; Zeller et al., 2008).

QTL Analyses in Arabidopsis

The  easy  access  to  molecular  markers  also  rendered  QTL 
analyses  in  Arabidopsis  much  more  amenable  than  before. 
The  theoretically  limiting  factors  in  QTL  analysis  are  princi-
pally the extent of LD, the marker density, and the number of 
recombination  events.  In  practice,  the  latter  limitation  could 
be overcome by creating a sufficiently large population of, ide-
ally, recombinant inbred lines (RILs) through repeated selfing 
of F2 progeny and successive single seed descent generations 
up  to  near  isogenization  (typically  from  the  seventh  selfed 
generation  onward;  Alonso-Blanco  et  al.,  1998;  Singer  et  al., 
2006).  The  new  marker  sets  overcame  the  hurdle  of  suffi-
ciently high marker density, and were also instrumental in esti-
mating  the  extent  of  LD  on  a  genome-wide  scale  (Nordborg 
et al., 2002; Plagnol et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2007). Thus, the 
isolation  of  QTL  and  eventually  QTNs  appeared  to  become 
feasible  in  Arabidopsis,  coinciding  with  the  renewed  interest 
in its natural genetic variation (Alonso-Blanco and Koornneef, 
2000;  Koornneef  et  al.,  2004).  Numerous  QTL  studies  were 
thus initiated with many of them focusing on traits of clearly 
adaptive value, such as flowering time or seed dormancy. This 
led to the isolation of mostly novel alleles of known genes and, 
in a few cases, it led to novel genes that had been missed in 
mutagenesis  approaches.  Next  we  will  highlight  a  few  exam-
ples  of  interest,  since  an  excellent  up-to-date  summary  of 

197

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

QTL  identified  both  in  model  organisms  and  crops  has  been 
recently published (Alonso-Blanco et al., 2009). We will also 
focus on hardwired natural genetic variation as opposed to epi-
genetic natural variation, which likely contributes significantly 
to  phenotypic  variety  (Shindo  et  al.,  2006;  Vaughn  et  al., 
2007; Zhai et al., 2008; Johannes et al., 2009) and is discussed 
in chapter 14 of this volume.

Novel Arabidopsis genes isolated through 
the natural variation approach

A  remarkable  practical  aspect  of  QTL  analyses  is  the  quasi-
immortal  conservation  of  the  biological  material  (i.e.,  the 
RILs)  due  to  their  homozygosity,  which  is  maintained  over 
subsequent generations (Alonso-Blanco et al., 1998). Thus, an 
RIL population that has been established and genotyped once 
can be screened repeatedly for multiple phenotypes to iden-
tify the respective underlying allelic variation. For instance, an 
RIL population derived from a cross between the Ler and Cvi 
accessions has been analyzed for dozens of phenotypes, even-
tually leading to the isolation of several QTLs (Alonso-Blanco 
et al., 2009). The fact that the Cvi accession from the Cape 
Verde Islands might represent a somewhat isolated accession 
adapted  to  a  rather  unusual  latitude  for  Arabidopsis  might 
have  helped  in  this  respect.  The  Ler    Cvi  RIL  population 
also led to the identification of a novel gene underlying a ger-
mination QTL, the DELAY OF GERMINATION 1 (DOG1) 
gene, based on the low seed dormancy of Cvi and the higher 
dormancy  of  Ler  (Bentsink  et  al.,  2006).  Genetic  variation 
for seed dormancy in nature is a typical quantitative trait con-
trolled by multiple loci on which environmental factors have 
a prominent effect. DOG1 delays germination by imposing a 
requirement for a longer period of seed after-ripening, while 
at  the  same  time  increasing  seed  viability.  The  DOG1  alle-
les  appear  to  differ  in  the  expression  levels  of  their  mRNA, 
which encodes a novel protein of unknown biochemical func-
tion.  Decreased  DOG1  activity  in  Cvi  is  consistent  with  an 
adaptation  to  a  mild,  stable  climate,  since  dormancy  has 
mainly evolved in temperate climates to prevent germination 
when conditions are suitable, but the probability of survival of 
the  seedling  until  reproduction  is  low  (e.g.,  in  warm  days  of 
autumn in contrast to spring).

Successful  QTL  analyses  were  also  performed  for  vari-
ous  physiological  and  developmental  traits,  such  as  salt  toler-
ance or root system architecture (Alonso-Blanco et al., 2009). 
Generally,  this  again  revealed  novel  alleles  of  known  genes, 
but  in  a  few  cases  also  previously  uncharacterized  genes.  For 
instance, a screen for root system architecture variation iden-
tified  a  loss-of-function  allele  of  the  previously  uncharacter-
ized BREVIS RADIX (BRX) gene as a major QTL for primary 
root  growth  in  an  RIL  population  derived  from  the  Uk-1 
and  Sav-0  parents  (Mouchel  et  al.,  2004).  BRX  encodes  the 
founding member of a novel family of highly conserved plant-
specific  proteins  found  in  both  the  mono-  and  dicotyledons, 
with  a  role  in  plant  hormone  signaling  pathways  (Mouchel 
et al., 2006). Moreover, a medium frequency hyperactive BRX 
allele of potentially adaptive value that leads to increased root 
system growth has also been identified (Beuchat et al., 2010). 

198

This is particularly interesting because such cases are still very 
rare, that is, most QTL alleles identified so far represent loss-
of-function variants (Alonso-Blanco et al., 2009).

What to Expect: Intraspecific 
Variation in Gene Structure and 
Content

In  summary,  by  now  numerous  QTLs  for  a  whole  suite 
of  phenotypes  have  been  identified  in  Arabidopsis.  The 
majority  of  those  loci  have  large  effects,  but  some  of  them 
explain  only  a  smaller  portion  of  the  phenotypic  vari-
ance,  proving  the  feasibility  of  the  isolation  of  small  effect 
QTLs  (e.g.,  Kroymann  and  Mitchell-Olds,  2005;  Bentsink 
et  al.,  2006;  Sergeeva  et  al.,  2006;  Filiault  et  al.,  2008; 
Beuchat et al., 2010). However, certain biases appear to pre-
vail.  For  instance,  one  feature  shared  by  the  large  majority 
of QTLs isolated so far is that compared to the Col-0 refer-
ence allele, they mostly represent rare loss-of-function alleles 
(Alonso-Blanco et al., 2009). Only a few examples of differ-
entially  active,  functional  alleles  that  have  been  experimen-
tally confirmed exist (e.g., El-Din El-Assal et al. 2001; Maloof 
et al., 2001; Balasubramanian et al., 2006; Filiault et al., 2008; 
Beuchat  et  al.,  2010).  Moreover,  amino  acid  polymorphisms 
appear  to  prevail  over  regulatory  polymorphisms,  since  only 
few QTLs found are due to bona fide expression differences, 
such  as  mutations  that  affect  regulatory  regions  but  leave 
the  transcript  intact  (Koornneef  et  al.  2004;  Alonso-Blanco 
et al., 2009). In general, hardwired expression differences in 
Arabidopsis  appear  to  be  rare  and  are  often  likely  to  repre-
sent  copy  number  variation  or  partial  gene  deletions  rather 
than  QTNs  in  regulatory  motifs  (Plantegenet  et  al.,  2009). 
From  a  basic  research  perspective,  this  is  somewhat  disap-
pointing when it comes to the ecological-evolutionary aspects 
of QTL. Although it is conceivable that loss of gene function 
can be adaptive, for instance, the loss of FRI function in the 
Cvi  accession  (Calcedo  et  al.,  2004),  this  is  expected  to  be 
the exception rather than the norm.

Structural genome variation: Higher than 
expected?

A  straightforward  explanation  for  this  bias  in  isolated  QTLs 
would be a selection bias by the investigators, who often focus 
on accessions that display the opposite extremes of a pheno-
type of interest. This increases the phenotypic variance, facili-
tating QTL isolation but possibly selecting against, or masking, 
alleles with subtle effects. Moreover, it appears possible that 
the  genome  evolution  of  Arabidopsis  introduces  a  systemic 
bias  toward  loss-of-function  alleles.  The  latter  is  suggested 
by  the  first  glimpses  at  genetic  variation  between  accessions 
at  the  whole  genome  sequence  level.  Only  a  few  accessions 
have been re-sequenced by high coverage shotgun sequencing 
so far; however, the picture emerging from these data already 
indicates  a  highly  dynamic  Arabidopsis  genome  (Ossowski 
et  al.,  2008;  Santuari  et  al.,  2010).  While  single  nucleotide 

Advances in identifying and exploiting natural genetic variation

C H A P T E R   1 3

polymorphisms  (SNPs)  are  prevalent  at  the  frequencies 
already  predicted  by  SNP  searches  using  marker  fragments, 
whole  genome  sequencing  also  indicates  a  surprising  number 
of  sizeable  deletions  and  insertions  (indels).  These  partially 
reflect  common  ancestry,  since  there  is  substantial  overlap 
between the indels observed in individual accessions (Santuari 
et  al.,  2010).  Frequently,  deletions  affect  large  parts  of  cod-
ing regions. Thus, compared to the Col-0 reference sequence, 
divergent  accessions  carry  numerous  null  alleles.  Given  the 
genome  duplication  history  of  Arabidopsis,  this  may  not  be 
surprising  and  might  be  a  species-specific  feature.  Although 
the  underlying  molecular  causes  might  differ,  substantial 
structural  variation  has  also  been  observed  in  crop  species 
(Huang et al., 2008; Gore et al., 2009; Springer et al., 2009).

Interestingly, part of this change is likely due to another, epi-
static  QTL,  which  might  be  identical  to  the  barren  stalk  1 
(ba1) gene, since ba1 is required for normal expression levels 
of  tb1(Gallavotti  et  al.,  2004).  ba1  encodes  a  non-canonical 
member  of  the  bHLH  transcription  factor  class.  A  natural 
ba1 allele, which carries a large insertion in the 5 regulatory 
regions,  has  been  identified.  Interestingly,  this  allele  appears 
to  have  been  selected  by  breeders  relatively  recently  in 
attempts to enhance the tb1 phenotype. Thus, even in domes-
ticated  crops,  residual  natural  variation  that  can  be  selected 
for exists. It is possible, however, that this is more prevalent 
in  maize  than  in  other  crops  because  of  its  highly  dynamic 
genome (Gore et al., 2009; Schnable et al., 2009), which also 
suggests that the ba1 mutation might have arisen within the 
domesticated germplasm.

QTL Analysis and Sequence Variation 
in Crops

Examples from rice

Domestication genes of maize

Isolation  of  QTL  alleles  in  crops  has  been  equally  boosted 
by  the  elucidation  of  the  whole  genome  sequences  of  vari-
ous grasses, most prominently rice and maize (Project, 2005; 
Schnable  et  al.,  2009).  In  maize,  however,  QTL  for  several 
agricultural  traits  have  been  isolated  through  the  pioneer-
ing  work  of  Doebley  and  co-workers.  Their  studies  aimed 
to  isolate  alleles  that  were  selected  during  maize  domesti-
cation  by  analyses  of  crosses  with  the  wild  maize  ancestor, 
the  Mexican  grass  teosinte  (Doebley  et  al.,  2006).  During 
the  domestication  process,  profound  differences  between 
the  maize  and  teosinte  architecture  have  been  fixed  through 
human selection. For instance, while teosinte shoots have sev-
eral  elongated  branches  with  male  inflorescences  (tassels)  at 
their  tips  and  female  inflorescences  (ears)  in  secondary  axil-
lary branches next to the leaves, maize shoots instead produce 
only  short  branches  with  seed-bearing  ears  at  the  ends.  The 
suppression  of  branching  and  branch  elongation,  as  well  as 
the  change  in  the  inflorescence  sex  at  the  tip  of  the  branch 
in  maize,  resulted  in  production  of  a  lower  number  of  ears 
per plant, but allowed each ear to grow larger (Doebley et al., 
1995). Through QTL analysis, a major locus regulating these 
morphological  differences,  teosinte  branched  1  (tb1),  was 
identified  (Doebley  et  al.,  1997).  tb1  encodes  a  TCP  class 
transcription  factor  and  acts  as  a  repressor  of  lateral  organ 
growth  and  a  promoter  of  the  development  of  female  inflo-
rescences. In teosinte, tb1 is expressed in the axillary meris-
tems of the main branches, whereas in maize its expression is 
high in the main lateral branch meristems. The domestication 
process  has  therefore  altered  the  expression  pattern  of  this 
gene. Indeed, during maize domestication, polymorphisms in 
the  promoter  region  of  tb1  were  drastically  reduced  as  the 
selective  pressure  by  the  breeders,  aimed  to  optimize  maize 
morphology for human use, unconsciously modified the level 
and pattern of tb1 expression. Thus, the tb1 QTL represents 
a unique example of regulatory variation in that both expres-
sion  pattern  and  level  are  affected,  probably  because  of  an 
indel  affecting  an  upstream  enhancer  (Clark  et  al.,  2006). 

Interestingly,  isolation  of  the  ba1  gene  was  aided  by  a  can-
didate  gene  approach,  since  a  homolog,  the  LAX  PANICLE 
(LAX) gene, had already been identified in rice (Komatsu et 
al.,  2003).  LAX  loss-of-function  results  in  a  rice  phenotype 
reminiscent of the ba1 phenotype. Rice shoots consist of till-
ers, which are panicle (a grain-bearing organ) forming shoots 
that  emerge  from  the  basal  internode  of  the  mother  stem 
(the culm). Similar to other monocotyledon crops, rice archi-
tecture  is  crucial  for  grain  yield  and  is  determined  by  plant 
height, tiller number and angle, number of panicles per tiller, 
and  branching  of  the  panicles.  Identification  of  genes  and 
allelic variants that regulate these traits would help us to fur-
ther understand the molecular mechanisms that regulate pro-
ductivity  and  would  facilitate  breeding  of  new  varieties  that 
increase grain yield. For instance, the wild ancestor of domes-
ticated  rice  shows  a  prostate  growth  habit  with  a  wide  tiller 
angle  and  a  short  stature  with  many  tillers.  To  allow  high-
density cultivation, ancient humans selected for plants with a 
more erect growth habit, due to a narrower tiller angle. The 
transition  from  the  prostate  growth  of  ancestral  wild  rice 
(Oryza  rufipogon)  to  the  erect  growth  of  O.  sativa  was  one 
of  the  most  critical  events  in  rice  domestication.  Through 
genetic  studies  of  a  cross  between  domesticated  and  wild 
rice, the gene PROSTATE GROWTH 1 (PROG1) was identi-
fied as an important regulator for this change in growth habit 
during rice domestication (Jin et al., 2008; Tan et al., 2008). 
PROG1  encodes  a  C2H2  zinc  finger  protein,  which  likely 
acts as a transcription factor and is predominantly expressed 
in  axillary  meristems  of  the  culm,  where  the  tiller  buds 
form.  Several  fixed  mutations  have  been  identified  within 
the PROG1 coding region of domesticated varieties and it is 
thought that one of them, a threonine to serine change, inacti-
vates the protein (Jin et al., 2008).

While PROG1 behaves as a single Mendelian, large effect 
locus,  two  QTLs  for  grain  yield  were  mapped  in  a  recent 
rice  breeding  approach  (Miura  et  al.,  2010).  One  of  them, 
the  SQUAMOSA  PROMOTER  BINDING  PROTEIN-LIKE 
14  (OsSPL14)  locus,  showed  up  as  a  single,  semi-dominant 
Mendelian locus in a parallel study (Jiao et al., 2010), empha-
sizing  the  advantage  of  analyzing  independent  populations 

199

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

with  different  tester  parents  in  parallel.  Both  studies  com-
pared  classic  japonica  rice  varieties  with  different  lines  that 
exhibit less tillers but more branched and productive panicles. 
Strikingly,  the  studies  revealed  that  the  lines  with  the  more 
productive panicles carry a point mutation, which affects the 
OsSPL14  transcript  stability  by  rendering  the  transcript  less 
susceptible  to  microRNA-mediated  decay.  Consequently, 
more  OsSPL14  protein  is  expressed,  which  both  represses 
tiller  formation  during  the  vegetative  stage  and  promotes 
panicle  branching  during  the  reproductive  stage.  This  results 
in  rice  plants  with  fewer  tillers,  but  increased  lodging  resist-
ance and more productive panicles. Since the reduced tillering 
can be compensated by a higher planting density, such varie-
ties consequently display higher grain yields.

Examples from other cereals

A  trait  that  is  historically  important  for  optimizing  yield  in 
both  seed  and  vegetative  crops  is  the  timing  of  the  transi-
tion  between  the  vegetative  and  reproductive  phases  of  the 
life  cycle,  for  example,  flowering.  This  transition  is  stimu-
lated  by  both  environmental  and  developmental  signals,  and 
has  been  characterized  in  great  detail  in  Arabidopsis,  reveal-
ing the major, conserved molecular players (Baurle and Dean, 
2006).  The  timing  of  flowering  is  a  major  factor  in  regional 
climatic  adaptation  of  crop  species.  To  maximize  yield,  it  is 
essential  that  a  crop’s  life  cycle  is  adapted  to  the  agro-envi-
ronments  in  which  it  is  grown.  In  vegetative  crops,  the  aim 
is  usually  to  delay  flowering,  while  in  seed  crops,  the  exact 
timing  of  flowering  is  a  major  determinant  of  grain  yield. 
Vernalization  accelerates  flowering  by  promoting  the  switch 
from  vegetative  to  reproductive  development,  depending  on 
the  length  of  the  cold  period  (Baurle  and  Dean,  2006).  The 
longer the cold period, the faster flowering will occur, up to 
a certain threshold when the vernalization response becomes 
saturated.  Winter  varieties  require  vernalization  and  are 
sown in late summer or autumn, so that they can be vernal-
ized  during  winter  and  then  flower  in  spring.  Spring  cereals 
do not require vernalization and are sown in early spring and 
harvested in late summer. Natural variation studies have iden-
tified the major vernalization response genes in wheat and bar-
ley, VERNALIZATION 1 (VRN1), VRN2, and VRN3 (note 
that these loci are not homologous to the VERNALIZATION 
loci of Arabidopsis; Trevaskis et al., 2007). These genes regu-
late  the  response  to  cold  period  and  promotion  of  flowering 
by  long  days.  VRN1  encodes  a  transcription  factor  that  pro-
motes  inflorescence  meristem  identity  (Yan  et  al.,  2003).  In 
winter  varieties,  expression  of  VRN1  is  strongly  induced  by 
a  period  of  low  temperature.  The  extent  of  this  induction 
depends on the length of the vernalization period, resulting in 
a quantitative effect on the timing of inflorescence initiation. 
The  activity  of  VRN1  is  enhanced  by  VRN3,  the  homolog 
of  the  Arabidopsis  florigen,  FLOWERING  LOCUS  T  (FT), 
whose  expression  is  induced  by  long  days  and  further  accel-
erates  reproductive  apex  development  (Yan  et  al.,  2006). 
VRN2,  a  repressor  of  flowering,  integrates  vernalization  and 
day-length responses by repressing VRN3 until plants are ver-
nalized (Yan et al., 2004, 2006). VRN2 is repressed by VRN1 

200

when  days  start  to  lengthen  in  the  spring,  thus  allowing  the 
VRN3-mediated flowering response to long days. The VRN1, 
VRN2, and VRN3 genes should be useful to cereal breeding 
programs.  An  increased  understanding  of  how  these  genes 
interact to control flowering time should also help us to pre-
dict  how  environmental  factors  affect  flowering  in  different 
genetic backgrounds. This will aid in the development of vari-
eties of major food crops, such as wheat, that are able to cope 
with climate change.

Toward Prediction of Variation in 
Molecular Function: Why Model 
Organisms are here to Stay

An  interesting  aspect  of  the  findings  highlighted  earlier,  as 
well as other QTL studies, is the importance of architectural 
changes  in  domestication  and  yield  increase  (Doust,  2007), 
which might also explain the prevalence of regulatory factors 
identified  in  those  studies.  Another  example  is  an  important 
locus  selected  during  maize  domestication,  teosinte  glume 
architecture (tga1), a SQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING 
PROTEIN  (SBP)  class  transcription  factor  that  affects  seed 
case  development  (Wang  et  al.,  2005).  A  tga1  allele  carry-
ing several mutations, most notably a likely causal amino acid 
change, led to the naked grain phenotype of maize.

The  presumed  causal  polymorphism  of  tga1  has  not  been 
directly  verified  in  experiments,  which  illustrates  a  common 
problem  in  the  analysis  of  crop  QTL  alleles.  With  very  few 
exceptions,  QTL  alleles  isolated  from  maize,  rice,  or  wheat 
thus  far  have  not  been  characterized  with  respect  to  molec-
ular function. While in some cases, rearrangements in the 5 
regulatory  region  and  associated  expression  level  differences 
suggest  a  loss-of-function,  in  most  cases  the  causal  polymor-
phisms can only be guessed at. For example, a maize QTL for 
flowering  time  selected  during  domestication,  Dwarf8,  car-
ries several polymorphisms, including indels in the regulatory 
region,  as  well  as  amino  acid  deletions  (Thornsberry  et  al., 
2001). These polymorphisms are genetically linked and found 
together  in  all  varieties  investigated.  Thus,  which  of  these 
polymorphisms is causal can only be a best guess and has not 
been  formally  determined.  This  is  true  for  most  crop  QTLs 
isolated  so  far,  principally  because  tracking  down  the  causal 
polymorphism would require laborious and lengthy transgenic 
analyses.

Crucial support from model organism 
candidate genes

Notably, when a putative causal polymorphism has been iden-
tified, it is mostly by inference from mutant analyses in model 
organisms.  In  particular,  the  analysis  of  Arabidopsis  growth 
and development has furnished a huge amount of data on gene 
function  that  can  be  exploited  to  understand  the  molecular 
basis  of  allelic  variation  in  the  crop  homologs.  Identification 
of many crop QTL profited largely from candidate approaches 
driven  by  known  genes  from  model  organisms,  significantly 

Advances in identifying and exploiting natural genetic variation

C H A P T E R   1 3

facilitating  and  accelerating  QTL  identification  once  coarse 
mapping had been achieved. This was possible because of the 
general  evolutionary  proximity  of  flowering  plants  to  each 
other, and therefore the often conceptually similar role of the 
homologous genes in different species.

Maybe  the  most  prominent  example  is  the  Arabidopsis 
gene  GIBBERELLIC  ACID  INSENSITIVE  (GAI),  a  nega-
tive regulator of GA response in Arabidopsis. In the dwarfed 
Arabidopsis gai mutant, the gai protein misses an amino acid 
stretch,  resulting  in  its  stabilization  and  constitutive  activity, 
and thus the inhibition of stem elongation (Peng et al., 1997). 
Strikingly,  the  dwarfing  Green  Revolution  gene  Reduced 
height 1 of wheat turned out to be a GAI homolog, and the 
dwarfing alleles are equally affected by a deletion in the same 
amino  acid  motif  (Peng  et  al.,  1999).  This  is  also  true  for 
dwarfing alleles of the maize homolog, Dwarf8. Notably, these 
deletions  are  not  found  in  the  dwarf8  alleles  that  have  been 
selected  for  flowering  time  mentioned  earlier,  providing  an 
example of a pleiotropic locus that can affect various traits, as 
is frequently observed in Arabidopsis (e.g., FLC or ERECTA). 
Similarly, isolation of many other crop QTLs was aided by the 
preceding detailed analysis of their model organism homologs, 
for  example,  tb1  (a  homolog  of  Antirrhinum  CYCLOIDEA) 
or VRN3 (a homolog of Arabidopsis FT). In some cases how-
ever,  Arabidopsis  or  generally  dicotyledon  homologs  do  not 
appear  to  exist,  such  as  for  the  LAX  gene  of  rice.  LAX  was 
instrumental  in  isolating  ba1  from  maize  (Gallavotti  et  al., 
2004),  emphasizing  the  need  for  a  well-developed  mono-
cotyledon  model  system,  such  as  Brachypodium  distachyon 
(Draper et al., 2001; Initiative, 2010).

Model systems as references to 
characterize allele activities

Advantages  of  the  model  systems  include  short  genera-
tion  time,  well-established  methodology,  and  biological 
resources.  This  permits  routine  and  quick  generation  of 
transgenic  lines.  Combined  with  null  mutants  for  nearly 
each  gene  available  (e.g.,  Alonso  et  al.,  2003),  direct  test-
ing  of  the  activity  of  allelic  variants  if  the  mutants  display  a 
quantifiable  phenotype  is  possible.  In  Arabidopsis,  this  has 
been used to evaluate the importance of amino acid residues 
or  regulatory  elements,  or  to  measure  the  activity  of  differ-
ent  functional  (i.e.,  not  null)  alleles  in  the  context  of  natu-
ral  variation.  Such  analyses  might  be  extended  to  include 
homologous  genes  from  other  species  (e.g.,  Beuchat  et  al., 
2010),  first  to  prove  their  equivalent  biochemical  role,  and 
secondly  to  determine  the  impact  of  mutations  observed 
in  nature.  If  done  at  high  throughput,  this  strategy  could  be 
applied to survey the activity of the natural polymorphisms in 
the alleles of a given gene (e.g., Filiault et al., 2008; Beuchat 
et  al.,  2010).  Subsequently,  this  information  could  then  be 
used  to  pre-select  varieties  that  carry  alleles  of  interest  for 
breeding  efforts,  without  a  priori  knowledge  of  the  varie-
ties’  phenotypic  characteristics.  Thus,  the  results  from  com-
plementation  assays  in  a  model  organism  could  be  exploited 
to predict the activity and phenotypic impact of natural crop 
alleles to drive crop improvement.

Beyond Simple Traits: Epigenetics, 
Heterosis, Genetic Incompatibility, 
and Trade-offs

Incompatibility between natural accessions

Another  aspect  in  which  model  systems  will  remain  invalu-
able is to understand genetic phenomena that are relevant for 
plant breeding. This includes the molecular basis of heterosis 
(e.g., Rosas et al., 2010), epigenetic phenomena (e.g., Shindo 
et  al.,  2006;  Vaughn  et  al.,  2007),  or  the  limits  of  breeding 
due  to  incompatibility.  The  latter  phenomenon  occurs  fre-
quently  enough  to  pose  a  practical  problem,  but  its  poten-
tial  molecular  causes  are  only  beginning  to  be  understood 
very  recently  thanks  to  analyses  of  Arabidopsis.  These  stud-
ies  demonstrated  that  certain  combinations  of  natural  alle-
les  in  one  genome  are  either  not  viable  or  result  in  severely 
decreased fitness, thus limiting the genetic constitutions that 
can  be  recovered  from  the  respective  cross  between  natural 
accessions. For instance, in a pioneering study by Weigel and 
co-workers, decreased fitness due to hybrid necrosis was dem-
onstrated to result from an incompatible interaction between 
alleles  of  certain  disease-resistance  loci  (Bomblies  et  al., 
2007). This was first discovered in a cross between the Uk-1 
and Uk-3 accessions, but eventually shown to occur in several 
other  crosses,  suggesting  that  such  “autoimmune  response” 
might be a common cause for incompatibility.

Other  studies  demonstrated  that  synthetic  lethality  can 
arise  from  genetic  interaction  between  paralogous  loci,  high-
lighting  the  dynamics  of  structural  genome  rearrangements 
and  mutation  rate  in  Arabidopsis  (Ossowski  et  al.,  2008, 
2010;  Santuari  et  al.,  2010).  For  example,  an  essential  gene 
in  amino  acid  biosynthesis  was  shown  to  be  duplicated  on 
two  different  chromosomes.  Differential  evolutionary  trajec-
tories of those paralogs in the Col-0 and Cvi accessions have 
resulted in their differential expression levels and the deletion 
of one paralog in Cvi (Bikard et al., 2009). As a consequence, 
the  functional  (expressed)  paralog  in  the  Col-0  accession 
is  located  in  the  position  of  the  deleted  Cvi  allele,  whereas 
the  remaining  functional  Cvi  paralog  on  a  different  chromo-
some is located in the position of the hypoactive (i.e., lowly 
expressed) Col-0 allele. Consequently, only certain combina-
tions between the four alleles result in sufficient overall gene 
activity, whereas other combinations impair growth rate or are 
not  even  viable.  Notably,  independent  non-functionalization 
events  of  one,  but  not  the  other,  paralog  were  observed  in 
other  accessions,  suggesting  that  this  type  of  incompatibility 
could  be  widespread.  A  conceptually  similar  case,  involving 
a  transposition  event,  was  also  identified  for  reduced  shoot 
growth (Vlad et al., 2010).

The  previously  mentioned  studies  illustrate  the  very 
dynamic  rate  of  duplication  and  transposition  events,  even 
over  evolutionary  short  periods  of  time,  resulting  in  various 
divergent  although  still  functional  allele  combinations  fixed 
in  different  accessions.  This  variation  remains  largely  hid-
den  in  wild  populations  of  Arabidopsis  because  it  is  mainly 
selfing,  but  it  restricts  the  options  for  out-crossing,  thereby 

201

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

contributing  to  genetic  drift  and  eventually  speciation 
(Bomblies  and  Weigel,  2007).  Because  Arabidopsis  is  self-
ing, these incompatibilities might not be as strongly selected 
against  as  in  obligate  out-crossing  species,  but  they  might 
occur  more  frequently  in  crops  because  of  their  inbreed-
ing  history.  Thus,  understanding  of  these  processes  in  model 
organisms  might  help  us  to  understand,  and  eventually  even 
predict, incompatibilities between crop varieties.

Trade-offs between different beneficial 
traits

Another phenomenon that could limit crop improvement are 
trade-offs  between  different  traits  that  have  been  shaped  by 
selective  pressures.  The  molecular  basis  of  these  trade-offs 
is  not  very  well  understood,  although  there  are  some  gen-
eral notions that there is a constant balancing of growth ver-
sus  defense.  A  recent  study  has  confirmed  this  concept  for 
Arabidopsis accessions, demonstrating that allelic diversity at 
the  ACCELERATED  CELL  DEATH  6  (ACD6)  locus  deter-
mines  pleiotropic  differences  in  both  vegetative  growth  and 
resistance to microbial infection, as well as herbivory (Todesco 
et  al.,  2010).  A  hyperactive  ACD6  allele  strongly  enhances 
pathogen  resistance  while  at  the  same  time  slowing  biomass 
accumulation.  This  allele  is  found  at  intermediate  frequency 
throughout  the  worldwide  range  of  Arabidopsis,  suggesting 
that it provides a substantial fitness benefit despite its marked 
impact  on  growth.  Similar  genetic  scenarios  are  conceivable 
in crops and might occur there even more frequently because 
of  the  largely  unidirectional  selection  pressures  imposed  by 
breeders.

Extending the Toolbox: Genome-wide 
Association Mapping

In  summary,  the  characterization  of  natural  genetic  variation 
has  made  big  strides  during  the  last  decade,  thanks  to  the 
accumulating  wealth  of  biological  data  from  model  systems 
and the quantum leaps in high-throughput technologies. The 
technological progress also fuels more ambitious projects that 
are relevant for plant biotechnology, such as association map-
ping.  In  Arabidopsis,  a  first  attempt  at  large-scale  genome-
wide  association  (GWA)  mapping  was  published  recently, 
presenting  a  set  of  95  accessions  that  have  been  genotyped 
for  about  250,000  SNPs  on  average  for  1  SNP  per  500 bp 
(Atwell  et  al.,  2010).  These  accessions  were  phenotyped  for 
more  than  100  traits,  and  several  strong  associations  were 
obtained  after  correction  for  possible  confounding  effects  of 
population structure. Among them, previously identified large 
effect  loci  for  traits  with  a  wide  quantitative  range,  such  as 
flowering  time,  were  confirmed.  For  many  other  traits,  sig-
nificant  associations  were  found.  It  thus  appears  likely  that 
GWA studies will become a standard tool for dissecting nat-
ural  variation  and  identifying  candidate  genes.  Independent 
experimental  verification  will  remain  necessary,  however,  as 
GWA alone will often not allow accurate estimation of allelic 
effects.  Moreover,  GWA  can  only  detect  alleles  that  explain 

202

a  sufficient  fraction  of  the  variation  in  the  mapping  popula-
tion and therefore have to be reasonably common. The resolu-
tion of GWA can thus be improved by increasing the sample 
size of accessions or varieties investigated, as well as by char-
acterizing  the  complete  polymorphism  set  of  all  lines  by 
whole genome sequencing like those attempted by the 1001 
Genomes Project (Weigel and Mott, 2009).

However,  some  inherent  limits  to  GWA  cannot  be  over-
come,  such  as  distortions  due  to  co-evolution  of  physically 
unlinked  loci  seen  in  the  examples  of  incompatibility  pre-
sented earlier in this chapter. To what degree GWA will drive 
marker-assisted crop breeding remains to be seen, but so far 
only small-scale studies with limited success, in the sense that 
no new loci were identified, exist (Aranzana et al., 2005; Zhao 
et  al.,  2007;  Ehrenreich  et  al.,  2009;  Weber  et  al.,  2009). 
Nevertheless,  it  appears  likely  that  GWA  combined  with 
dedicated  QTL  analyses  of  RILs  and  experimental  verifica-
tion  of  allelic  variant  activities  will  be  a  complementing  and 
very powerful approach to dissect the allelic contributions to 
traits of interest. The availability of more sophisticated, multi-
parental  RIL  populations  and  RIL  populations  characterized 
at  the  whole  genome  sequence  level  will  greatly  contribute 
to these efforts (e.g., Sibout et al., 2008; Kover et al., 2009; 
Santuari et al., 2010).

The Route to Effectively Exploit 
Natural Variation for Plant 
Biotechnology

Through technology developed in studies of natural variation 
of model species, we will eventually be able to routinely asso-
ciate  natural  variation  with  adaptive  agricultural  features  in 
crops and identify novel genes or adaptive alleles from natu-
ral variation present in the wild. As an increasing number of 
genes  regulating  agronomical  traits  in  crop  species  are  iden-
tified,  their  sequences  can  be  used  by  breeders  as  functional 
markers for selecting favorable genotypes.

A  major  question  in  plant  biotechnology  will  be  how  to 
best  exploit  the  identified  natural  variation  of  interest.  This 
aspect is indivisible from developments in legislation and pub-
lic  perception  concerning  such  issues  as  patenting  or  geneti-
cally modified crops. The most inoffensive approach would be 
classic marker-assisted breeding that aims to recover a desired 
allelic  combination  in  the  progeny  of  a  given  cross  or  intro-
gression  between  varieties  carrying  the  alleles  of  interest.  In 
principal, the new technologies enable us to effectively breed 
crop varieties even from crosses with their wild counterparts 
through  a  limited  number  of  generations.  Identification  of 
alleles responsible for the desired features enables us to con-
firm their presence in the genome even in the absence of any 
visible phenotypic traits. Thus, we do not have to rely exclu-
sively  on  phenotypic  traits  any  longer;  we  can  directly  iden-
tify  individuals  carrying  the  desirable  alleles  through  the  use 
of  genetic  markers  and  select  them  for  further  breeding.  As 
outlined  in  the  introduction,  in  practice,  this  approach  is 
mainly  limited  by  the  available  genotyping  throughput  and 
the  number  of  individuals  that  can  be  analyzed.  Another 

Advances in identifying and exploiting natural genetic variation

C H A P T E R   1 3

important  constraint,  however,  is  the  limited  knowledge 
about all of the alleles responsible for the additive beneficial 
features of the parental crop varieties. Conservation of these 
beneficial features in the derived, desired variety would thus 
require  time-consuming,  precise  introgression  of  the  alleles 
of interest from the other parent. Therefore, the rational and 
straightforward solution would be the introduction of desired 

alleles  into  elite  varieties  by  transgenic  means.  Beyond  sim-
ple  transgenesis,  the  recent  breakthroughs  in  gene  targeting 
in  plants  would  even  enable  targeted  replacement  of  alleles 
(Shukla  et  al.,  2009;  Townsend  et  al.,  2009;  Osakabe  et  al., 
2010; Zhang et al., 2010). Arguably, this would be the opti-
mal  way  to  bring  beneficial  natural  variation  back  into  crop 
germplasms and pave the way for true designer crops.

References

Allaby, R. G., Fuller, D. Q., & Brown, T. 

A. (2008). The genetic expectations of 
a protracted model for the origins of 
domesticated crops. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 105, 13982–13986.

Alonso, J. M., Stepanova, A. N., Leisse, T. J., 

Kim, C. J., Chen, H., & Shinn, P.,  
et al. (2003). Genome-wide insertional 
mutagenesis of Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Science, 301, 653–657.

Alonso-Blanco, C., Aarts, M. G., Bentsink, 

L., Keurentjes, J. J., Reymond, M., & 
Vreugdenhil, D., et al. (2009). What has 
natural variation taught us about plant 
development, physiology, and adaptation? 
Plant Cell, 21, 1877–1896.

Alonso-Blanco, C., & Koornneef, M. (2000). 

Naturally occurring variation in Arabidopsis: 
An underexploited resource for plant 
genetics. Trends in Plant Science, 5, 22–29.

Alonso-Blanco, C., Koornneef, M., & Stam, 
P. (1998). The use of recombinant inbred 
lines (RILs) for genetic mapping. Methods in 
Molecular Biology, 82, 137–146.

Aranzana, M. J., Kim, S., Zhao, K., Bakker, 

E., Horton, M., & Jakob, K., et al. (2005). 
Genome-wide association mapping in 
Arabidopsis identifies previously known 
flowering time and pathogen resistance 
genes. PLoS Genetics, 1, e60.

Atwell, S., Huang, Y. S., Vilhjalmsson, B. J., 
Willems, G., Horton, M., & Li, Y., et al. 
(2010). Genome-wide association study 
of 107 phenotypes in Arabidopsis thaliana 
inbred lines. Nature, 465, 627–631.

Balasubramanian, S., Sureshkumar, S., Agrawal, 
M., Michael, T. P., Wessinger, C., & Maloof, 
J. N., et al. (2006). The PHYTOCHROME 
C photoreceptor gene mediates natural 
variation in flowering and growth responses 
of Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature Genetics, 
38, 711–715.

Baurle, I., & Dean, C. (2006). The timing of 
developmental transitions in plants. Cell, 
125, 655–664.

Bentsink, L., Jowett, J., Hanhart, C. J., & 

Koornneef, M. (2006). Cloning of DOG1, 
a quantitative trait locus controlling seed 
dormancy in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 17042–17047.
Beuchat, J., Li, S., Ragni, L., Shindo, C., 

Kohn, M. H., & Hardtke, C. S. (2010). A 
hyperactive quantitative trait locus allele 
of Arabidopsis BRX contributes to natural 
variation in root growth vigor. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 107, 8475–8480.

Bikard, D., Patel, D., Le Mette, C., Giorgi, 
V., Camilleri, C., & Bennett, M. J., et al. 
(2009). Divergent evolution of duplicate 
genes leads to genetic incompatibilities 
within A. thaliana. Science, 323, 623–626.

Bomblies, K., Lempe, J., Epple, P., Warthmann, 

N., Lanz, C., & Dangl, J. L., et al. (2007). 
Autoimmune response as a mechanism for 
a Dobzhansky-Muller-type incompatibility 
syndrome in plants. PLoS Biology, 5, e236.

Bomblies, K., & Weigel, D. (2007). Arabidopsis: 

A model genus for speciation. Current 
Opinion in Genetics & Development, 17, 
500–504.

Borevitz, J. O., Liang, D., Plouffe, D., Chang, 
H. S., Zhu, T., & Weigel, D., et al. (2003). 
Large-scale identification of single-feature 
polymorphisms in complex genomes. 
Genome Research, 13, 513–523.

Borojevic, K. (2005). The transfer and history 
of “reduced height genes” (Rht) in wheat 
from Japan to Europe. The Journal of 
Heredity, 96, 455–459.

Brown, T. A., Jones, M. K., Powell, W., & 

Allaby, R. G. (2009). The complex origins of 
domesticated crops in the Fertile Crescent. 
Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 24, 103–109.
Buckler, E. S., Thornsberry, J. M., & Kresovich, 

S. (2001). Molecular diversity, structure 
and domestication of grasses. Genetical 
Research, 77, 213–218.

Caicedo, A. L., Stinchcombe, J. R., Olsen, 
K. M., Schmitt, J., & Purugganan, M. D. 
(2004). Epistatic interaction between 
Arabidopsis FRI and FLC flowering time 
genes generates a latitudinal cline in a life 
history trait. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 101, 15670–15675.

Clark, R. M., Schweikert, G., Toomajian, C., 
Ossowski, S., Zeller, G., & Shinn, P., et al. 
(2007). Common sequence polymorphisms 
shaping genetic diversity in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Science, 317, 338–342.

Clark, R. M., Wagler, T. N., Quijada, P., & 
Doebley, J. (2006). A distant upstream 
enhancer at the maize domestication gene 
tb1 has pleiotropic effects on plant and 
inflorescent architecture. Nature Genetics, 
38, 594–597.

Devlin, P. F., Robson, P. R., Patel, S. R., Goosey, 

L., Sharrock, R. A., & Whitelam, G. C. 
(1999). Phytochrome D acts in the shade-
avoidance syndrome in Arabidopsis by 
controlling elongation growth and flowering 
time. Plant Physiology, 119, 909–915.

Doebley, J., Stec, A., & Gustus, C. (1995). 

teosinte branched 1 and the origin of maize: 
Evidence for epistasis and the evolution of 
dominance. Genetics, 141, 333–346.

Doebley, J., Stec, A., & Hubbard, L. (1997). 

The evolution of apical dominance in maize. 
Nature, 386, 485–488.

Doebley, J. F., Gaut, B. S., & Smith, B. D. 
(2006). The molecular genetics of crop 
domestication. Cell, 127, 1309–1321.

Doust, A. (2007). Architectural evolution and 
its implications for domestication in grasses. 
Annals of Botany, 100, 941–950.

Draper, J., Mur, L. A., Jenkins, G., Ghosh-

Biswas, G. C., Bablak, P., & Hasterok, R.,  
et al. (2001). Brachypodium distachyon. A 
new model system for functional genomics in 
grasses. Plant Physiology, 127, 1539–1555.
Ehrenreich, I. M., Hanzawa, Y., Chou, L., Roe, 

J. L., Kover, P. X., & Purugganan, M. D. 
(2009). Candidate gene association mapping 
of Arabidopsis flowering time. Genetics, 
183, 325–335.

El-Din El-Assal, S., Alonso-Blanco, C., Peeters, 

A. J., Raz, V., & Koornneef, M. (2001). 
A QTL for flowering time in Arabidopsis 
reveals a novel allele of CRY2. Nature 
Genetics, 29, 435–440.

Filiault, D. L., Wessinger, C. A., Dinneny, J. R., 

Lutes, J., Borevitz, J. O., & Weigel, D.,  
et al. (2008). Amino acid polymorphisms in 
Arabidopsis phytochrome B cause differential 
responses to light. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 105, 3157–3162.

Gallavotti, A., Zhao, Q., Kyozuka, J., Meeley, 

R. B., Ritter, M. K., & Doebley, J. F.,  
et al. (2004). The role of barren stalk1 in 
the architecture of maize. Nature, 432, 
630–635.

Godiard, L., Sauviac, L., Torii, K. U., Grenon, 

O., Mangin, B., & Grimsley, N. H., et al. 
(2003). ERECTA, an LRR receptor-like 
kinase protein controlling development 
pleiotropically affects resistance to bacterial 
wilt. Plant Journal, 36, 353–365.

Gore, M. A., Chia, J. M., Elshire, R. J., Sun, Q., 
Ersoz, E. S., & Hurwitz, B. L., et al. (2009). 
A first-generation haplotype map of maize. 
Science, 326, 1115–1117.

Huang, J., Pray, C., & Rozelle, S. (2002). 
Enhancing the crops to feed the poor. 
Nature, 418, 678–684.

Huang, X., Lu, G., Zhao, Q., Liu, X., & Han, B. 
(2008). Genome-wide analysis of transposon 
insertion polymorphisms reveals intraspecific 
variation in cultivated rice. Plant Physiology, 
148, 25–40.

Initiative, I. B. (2010). Genome sequencing and 

analysis of the model grass Brachypodium 
distachyon. Nature, 463, 763–768.

Initiative, T. A. G. (2000). Analysis of the 
genome sequence of the flowering plant 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature, 408, 796–815.

203

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Jiao, Y., Wang, Y., Xue, D., Wang, J., Yan, 

M., & Liu, G., et al. (2010). Regulation of 
OsSPL14 by OsmiR156 defines ideal plant 
architecture in rice. Nature Genetics, 42, 
541–544.

Jin, J., Huang, W., Gao, J. P., Yang, J., Shi, 

M., & Zhu, M. Z., et al. (2008). Genetic 
control of rice plant architecture under 
domestication. Nature Genetics, 40, 1365–
1369.

Jodon, N. E., & Beachell, M. H. (1943). Rice 

dwarf mutations and their inheritance. 
Journal of Heredity, 34, 155–160.

Johannes, F., Porcher, E., Teixeira, F. K., 

Saliba-Colombani, V., Simon, M., & Agier, 
N., et al. (2009). Assessing the impact of 
transgenerational epigenetic variation on 
complex traits. PLoS Genetics, 5, e1000530.
Johanson, U., West, J., Lister, C., Michaels, S., 
Amasino, R., & Dean, C. (2000). Molecular 
analysis of FRIGIDA, a major determinant 
of natural variation in Arabidopsis flowering 
time. Science, 290, 344–347.

Kim, S., Plagnol, V., Hu, T. T., Toomajian, C., 

Clark, R. M., & Ossowski, S., et al. (2007). 
Recombination and linkage disequilibrium in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature Genetics, 39, 
1151–1155.

Komatsu, K., Maekawa, M., Ujiie, S., Satake, 

Y., Furutani, I., & Okamoto, H., et al. 
(2003). LAX and SPA: Major regulators of 
shoot branching in rice. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 100, 11765–11770.

Koornneef, M., Alonso-Blanco, C., & 

Vreugdenhil, D. (2004). Naturally occurring 
genetic variation in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Annual Review of Plant Biology, 55, 141–172.

Koornneef, M., & Meinke, D. (2010). The 
development of Arabidopsis as a model 
plant. Plant Journal, 61, 909–921.

Kover, P. X., Valdar, W., Trakalo, J., Scarcelli, 
N., Ehrenreich, I. M., & Purugganan, M. 
D., et al. (2009). A Multiparent Advanced 
Generation Inter-Cross to fine-map 
quantitative traits in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
PLoS Genetics, 5, e1000551.

Kroymann, J., & Mitchell-Olds, T. (2005). 

Epistasis and balanced polymorphism 
influencing complex trait variation. Nature, 
435, 95–98.

Lukowitz, W., Gillmor, C. S., & Scheible, W. 

R. (2000). Positional cloning in Arabidopsis. 
Why it feels good to have a genome initiative 
working for you. Plant Physiology, 123, 
795–805.

Maloof, J. N., Borevitz, J. O., Dabi, T., Lutes, 

J., Nehring, R. B., & Redfern, J. L., et al. 
(2001). Natural variation in light sensitivity 
of Arabidopsis. Nature Genetics, 29, 
441–446.

Michaels, S. D., & Amasino, R. M. (1999). 

FLOWERING LOCUS C encodes a 
novel MADS domain protein that acts as 
a repressor of flowering. Plant Cell, 11, 
949–956.

Miura, K., Ikeda, M., Matsubara, A., Song, 
X. J., Ito, M., & Asano, K., et al. (2010). 
OsSPL14 promotes panicle branching and 
higher grain productivity in rice. Nature 
Genetics, 42, 545–549.

Mouchel, C. F., Briggs, G. C., & Hardtke, 

C. S. (2004). Natural genetic variation in 

204

Arabidopsis identifies BREVIS RADIX, 
a novel regulator of cell proliferation 
and elongation in the root. Genes & 
Development, 18, 700–714.

Mouchel, C. F., Osmont, K. S., & Hardtke, C. 
S. (2006). BRX mediates feedback between 
brassinosteroid levels and auxin signalling in 
root growth. Nature, 443, 458–461.
Napp-Zinn, K. (1957). Untersuchungen 
zur Genetik des Kältebedürfnisses bei 
Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. Z. Indukt. 
Abstamm Vererbungsl, 88, 253–285.

Nordborg, M., Borevitz, J. O., Bergelson, 

J., Berry, C. C., Chory, J., & Hagenblad, 
J., et al. (2002). The extent of linkage 
disequilibrium in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Nature Genetics, 30, 190–193.

Nordborg, M., Hu, T. T., Ishino, Y., Jhaveri, J., 
Toomajian, C., & Zheng, H., et al. (2005). 
The pattern of polymorphism in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. PLoS Biology, 3, e196.

Osakabe, K., Osakabe, Y., & Toki, S. (2010). 
Site-directed mutagenesis in Arabidopsis 
using custom-designed zinc finger nucleases. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
107, 12034–12039.

Ossowski, S., Schneeberger, K., Clark, R. 

M., Lanz, C., Warthmann, N., & Weigel, 
D. (2008). Sequencing of natural strains 
of Arabidopsis thaliana with short reads. 
Genome Research, 18, 2024–2033.

Ossowski, S., Schneeberger, K., Lucas-Lledo, 

J. I., Warthmann, N., Clark, R. M., & Shaw, 
R. G., et al. (2010). The rate and molecular 
spectrum of spontaneous mutations in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Science, 327, 92–94.

Peng, J., Carol, P., Richards, D. E., King, K. 
E., Cowling, R. J., & Murphy, G. P., et al. 
(1997). The Arabidopsis GAI gene defines 
a signaling pathway that negatively regulates 
gibberellin responses. Genes & Development, 
11, 3194–3205.

Peng, J., Richards, D. E., Hartley, N. M., 

Murphy, G. P., Devos, K. M., & Flintham, 
J. E., et al. (1999). “Green revolution” 
genes encode mutant gibberellin response 
modulators. Nature, 400, 256–261.

Plagnol, V., Padhukasahasram, B., Wall, J. D., 

Marjoram, P., & Nordborg, M. (2006). 
Relative influences of crossing over and 
gene conversion on the pattern of linkage 
disequilibrium in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Genetics, 172, 2441–2448.

Plantegenet, S., Weber, J., Goldstein, D. R., 

Zeller, G., Nussbaumer, C., & Thomas, J., 
et al. (2009). Comprehensive analysis of 
Arabidopsis expression level polymorphisms 
with simple inheritance. Molecular Systems 
Biology, 5, 242.

Project, I. R. G. S. (2005). The map-based 

sequence of the rice genome. Nature, 436, 
793–800.

Purugganan, M. D., & Fuller, D. Q. (2009). 

The nature of selection during plant 
domestication. Nature, 457, 843–848.

Rhee, S. Y., Beavis, W., Berardini, T. Z., Chen, 
G., Dixon, D., & Doyle, A., et al. (2003). 
The Arabidopsis Information Resource 
(TAIR): A model organism database 
providing a centralized, curated gateway to 
Arabidopsis biology, research materials and 

community. Nucleic Acids Research, 31, 
224–228.

Rosas, U., Barton, N. H., Copsey, L., Barbier 
de Reuille, P., & Coen, E. (2010). Cryptic 
variation between species and the basis 
of hybrid performance. PLoS Biology, 8, 
e1000429.

Santuari, L., Pradervand, S., Amiguet-Vercher, 
A. M., Thomas, J., Dorcey, E., & Harshman, 
K., et al. (2010). Substantial deletion 
overlap among divergent Arabidopsis 
genomes revealed by intersection of short 
reads and tiling arrays. Genome Biology, 
11, R4.

Schmid, K. J., Sorensen, T. R., Stracke, R., 

Torjek, O., Altmann, T., & Mitchell-Olds, T., 
et al. (2003). Large-scale identification and 
analysis of genome-wide single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms for mapping in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Genome Research, 13, 1250–1257.
Schnable, P. S., Ware, D., Fulton, R. S., Stein, 
J. C., Wei, F., & Pasternak, S., et al. (2009). 
The B73 maize genome: complexity, 
diversity, and dynamics. Science, 326, 
1112–1115.

Sergeeva, L. I., Keurentjes, J. J., Bentsink, L., 
Vonk, J., van der Plas, L. H., & Koornneef, 
M., et al. (2006). Vacuolar invertase 
regulates elongation of Arabidopsis thaliana 
roots as revealed by QTL and mutant 
analysis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 103, 2994–2999.

Shindo, C., Aranzana, M. J., Lister, C., 

Baxter, C., Nicholls, C., & Nordborg, 
M., et al. (2005). Role of FRIGIDA and 
FLOWERING LOCUS C in determining 
variation in flowering time of Arabidopsis. 
Plant Physiology, 138, 1163–1173.

Shindo, C., Lister, C., Crevillen, P., Nordborg, 

M., & Dean, C. (2006). Variation in the 
epigenetic silencing of FLC contributes to 
natural variation in Arabidopsis vernalization 
response. Genes & Development, 20, 3079–
3083.

Shukla, V. K., Doyon, Y., Miller, J. C., 

DeKelver, R. C., Moehle, E. A., & Worden, 
S. E., et al. (2009). Precise genome 
modification in the crop species Zea mays 
using zinc-finger nucleases. Nature, 459, 
437–441.

Sibout, R., Plantegenet, S., & Hardtke, C. S. 

(2008). Flowering as a condition for xylem 
expansion in Arabidopsis hypocotyl and 
root. Current Biology, 18, 458–463.

Singer, T., Fan, Y., Chang, H. S., Zhu, T., 

Hazen, S. P., & Briggs, S. P. (2006). A high-
resolution map of Arabidopsis recombinant 
inbred lines by whole-genome exon array 
hybridization. PLoS Genetics, 2, e144.

Springer, N. M., Ying, K., Fu, Y., Ji, T., Yeh, C. 

T., & Jia, Y., et al. (2009). Maize inbreds 
exhibit high levels of copy number variation 
(CNV) and presence/absence variation 
(PAV) in genome content. PLoS Genetics, 5, 
e1000734.

Sussman, M. R., Amasino, R. M., Young, J. C., 

Krysan, P. J., & Austin-Phillips, S. (2000). 
The Arabidopsis knockout facility at the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Plant 
Physiology, 124, 1465–1467.

Tan, L., Li, X., Liu, F., Sun, X., Li, C., & 

Zhu, Z., et al. (2008). Control of a key 

Advances in identifying and exploiting natural genetic variation

C H A P T E R   1 3

transition from prostrate to erect growth 
in rice domestication. Nature Genetics, 40, 
1360–1364.

Tanksley, S. D., & McCouch, S. R. (1997). 

Seed banks and molecular maps: Unlocking 
genetic potential from the wild. Science, 
277, 1063–1066.

Thornsberry, J. M., Goodman, M. M., Doebley, 
J., Kresovich, S., Nielsen, D., & Buckler, E. 
S. (2001). Dwarf8 polymorphisms associate 
with variation in flowering time. Nature 
Genetics, 28, 286–289.

Todesco, M., Balasubramanian, S., Hu, T. T., 

Traw, M. B., Horton, M., & Epple, P., et al. 
(2010). Natural allelic variation underlying 
a major fitness trade-off in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Nature, 465, 632–636.

Torii, K. U., Mitsukawa, N., Oosumi, T., 

Matsuura, Y., Yokoyama, R., & Whittier, R. 
F., et al. (1996). The Arabidopsis ERECTA 
gene encodes a putative receptor protein 
kinase with extracellular leucine-rich 
repeats. Plant Cell, 8, 735–746.

Townsend, J. A., Wright, D. A., Winfrey, R. 

J., Fu, F., Maeder, M. L., & Joung, J. K., et 
al. (2009). High-frequency modification 
of plant genes using engineered zinc-finger 
nucleases. Nature, 459, 442–445.

Trevaskis, B., Hemming, M. N., Dennis, E. S., & 

Peacock, W. J. (2007). The molecular basis 
of vernalization-induced flowering in cereals. 
Trends in Plant Science, 12, 352–357.

Vaughn, M. W., Tanurdzic, M., Lippman, Z., 
Jiang, H., Carrasquillo, R., & Rabinowicz, 
P. D., et al. (2007). Epigenetic natural 
variation in Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS 
Biology, 5, e174.

Vlad, D., Rappaport, F., Simon, M., & Loudet, 

O. (2010). Gene transposition causing 
natural variation for growth in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. PLoS Genetics, 6, e1000945.

Wang, H., Nussbaum-Wagler, T., Li, B., Zhao, 

Q., Vigouroux, Y., & Faller, M., et al. (2005). 
The origin of the naked grains of maize. 
Nature, 436, 714–719.

Waugh, R., Leader, D. J., McCallum, N., 
& Caldwell, D. (2006). Harvesting the 
potential of induced biological diversity. 
Trends in Plant Science, 11, 71–79.

Weber, A. L., Zhao, Q., McMullen, M. D., & 

Doebley, J. F. (2009). Using association 
mapping in teosinte to investigate the 
function of maize selection-candidate genes. 
PLoS One, 4, e8227.

Weigel, D., & Mott, R. (2009). The 1001 

genomes project for Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Genome Biology, 10, 107.

West, M. A., van Leeuwen, H., Kozik, A., 

Kliebenstein, D. J., Doerge, R. W. & 
Clair, D. A., et al. (2006). High-density 
haplotyping with microarray-based 
expression and single feature polymorphism 
markers in Arabidopsis. Genome Research, 
16, 787–795.

Wollenweber, B., Porter, J. R., & Lubberstedt, T. 
(2005). Need for multidisciplinary research 
towards a second green revolution. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 8, 337–341.
Wright, S. I., Bi, I. V., Schroeder, S. G., 

Yamasaki, M., Doebley, J. F., & McMullen, 
M. D., et al. (2005). The effects of artificial 
selection on the maize genome. Science, 308, 
1310–1314.

Yan, L., Fu, D., Li, C., Blechl, A., Tranquilli, 

G., & Bonafede, M., et al. (2006). The 
wheat and barley vernalization gene VRN3 
is an orthologue of FT. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 19581–19586.

Yan, L., Loukoianov, A., Blechl, A., Tranquilli, 

G., Ramakrishna, W., & SanMiguel, P., et al. 
(2004). The wheat VRN2 gene is a flowering 

repressor down-regulated by vernalization. 
Science, 303, 1640–1644.

Yan, L., Loukoianov, A., Tranquilli, G., 

Helguera, M., Fahima, T., & Dubcovsky, 
J. (2003). Positional cloning of the wheat 
vernalization gene VRN1. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 100, 6263–6268.

Zeller, G., Clark, R. M., Schneeberger, K., 

Bohlen, A., Weigel, D., & Ratsch, G. 
(2008). Detecting polymorphic regions in 
Arabidopsis thaliana with resequencing 
microarrays. Genome Research, 18, 918–929.
Zhai, J., Liu, J., Liu, B., Li, P., Meyers, B. C., & 
Chen, X., et al. (2008). Small RNA-directed 
epigenetic natural variation in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. PLoS Genetics, 4, e1000056.

Zhang, F., Maeder, M. L., Unger-Wallace, E., 
Hoshaw, J. P., Reyon, D., & Christian, M., 
et al. (2010). High frequency targeted 
mutagenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana using 
zinc finger nucleases. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 107, 12028–12033.

Zhang, X., Shiu, S. H., Cal, A., & Borevitz, 

J. O. (2008). Global analysis of 
genetic, epigenetic and transcriptional 
polymorphisms in Arabidopsis thaliana 
using whole genome tiling arrays. PLoS 
Genetics, 4, e1000032.

Zhao, J., Paulo, M. J., Jamar, D., Lou, P., van 
Eeuwijk, F., & Bonnema, G., et al. (2007). 
Association mapping of leaf traits, flowering 
time, and phytate content in Brassica rapa. 
Genome, 50, 963–973.

205

Controlling plant response to the 
environment: Viral diseases

22

Munir Mawassi  Abed Gera
Agricultural Research Organization, the Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 343
Phytosanitation and Quarantine Regulation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 344
Transmission of Plant Viruses  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 344
Cultural Strategies of Virus Control  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 344
Management of soil-borne viruses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .344
Management of airborne viruses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .345
Resistance to Virus Transmission by Insects  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 345
Pathogen-derived resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .345
RNA-mediated resistance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .346

Application of the PDR Concept for Developing  
Transgenic Virus Resistance to Horticultural Crops  .  .  .  .  . 346

RNA silencing-based applications for  
developing virus resistant plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .347
PDR stability and suppression of RNA silencing . . . . .348

Assessment of Risks Associated with  
Transgenic Virus Resistance in Plants   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 348
Conclusion  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 349

Introduction

Plant  viruses  cause  significant  agricultural  losses  worldwide, 
particularly  in  tropical  and  subtropical  ecosystems.  Viruses 
are  very  difficult  to  combat  due  to  the  scarcity  of  effective 
control  measures,  placing  them  among  the  most  important 
agricultural pathogens. Globalization and the development of 
international  trade  of  agricultural  and  horticultural  produce 
are  breaking  down  traditional  geographical  barriers  to  patho-
gen  movement  (Gera  et  al.,  2010).  As  trade  becomes  more 
international, the potential for importation of non-indigenous 
plant  viruses  grows  significantly.  Despite  some  successes  in 
eradication,  many  of  these  new  pathogens  are  now  estab-
lished, and industry must deal with the consequences of their 
introduction. Another factor that might influence the spread 
of  plant  viruses  in  the  future  is,  of  course,  global  climate 
change (Garrett et al., 2006). Although it is difficult to reach 

firm conclusions about the potential direct influence on virus 
diseases,  global  climate  change  could  have  a  significant,  indi-
rect  influence  on  patterns  of  virus  spread.  Examples  include 
changes  in  cropping  patterns  (e.g.,  subtropical  crops  planted 
in  previously  more  temperate  regions),  and  changes  in  the 
distribution  of  virus  vectors,  either  through  vector  invasions 
into  new  territories  or  enhanced  over-wintering  of  vectors 
that allow viruses to establish themselves in areas from which 
they  had  previously  been  restricted.  The  western  flower 
thrips (WFT, Frankliniella occidentalis), the most widespread 
vector  of  Tospoviruses  (Ullman  et  al.,  1997),  illustrates  such 
potential impact. Although WFT is currently established only 
in  glasshouses  in  many  areas  of  northern  Europe  and  North 
America,  global  warming  and  milder  winters  increase  the 
potential  for  this  insect  to  become  established  outdoors  as 
well (Kirk and Terry, 2003). This would introduce the possi-
bility of new and devastating diseases in field crops, as already 
witnessed in warmer climates.

Most  emerging  infectious  diseases  of  plants  are  caused 
by viruses (Anderson et al., 2004; Gera et al., 2010). This is 
exemplified  by  recent  widespread  epidemics  of  viruses  from 
the genus Tospovirus in the family Bunyaviridae, which cause 
crop  losses  that  account  for  losses  of  more  than  one  billion 
dollars  per  year  (Prins  and  Goldbach,  1998).  Viruses  of  the 
genus  Begomovirus  in  the  family  Geminiviridae  are  devas-
tating and cause the loss of millions of tons of food annually 
(Fargette et al., 2006). Outbreaks of plum pox virus (PPV) in 
stone fruit trees in the Northern Hemisphere, and of Pepino 
mosaic virus (PepMV) in tomato crops in Europe and North 
America also have been significantly devastating.

Viral  diseases  can  affect  food  quality  as  well  as  reduce 
yields, yet quality is also affected by measures such as spray-
ing with pesticides used to control insect vectors. An alterna-
tive control strategy for viruses is the use of crop cultivars or 
varieties  that  are  genetically  resistant.  These  resistant  geno-
types carry a heritable trait or set of traits that are responsi-
ble  for  the  suppression  of  virus  multiplication  and/or  spread 
even  under  environmental  conditions  that  favor  virus  infec-
tion  of  the  given  species.  Plant  breeding  has  been  used  to 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00022-5

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

incorporate  resistance  genes  into  commercially  important 
varieties, but this method suffers from the limitation of sex-
ual  compatibility  and  the  species  gene  pool.  Gene  transfer 
to  plants  abolishes  both  of  these  limitations  by  overcoming 
species  boundaries  and  therefore  extending  the  gene  pool  to 
all life on Earth. In some cases, natural resistance genes have 
been  transferred  from  one  plant  to  another.  In  other  cases  
pathogen-related  proteins  or  defensive  peptides  have  been 
over-expressed. Recombinant antibodies can also be included 
in  the  category  of  heterologous  resistance  proteins.  Various 
types  of  virus-resistant  antibodies,  including  single  gene  Fv 
fragments  (scFvs),  have  been  expressed  in  plants.  The  use 
of  genetic  resistance  is  advantageous  because  it  can  provide 
effective  protection  with  no  additional  cost  implications  for 
the producer during the growing season. It is also environmen-
tally  friendly  and  safe  for  the  consumer.  Most  crop  species 
have  virus-resistance  traits  available,  and  in  many  cases  cul-
tivars  with  varying  degrees  of  resistance  have  achieved  com-
mercial  status.  However,  many  issues  concerning  the  use  of 
genetic resistance for the sustainable control of viral diseases 
remain to be investigated. This chapter is restricted to the dis-
cussion of development and potential use of natural and trans-
genic resistant varieties.

Phytosanitation and Quarantine 
Regulation

Some viruses have been widely distributed around the world 
and have caused significant damage and economic loss. When 
trade in plant propagation materials was initiated many years 
ago, the threat of distributing viruses was minimized because 
much of the germplasm was exchanged as seed. In the last six 
decades, the transport of vegetatively propagated clonal mate-
rial  has  resulted  in  the  dissemination  of  many  viral  diseases. 
Recently, vegetative propagation of horticultural crops served 
as  virus  carriers.  In  some  instances  the  agents  were  spread 
before  it  was  recognized  that  the  material  was  diseased.  In 
other  instances,  methods  of  detection  for  a  specific  disease 
agent were not developed for certification purposes.

Quarantine  regulations  are  designed  primarily  to  exclude 
the movement of pathogens into geographic areas where they 
were  not  previously  known  to  occur.  The  past  two  decades 
have  seen  the  development  of  an  increasingly  secure  global 
system  of  plant  health  inspection  and  quarantine  (phytosani-
tary system) that balances agriculture protection against inter-
national  trade  (McGee,  1997).  Phytosanitary  regulations  and 
policies established by individual countries and increasingly by 
organizations formed by groups of countries (i.e., the European 
and  Mediterranean  Plant  Protection  Organization,  EPPO; 
North  American  Plant  Protection  Organization,  NAPPO)  are 
designed  to  prevent  the  entry  and  spread  of  pests,  including 
viruses,  over  natural  barriers.  EPPO  is  a  regional  organiza-
tion  operating  under  guidelines  from  the  International  Plant 
Protection. Today, the organization includes 50 member states 
in the European and Mediterranean region (http://www.eppo.
org).  EPPO  sets  regional  standards  for  phytosanitary  protec-
tion of plant products. These regulations are enforced by quar-
antine and other authorized inspection agencies (EPPO, 2009).

Global  surveillance  and  reporting  of  plant  viral  diseases 
require  an  international  coalition  that  does  not  yet  exist. 
There  is  a  lack  of  standardization  in  testing  protocols  for 
seed-borne  diseases  and  significant  variation  in  seed  protec-
tion  treatments  among  countries.  Strengthening  the  global 
phytosanitary  system  (i.e.,  international  agreements  on  the 
inspection  and  quarantining  of  plants  to  prevent  spread  of 
pathogens and disease) requires improved information, stand-
ardized seed testing, improved access to seed treatment pro-
tocols,  and  revised  pathology  research  priorities  (McGee, 
1997), but funding for adequate diagnostic facilities and pro-
grams  is  often  lacking.  The  economic,  environmental,  and 
social costs of incorrect diagnoses are high.

Reducing  the  threats  and  impact  of  emerging  plant  viral 
diseases  will  require  novel  approaches  to  integrated  research 
and long-term commitments from the scientific and political 
communities alike.

Transmission of Plant Viruses

Viruses  are  unable  to  pass  through  the  cuticle  of  plant  cells. 
They have evolved to avoid the cuticle by passive transmission 
through  vegetative  propagation  and  seed  transmission.  They 
penetrate the host through wounds that occur in mechanical 
transmission or transmission by vectors.

Plant  viruses  are  transmitted  in  many  different  ways 
including  mechanical  rubbing  and  grafting,  and  naturally 
through  pollen,  seed,  arthropods,  nematodes,  and  fungi 
(Lawson et al., 1995). Knowledge of the factors that influence 
spread is essential for development of control procedures.

Cultural Strategies of Virus Control

At  present  no  antiviral  pesticides  that  affect  the  virus  with-
out  harming  the  host  plant  are  available.  It  is,  however,  pos-
sible to reduce the dissemination of viruses by interfering with 
their spread by vectors. Many cultural procedures used for virus 
control are aimed at eradicating or altering one or more of the 
primary  participants  in  the  transmission  process  (vector,  virus 
source plants, and the crop) or preventing their coming together. 
In  this  section  we  describe  cultural  strategies  that  were  devel-
oped to impede the spread of soil- and air-borne viruses.

Management of soil-borne viruses

Soil-borne  virus  diseases  are  spread  either  by  soil  organisms, 
like  nematodes  and  fungi,  or  mechanically  transmitted  with-
out  the  assistance  of  a  known  vector  (Hull,  2002).  The  lat-
ter  group  of  viruses  is  characterized  by  high  stability  and 
long persistence in soil and drainage water (Mandahar, 1990; 
Lewandowski, 2000). The use of “intermediating media” such 
as condensed peat trays or Perlite sleeves can serve as an effi-
cient means to block soil-borne epidemics of tobamoviruses in 
infested soils (Antignus et al., 2005). This procedure proved 
highly efficient when tested to protect pepper crops in com-
mercial greenhouses from root infection by pepper mild mot-
tle virus (PMMoV; Y. Antignus, personal communication).

344

Controlling plant response to the environment: Viral diseases

C H A P T E R   2 2

Squash  root-stocks  were  also  used  successfully  to  pro-
tect  cucumbers,  watermelon,  melon,  tomato,  and  eggplants 
from  soil-borne  pathogens  (Lee,  1994;  Oda,  1999).  Pepper 
root-stocks  carrying  the  L4  allele  of  the  gene  for  resistance 
against PMMoV successfully protected susceptible pepper sci-
ons  from  infection  through  virus-infested  soil  in  commercial 
greenhouses (Y. Antignus, personal communication).

Management of airborne viruses

The major group of plant viruses is airborne and transmitted in 
nature by insects that feed on plants; for example, 192 aphid 
species are known as vectors of 275 plant viruses (Hull, 2002). 
Whiteflies  and  thrips  are  also  known  as  major  virus  vectors 
that are responsible for the spread of virus diseases that may 
devastate economically important crops. The simplest way to 
prevent  contact  between  these  viruliferous  vectors  and  the 
crop is by forming a physical barrier to mechanically prevent 
the  invasion  of  the  vector  into  the  crop.  Crops  grown  in  the 
open field can be protected efficiently from virus infection by 
either floating row covers that lay over the plants without any 
support, or by the use of “low tunnels” where the protecting 
cover rests on wire arches. In both cases the protection is time 
limited because the cover should be removed for cultural prac-
tices  or  bee  pollination  (Hilje  et  al.,  2001).  However,  delay 
in infection may mitigate effects of yield reduction (Antignus 
and  Ben-Yakir,  2004).  In  general,  any  material  capable  of 
blocking insect invasion on the basis of its hole size can form 
an  efficient  barrier.  The  materials  used  include  polypropyl-
ene  (agryl),  a  lightweight  material  with  a  texture  that  allows 
a  certain  air  flow,  and  fine  mesh  nets  (50  mesh)  that  were 
first  implemented  in  Israeli  greenhouses  to  protect  tomato 
crops from tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV; Cohen and 
Berlinger,  1986).  Similar  protection  effects  against  white-
flies, aphids, and their vectored viruses were reported later by 
Csizinszky et al. (1997) and Summers et al. (2005).

Vegetable  crops  are  efficiently  protected  from  insect 
pests  (aphids,  thrips,  whiteflies),  and  viral  diseases  trans-
mitted  by  them,  when  grown  in  “walk-in”  tunnels  or  green-
houses  covered  either  with  UV-absorbing  polyethylene 
films  or  with  UV-absorbing  50-mesh  nets  (Antignus  et  al., 
1996,  2001;  Antignus,  2001).  Tomatoes  and  cucumbers 
grown  under  UV-absorbing  greenhouse  covers  were  highly 
protected against whitefly-borne viruses such as TYLCV and 
cucurbit yellow stunting disorder virus (CYSDV; Antignus et 
al.,  1996).  These  results  suggest  that  the  elimination  of  the 
UV portion of the light spectrum is interfering with the “UV 
vision” of insects and, as a consequence, may affect their abil-
ity  to  orient  themselves  to  the  crop  (Antignus,  2001;  Raviv 
and Antignus, 2004). Similar results were reported by Doukas 
and Payne (2007) and Mutwiwa et al. (2005).

Resistance to Virus Transmission by 
Insects

In  epidemiological  terms,  approximately  80%  of  viruses 
depend  on  transmission  by  vectors,  mainly  insects,  but  also 

by  nematodes,  fungi,  and  mites  (Stacesmith  and  Hamilton, 
1988).  For  vector  transmission,  viruses  must  be  transmitted 
efficiently to a new host when the vector feeds (Hull, 2002). 
The  majority  of  plant  viruses  are  transmitted  by  insects 
through a highly specific process in which interactions among 
the virus, vector, and plant must occur (Ng and Falk, 2006). 
Resistance  mechanisms  acting  against  vectors  have  been  his-
torically  classified  as  antixenosis  if  they  influence  vector 
behavior in terms of feeding preference (Kogan and Ortman, 
1978), or as antibiosis if they increase mortality or reduce fit-
ness  or  reproductive  capacity  of  the  vector  (Smith,  1989). 
Both types of resistance may be due to the presence of non-
glandular trichomes or waxy surfaces that act as physical bar-
riers  (Sadasivam  and  Thayumanavan,  2003),  or  the  presence 
of  certain  secondary  metabolites  or  deterrent  compounds 
on  leaf  surfaces,  vacuoles,  or  glandular  trichomes  that  may 
possess  insecticidal  or  antifeedant  properties  (Singer  et  al., 
2003).  Furthermore,  these  metabolites  may  play  an  active 
role in resistance, because their synthesis can be enhanced by 
jasmonic acid (JA) and suppressed by salicylic acid (SA; Traw 
et al., 2003; Li et al., 2004).

Genes  that  confer  aphid  resistance  have  been  identi-
fied and mapped at least in lettuce, melon, tomato, soybean, 
and wheat (Klingler et al., 2005; Li et al., 2007; Wroblewski 
et  al.,  2007;  Mensah  et  al.,  2008).  However,  only  two  of 
them  have  been  cloned  and  characterized  (Dogimont  et  al., 
2008), both of them belonging to the nucleotide binding site 
leucine-rich  repeat  (NBS-LRR)  family  of  resistance  genes 
(Dangl  and  Jones,  2001;  Takken  et  al.,  2006).  The  first  was 
Mi-1,  cloned  from  a  wild  relative  of  tomato  (Solanum  peru-
vianum),  which  showed  high  levels  of  resistance  to  root-
knot nematodes (Rossi et al., 1998), to the whitefly Bemisia 
tabaci (Milligan et al., 1998), and to the aphid Macrosiphum 
euphorbiae  (Blackman  and  Eastop,  2000).  Mi-1  is  constitu-
tively expressed in roots and leaves, and the resistance that it 
confers against nematodes is associated with a hypersensitive 
response (HR; Lopez-Perez et al., 2006), whereas for white-
flies and aphids it appears to inhibit their feeding, fecundity, 
and survival on leaves of mature plants (Martinez de Ilarduya 
et al., 2003).

The  second  NBS-LRR  resistance  gene  is  Vat,  which  con-
fers  resistance  to  Aphis  gossypii  and  to  viruses  that  are  non-
persistently  transmitted  by  this  vector  in  melon  (Pitrat  and 
Lecoq,  1980).  Using  a  map-based  cloning  strategy  and  func-
tional  analysis  in  transgenic  melon  plants,  Dogimont  et  al. 
(2008) demonstrated that a single gene encoding a coiled-coil 
(CC)-NBS-LRR  protein  confers  both  functions.  Recognition 
of an aphid gene product by Vat probably triggers the plant’s 
responses,  preventing  aphid  feeding,  reducing  fecundity 
and  survival,  and  inhibiting  non-specific  antiviral  responses 
(Dogimont et al., 2008).

Pathogen-derived resistance

Pathogen-derived  resistance  (PDR)  is  a  phenomenon  where 
transgenic  plants  expressing  genes  or  sequences  of  a  patho-
gen  are  protected  against  the  cognate  or  related  pathogens. 
Sanford  and  Johnston  (1985)  apply  the  concept  of  PDR  to 

345

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

the  bacteriophage  Qβ  in  Escherichia  coli.  They  proposed 
that pathogens express genes or molecules critical for patho-
genesis,  and  expressing  dysfunctional  pathogen-derived  gene 
products in a susceptible host results in disrupting pathogen–
host interaction and inhibiting the pathogen. The application 
of  the  PDR  concept  to  plant  viruses  was  first  demonstrated 
by Powell-Abel et al. (1986), where they showed that trans-
genic Nicotiana tabacum cv. Xanthi and cv. Samsun express-
ing  the  coat  protein  gene  of  tobacco  mosaic  virus  (TMV) 
exhibited resistance following mechanical inoculation of TMV. 
Resistance of transgenic plants varied as some plants did not 
express  symptoms  of  disease  for  the  duration  of  the  experi-
ment,  whereas  other  plants  exhibited  a  delay  of  up  to  14 
days  in  symptom  development.  Nejidat  and  Beachy  (1990) 
demonstrated  that  resistance  in  transgenic  plants  was  strong 
to  tobamoviruses  closely  related  to  TMV,  but  weak  or  not 
detectable  to  distantly  related  tobamoviruses.  Following  the 
discovery  by  Powell-Abel  et  al.  (1986),  the  practical  effec-
tiveness of PDR for controlling plant viruses has been estab-
lished  for  many  plant  viruses  in  many  crops.  Resistance  was 
engineered primarily by using coat protein genes, as well as by 
other viral proteins such as the movement protein RdRp and 
proteinase.  Yet  over  the  past  decade,  much  work  has  shown 
that PDR for plant viruses are RNA-mediated and can occur 
through  expression  of  non-coding  RNA  viral  sequences  of 
satellite RNA, defective interfering RNA, and 5 and 3 non-
coding  sequences  (Table  22.1).  It  is  becoming  obvious  that 

Table 22.1  Examples of pathogen-derived sequences used to 
control virus diseases

Pathogen-derived 
genes or sequences

Examples of 
resistance against

Hosts

Coat protein

TMV, PVX, TVMV

Tobacco, potato, tomato

Replicase protein

TMV, PVX, PEBV

Tobacco, Nicotiana 
benthamiana

Antisense RNA

TGMV, PLRV

Tobacco, potato

3-untranslated region

TYMV

Replicon

GVA

Brassica napus

N. benthamiana

Defective replicon

TMV, CMV, BMV

Tobacco

Defective interfering 
RNA or DNA

ACMV, BCTV, BMV

N. benthamiana, barley

Movement protein

TMV, PLRV, BMV

Tobacco, potato

Helper component 
protein

PVY

Tobacco

Satellite RNAs

CMV, TRSV

Tobacco, pepper, tomato

Abbreviations: ACMV, African cassava mosaic virus; BCTV, beet curly top virus;  
BMV, brome mosaic virus; CMV, cucumber mosaic virus; GVA, grapevine virus A; 
PEBV, pea early browning virus; PLRV, potato leaf roll virus; PVX, potato virus X;  
PVY, potato virus Y; TGMV, tobacco golden mosaic virus; TMV, tobacco mosaic virus; 
TRSV, tobacco ringspot virus; TYMV, turnip yellow mosaic virus.

346

almost any genetic element of any virus can have the potential 
to confer resistance to virus infection in plants.

RNA-mediated resistance

Initially,  the  mechanism  of  PDR  was  poorly  understood. 
It  was  suggested  that  expression  of  the  viral  coat  protein  in 
the  transgenic  plant  would  interfere  with  the  uncoating  of 
virus particles in the early event of virus multiplication cycle 
(Register  and  Beachy,  1988;  Osbourn  et  al.,  1989).  It  was 
hypothesized that the coat protein transgene product interacts 
with a host factor or with the challenge viral RNA, inhibiting 
or  disrupting  translation,  assembly,  or  replication  of  the  viral 
RNA  (Asurmendi  et  al.,  2007).  However,  subsequent  work 
of  Lindbo  and  Dougherty  (1992a,b)  showed  that  transgenic 
tobacco plants expressing untranslatable coat protein gene of 
the tobacco etch virus (TEV) were immune to TEV infection, 
providing evidence that the RNA and not the protein of the 
TEV coat protein gene was responsible for virus resistance in 
transgenic  plants.  Since  this  breakthrough  discovery,  it  soon 
became  apparent  that  expression  of  the  viral  transgene  pro-
tein  product  was  essentially  not  needed  for  obtaining  resist-
ance (Dougherty et al., 1994), as it has been shown that most 
examples  of  PDR  for  plant  viruses  are  RNA-mediated  and 
occur  through  the  mechanism  of  post-transcriptional  gene 
silencing (PTGS), which acts as a defense mechanism against 
viruses  now  referred  to  as  RNA  silencing  (Voinnet,  2001, 
2005; Waterhouse et al., 2001; Lindbo and Dougherty, 2005).
The  discovery  of  RNA  silencing  is  arguably  the  most 
important  biological  finding  of  the  last  decade.  RNA  silenc-
ing  is  a  mechanism  of  sequence-specific  RNA  degradation 
conserved  among  multicellular  organisms,  including  plants 
(Hannon,  2002).  It  functions  in  developmental  regulation 
and in host defense against transposable elements and viruses. 
The  pathway  of  viral  RNA  silencing  is  initially  triggered  by 
the  dsRNA  precursors,  like  those  generated  from  replicat-
ing  viral  RNA  intermediates  and/or  viral  RNA  secondary 
structures.  This  dsRNA  is  recognized  and  cleaved  into  small 
interfering  RNAs  (siRNAs)  of  21  to  25  nucleotide  duplexes 
by  an  RNase-III-like  enzyme  named  DICER.  The  siRNAs 
are  next  incorporated  and  converted  to  single-stranded 
RNAs  in  the  Argonaute-containing  multi-subunit  ribonu-
clease  named  RNA-induced  silencing  complex  (RISC).  The 
RISC,  consequently,  targets  and  specifically  degrades  RNAs 
that  share  sequence  similarity  with  the  siRNA  (Waterhouse 
et  al.,  1998;  Hamilton  and  Baulcombe,  1999;  Hammond  
et  al.,  2001;  Voinnet,  2001,  2005,  2008;  Hannon,  2002; 
Deleris et al., 2006; Obbard et al., 2009).

Application of the PDR Concept 
for Developing Transgenic Virus 
Resistance to Horticultural Crops

Following  the  first  development  of  TMV  resistance  in  N. 
tabacum  cv.  Xanthi  and  cv.  Samsun  plants  (Powell-Abel, 
1986),  the  concept  of  PDR  was  applied  in  various  horti-
cultural  crops  for  the  purpose  of  providing  control  of  viral 

Controlling plant response to the environment: Viral diseases

C H A P T E R   2 2

diseases.  Nelson  et  al.  (1988)  reported  on  the  development 
of transgenic tomato plants expressing the coat protein from 
TMV. In their field trial, most (95%) of the transgenic plants 
were found to be asymptomatic following mechanical inocula-
tion by TMV. Furthermore, Sanders et al. (1992) showed that 
such transgenic tomato plants were resistant to distinct TMV 
strains.  Inoculated  transgenic  tomato  plants  provided  fruit 
yield that was identical to that obtained from non-inoculated, 
non-transgenic  tomato  plants,  indicating  that  the  process  of 
transformation and expression of the transgene did not affect 
the horticultural performance of the transgenic plants (Nelson 
et  al.,  1988).  Effective  resistance  was  obtained  in  cucum-
ber transgenic plants expressing the coat protein gene of the 
CMV.  In  their  work,  Gonsalves  et  al.  (1992)  reported  on  a 
high  incidence  of  asymptomatic  cucumber  transgenic  plants 
relative to non-transformed plants following CMV inoculation 
via aphid vectors. This illustrated the efficacy of the PDR con-
cept at providing practical control of aphid-transmitted virus 
diseases (for review see Fuchs and Gonsalves, 2007).

The  development  of  transgenic  papaya  resistant  to  the 
papaya ringspot virus (PRSV) has been thoroughly reported 
(for  review  see  Gonsalves,  1998).  Transgenic  papaya  plants 
expressing  the  coat  protein  gene  of  PRSV  have  been  com-
mercialized,  providing  a  tangible  approach  to  control  PSRV 
in Hawaii (Gonsalves, 2006) and promise for control of the 
virus  worldwide.  Potato  lines  resistant  to  the  potato  leaf-
roll  virus  (PLRV)  were  also  created,  field  tested,  deregu-
lated,  and  commercialized  (Kaniweski  and  Thomas,  2004). 
However,  resistance  to  PLRV  infection  was  obtained  in 
potato  lines  expressing  the  replicase  gene  but  not  the  coat 
protein gene. Another potato cultivar with resistance to PVY 
was  created  by  expressing  its  coat  protein  gene  (Kaniewski 
et al., 1990).

Resistance to multiple viruses for control of virus diseases 
is  worthwhile  as  mixed  infections  of  viruses  are  common 
among  horticultural  crops.  To  this  extent,  the  PDR  concept 
was applied for creation of transgenic plants resistant to more 
than  one  virus.  In  early  studies  performed  by  Kaniewski 
et  al.  (1990)  and  Lawson  et  al.  (1990),  transgenic  potato 
plants  expressing  the  coat  protein  genes  of  PVX  and  PVY 
were developed and found to be remarkably resistant to infec-
tions by both PVX and PVY viruses. Later on, transgenic sum-
mer squash plants were developed to express the CP gene of 
zucchini yellow mosaic virus (ZYMV) and watermelon mosaic 
virus  (WMV).  These  plants  were  found  to  be  resistant  to 
two  viruses,  ZYMV  and  WMV,  using  mechanical  inoculation 
or aphid vectors (Fuchs and Gonsalves, 1995). Furthermore, 
transgenic  squash  plants  expressing  the  CP  genes  of  CMV, 
ZYMV, and WMV were found to be resistant to these three 
viruses (Tricoli et al., 1995; Fuchs et al., 1998b).

RNA silencing-based applications for 
developing virus resistant plants

A  central  key  to  trigger  RNA  silencing  in  plants  is  the  for-
mation  of  dsRNA  structures.  Many  approaches  have  been 
applied  to  produce  viral  dsRNA  for  activation  of  RNA 
silencing  in  plants.  These  included  expression  of  sense  and 

antisense  viral  sequences,  of  viral  sequences  with  inverted 
repeat  regions  capable  to  forming  hairpin  RNA  structures, 
and  of  virus  minireplicon  and  artificial  plant  micro  RNA 
(amiRNA;  Smith  et  al.,  2000;  Prins  et  al.,  2008;  Brumin 
et al., 2009).

Transgenic potato plants, of the commercial “Spunta” cul-
tivar,  expressing  inverted  repeat  regions  of  the  3-terminal 
of  the  coat  protein  gene  of  PVY,  which  is  highly  conserved 
in  sequences  among  different  PVY  isolates,  were  created 
(Missiou et al., 2004). Twelve of fifteen transgenic lines pro-
duced  siRNAs  and  were  highly  resistant  to  three  strains  of 
PVY  belonging  to  the  subtypes  PVYN,  PVYO,  and  PVYNTN. 
Praveen  et  al.  (2010)  developed  transgenic  tomato  plants 
by  transforming  RNA  inhibition  (RNAi)  constructs  with 
sequences  ranging  from  21  to  200 nt  of  the  viral  target  AC4 
gene  of  various  viruses  causing  the  tomato  leaf  curl  disease. 
The  constructs  carry  the  sense  and  antisense  portions  of 
these sequences and are separated by different introns. They 
found  that  dsRNA  derived  from  longer  arm-length  con-
structs  generating  a  pool  of  siRNAs  were  more  effective  in 
targeting gene silencing. Tougou et al. (2006) reported on the 
development  of  soybean  transgenic  plants  that  were  trans-
formed  with  a  construct  containing  inverted  repeat-SbDV 
coat  protein  gene  of  the  soybean  dwarf  virus  (SbDV)  inter-
spersed  with  β-glucuronidase  (GUS)  sequences.  Two  months 
after  inoculation  of  SbDV  by  aphid,  T2  plants  contained  lit-
tle  SbDV-specific  RNA  and  remained  symptomless.  These 
plants  contained  SbDV-CP-specific  siRNA,  indicating  that 
plants  achieved  resistance  to  SbDV  by  an  RNA-silencing-
mediated process. Other work evaluated different constructs 
with  intron-spliced  hpRNA  (ihpRNA),  ihpRNA  overhang, 
and ihpRNA spacer for resistance to PVY (Smith et al., 2000; 
Wesley et al., 2001). The ihpRNA was found to be the most 
efficient construct as resistance to PVY was obtained in 90% 
of  the  plants  exhibiting  RNA  silencing.  By  arranging  viral 
transgenes  as  inverted  repeats,  Bucher  et  al.  (1996)  showed 
that efficient simultaneous targeting of four different tospovi-
ruses can be achieved by using a single small transgene based 
on  the  production  of  minimal  sized  chimeric  cassettes.  Due 
to  simultaneous  RNA  silencing,  the  transgenic  expression  of 
genetic  segments  of  several  viruses  from  a  single  transgene 
construct rendered up to 82% of the transformed plant lines 
with heritable resistance against multiple viruses.

Another  approach  that  has  been  used  to  trigger  RNA 
silencing  in  plants  and  to  create  transgenic  plant  with  virus 
resistance  is  the  expression  of  artificial  plant  amiRNAs.  Niu 
et  al.  (2006)  modified  an  Arabidopsis  thaliana  miR159  pre-
cursor to express artificial miRNAs (amiRNAs) targeting viral 
mRNA  sequences  encoding  two  gene  silencing  suppressors, 
P69  of  TYMV  and  HC-Pro  of  turnip  mosaic  virus  (TuMV). 
Transgenic  A.  thaliana  plants  expressing  amiR-P69159  and 
amiR-HC-Pro159  were  found  to  be  specifically  resistant  to 
TYMV and TuMV, respectively. In addition, transgenic plants 
that express both amiR-P69159 and amiR-HC-Pro159 from a 
dimeric  pre-amiR-P69159/amiR-HC-Pro159  transgene  were 
resistant  to  both  viruses.  Interestingly,  when  inoculated  with 
the specific virus, these amiRNA-based transgenic plants dis-
played specific resistance even at low temperatures that usu-
ally inhibit post-transcriptional gene silencing.

347

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

In  an  attempt  to  develop  resistance  to  the  GVA,  Brumin 
et al. (2009) made a GFP-tagged GVA minireplicon and utilized 
it  as  a  tool  to  consistently  activate  RNA  silencing.  Transgenic  
N.  benthamiana  plants  expressing  the  GVA-minireplicon  dis-
played  resistance  against  GVA  infection,  which  was  found  in 
60% and in 90–95%, of T1 and T2 progenies, respectively.

PDR stability and suppression of RNA 
silencing

Diverse RNA and DNA viruses of plants encode RNA silenc-
ing  suppressors  (RSSs),  which  in  addition  to  their  role  in 
viral  counter  defense,  were  implicated  in  the  efficient  accu-
mulation of viral RNAs, virus transport, and pathogenesis, as 
well as determination of the virus host range. Viral RSSs are 
also known to cause transgene silencing. The Hc-Pro of TEV 
was  among  the  first  RSS  shown  to  suppress  PTGS  of  the 
β-glucuronidase  (GUS)  transgene  (Kasschau  and  Carrington, 
1998). The Hc-Pro of PVY and the 2b protein of CMV were 
found to suppress PTGS of the GFP transgene in N. bentha-
miana  plants  (Brigneti  et  al.,  1998).  Although  a  major  class 
of  viral  RSSs  are  dsRNA-binding  proteins,  as  revealed  first 
for  the  tombusviral  P19  (Silhavy  et  al.,  2002),  RSSs  from 
different  plant  viruses  counteract  various  steps  in  the  PTGS 
process (Li and Ding, 2006). The existence of suppressors of 
PTGS,  encoded  by  plant  viruses,  poses  questions  about  the 
stability of PTGS-based resistance in transgenic plants. Mitter 
et  al.  (2001,  2003)  investigated  the  suppression  of  dsRNA-
induced PTGS by CMV in a tobacco line expressing a single 
copy dsRNA-encoding transgene to target PVY. They showed 
that  the  immunity  to  PVY  in  this  transgenic  line  can  break 
down upon infection with CMV. Similarly, infection of trans-
genic N. benthamiana plants expressing a GVA minireplicon 
with the GVB or PVY did affect the stability of PTGS-based 
resistance  as  these  plants  turned  and  became  susceptible  to 
GVA (Brumin et al., 2009).

The stability of PTGS-based resistance in transgenic plants 
was  examined  for  C5  plum  trees  transformed  with  the  PPV 
coat protein gene (Zagrai et al., 2008). This transgenic plum 
displays PTGS, which makes it highly resistant to PPV infec-
tion. Yet, the engineered resistance to PPV was stable and was 
not  suppressed  by  the  presence  of  challenging  heterologous 
viruses.

The stability of engineered resistance is modulated by envi-
ronmental  factors.  At  low  temperature,  both  virus  and  trans-
gene  triggered  RNA  silencing  are  inhibited.  Consequently, 
in cold, plants become more susceptible to viruses, and RNA 
silencing-based phenotypes of transgenic plants are lost. Szittya 
et  al.  (2003)  found  that  siRNA-mediated  RNA  silencing  is 
temperature dependent in different dicot species, which would 
suggest that inefficient siRNA generation at low temperature is 
probably a universal feature of higher plants. In contrast, tem-
perature  does  not  influence  the  accumulation  of  micro  (mi)
RNAs, which play a role in developmental regulation, suggest-
ing that the two classes of small (si and mi) RNAs are gener-
ated by different nuclease complexes (Szittya et al., 2003).

Resistance  breakage  is  a  critical  issue  associated  with 
virus-resistant  transgenic  plants.  Consideration  of  resistance 

breakdown  is  important  because  of  the  long  time  required 
to create transgenic resistant plants, and because one desires 
to  maximize  the  efficacy  of  the  engineered  resistance  over 
time.  Engineered  resistance  tended  to  be  stable  in  sum-
mer squash and papaya transgenic plants as resistance break-
age  was  not  reported  for  more  than  10  years  (Fuchs  and 
Gonsalves, 2007). However, resistance breakage was reported 
for  wheat  transformed  with  the  coat  protein  gene  of  wheat 
streak mosaic virus (WSMV) as transgenic lines that showed 
WSMV resistance in greenhouse trials did not express resist-
ance under field conditions.

Assessment of Risks Associated with 
Transgenic Virus Resistance in Plants

In  the  past,  major  attention  has  been  paid  to  potential  risks 
associated  with  virus-resistant  transgenic  plants.  Potential 
food safety issues have been extensively reviewed (see König 
et al., 2004; Fuchs and Gonsalves, 2007; Reddy et al., 2009; 
Alderborn  et  al.,  2010).  Hence,  in  this  section  we  focus  on 
major  potential  issues  of  phenotype-  and  genotype-mediated 
impacts, although their occurrence is not as pronounced.

Recombination  between  the  transgene  mRNA  and  the 
RNA  of  an  infecting  virus  could  occur  in  the  transgenic 
plant  cells  during  replication  of  genomic  RNA  of  the  chal-
lenge virus, resulting in chimeric viruses with a different virus 
genotype.  Recombination  between  the  mRNA  encoded  by 
a viral transgene and the RNA of an infecting virus has been 
documented  in  several  studies  (Greene  and  Allison,  1994; 
Borja  et  al.,  1999;  Adair  and  Kearney,  2000;  Turturo  et  al., 
2008).  Thus,  recombination  raises  the  issue  of  whether  this 
phenomenon,  if  it  occurred  in  transgenic  plants  in  the  field, 
could  lead  to  the  creation  of  novel  viral  genomes,  and  con-
sequently  to  the  emergence  of  new  diseases.  Despite  being 
reported  in  several  laboratories  to  occur  in  transgenic  herba-
ceous plants and by applying conditions of high selective pres-
sure, recombination events have not been proven to occur in 
transgenic plants in the field. The work carried out by Vigne 
et  al.  (2004)  addressed  the  question  of  whether  the  recom-
bination event occurs in transgenic grapevines expressing the 
CP  gene  of  grapevine  fanleaf  virus  (GFLV)  in  two  natural 
GFLV-infected  vineyards.  From  their  results,  there  was  no 
evidence  that  transgenic  grapevines  assisted  the  creation  of 
viable GFLV recombinants or affected the molecular diversity 
of  GFLV  populations.  More  recently,  Turturo  et  al.  (2008) 
compared  the  populations  of  recombinant  viruses  generated 
in  transgenic  and  non-transgenic  plants  using  two  cucumo-
viral  systems,  involving  either  two  strains  of  CMV  or  CMV 
and  the  related  tomato  aspermy  virus  (TAV).  Using  a  highly 
sensitive  RT-PCR  assay,  which  specifically  amplifies  recom-
binant  viruses,  they  showed  that  equivalent  populations  of 
recombinant viruses were present in plants expressing a CMV 
CP transgene and in non-transgenic plants infected simultane-
ously with both viruses. This suggests that there was no evi-
dence for novel recombination mechanisms in the transgenic 
plants.

Heteroencapsidation of one virus by the coat protein of a 
closely  related  virus  could  also  occur  in  plants  infected  with 

348

Controlling plant response to the environment: Viral diseases

C H A P T E R   2 2

Challenge of an insect non-
transmissible virus via mechanical
inoculation, grafting, etc.

Transgenic plant
produces CP subunits

First virus progeny

Virus encapsidation with
homologous and heterologous
CP subunits

Production of virus particles 
with heterologous CP 
subunits that can be 
transmitted by insect vectors 

Second virus progeny

Virus particle

Figure 22.1 l Schematic illustration of heteroencapsidation l A challenge virus, which is non-transmittable by insect vectors, can 
be transmitted from infected plant to a transgenic plant by mechanical inoculation or grafting. In the transgenic plant, the progeny of 
the challenge virus can be encapsidated with homologous CP subunits as well as with those heterologous CP subunits encoded by the 
transgene. Those virus particles with the heterologous CP subunits can be acquired by insect vectors and further transmitted. 

multiple  viruses.  This  phenomenon  could  occur  in  virus- 
resistant  transgenic  plants  expressing  a  coat  protein,  where 
subunits of the protein encapsidate genomic RNA of a related 
virus.  Because  the  coat  protein  can  be  associated  with  other 
features such as pathogeneses or insect-vector specificity, het-
eroencapsidation might change properties of infecting viruses 
in  transgenic  plants.  For  example,  an  infecting  non-transmis-
sible  virus  could  become  transmissible  through  heteroencap-
sidation in a transgenic plant when acquiring the coat protein 
of a transmissible donor virus (Figure 22.1). Consequently, it 
is theoretically possible that new virus epidemics could result 
from heteroencapsidation.

Heteroencapsidation has been extensively studied in trans-
genic herbaceous plants for many viruses such as TMV, CMV, 
PVY,  and  ZYMV,  (Farinelli  et  al.,  1992;  Candelier-Harvey 
and  Hull,  1993;  Lecoq  et  al.,  1993;  Hammond  and  Dienelt, 
1997).  These  studies  reported  that  coat  proteins  expressed 
in transgenic plants are capable of encapsidation of the RNA 
genomes of challenge viruses. In transgenic plants expressing 
the capsid protein of PPV, heteroencapsidation was found to 
assist  aphid  transmission  and  spread  of  another  non-aphid-
transmissible  strain  of  ZYMV  (Lecoq  et  al.,  1993).  In  con-
trast, this has not been found to be the case in the field. For 
example, transgenic squash and melon expressing the CP gene 

of  an  aphid-transmissible  strain  of  CMV  have  been  tested 
in  the  field  for  their  capacity  to  trigger  the  transmission  of 
an  aphid-non-transmissible  CMV  strain  through  heteroen-
capsidation.  The  results  indicated  that  spread  of  the  aphid-
non-transmissible  strain  did  not  occur  from  mechanically 
inoculated transgenic plants (Fuchs et al., 1998a). In addition, 
for  transgenic  papaya  and  squash,  no  unexpected  emergence 
of  virus  species  with  undesired  characteristics  was  reported 
8–10  years  post-commercialization  (Fuchs  and  Gonsalves, 
2007).  However,  the  only  occurrence  of  heteroencapsida-
tion in the field that has been documented to date was with 
transgenic  squash  expressing  the  CP  gene  of  WMV,  where  a 
low rate of transmission of an aphid-non-transmissible ZYMV 
strain (2%) was reported (Fuchs et al., 1999), although spread 
of the aphid-non-transmissible strain of ZYMV did not reach 
epidemic proportions.

Conclusion

Virus diseases cause serious loss of yield and quality in many 
crop  species.  Control  mechanisms  include  use  of  virus-free 
seed  or  propagation  material,  prevention  of  infection  by 
phytosanitation,  prevention  of  transmission  by  vectors,  and 

349

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

breeding  for  resistance.  Due  to  the  limited  effectiveness  of 
physical,  chemical,  and  biological  methods  in  the  control 
of  these  diseases,  the  use  of  genetic  or  transgenic  resistance 
and RNA silencing has become the best management strategy 
on  a  medium-long-term  basis.  The  study  of  the  mechanisms 
responsible  for  the  resistances  found  and  of  their  genetic 

control,  as  well  as  the  development  of  new  biotechnologies, 
would  enable  the  pyramiding  of  different  resistance  genes, 
thus  making  a  positive  contribution  to  the  development  of 
environmentally  friendly  and  safe  durable  resistance  to  viral 
diseases.

References

Adair, T. L., & Kearney, C. M. (2000). 

Recombination between a 3-kilobase tobacco 
mosaic virus transgene and a homologous 
viral construct in the restoration of viral and 
nonviral genes. Archives of Virology, 145, 
1867–1883.

Alderborn, A., Sundström, J., Soeria-Atmadja, 

D., Sandberg, M., Andersson, H. C., & 
Hammerling, U. (2010). Genetically 
modified plants for non-food or non-feed 
purposes: Straightforward screening for 
their appearance in food and feed. Food and 
Chemical Toxicology, 48, 453–464.

Anderson, P. K., Cunningham, A. A., Patel, N. 
G., Morales, F. J., Epstein, P. R., & Daszak, 
P. (2004). Emerging infectious diseases of 
plants: Pathogen pollution, climate change 
and agrotechnology drivers. Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution, 19, 535–544.
Antignus, Y. (2001). Manipulation of 

wavelength-dependent behaviour of insects: 
An IPM tool to impede insects and restrict 
epidemics of insect-borne viruses. Virus 
Research, 71, 213–220.

Antignus, Y., & Ben-Yakir, D. (2004). 

Greenhouse photoselective cladding 
materials serve as an IPM tool to control 
the spread of insect pests and their vectored 
viruses. In R. Horowitz & Y. Ishaya (Eds.), 
Insect pest management (pp. 319–333). 
Berlin: Springer.

Antignus, Y., Lachman, O., Pearlsman, M., 

& Koren, A. (2005). Containment of 
cucumber fruit mottle mosaic Tobamovirus 
(CFMMV) infection through roots by 
planting into a virus-free intermediating 
medium. Phytoparasitica, 33, 85–87.

Antignus, Y., Lapidot, M., & Cohen, S. (2001). 
Interference with ultraviolet vision of insects 
to impede insect pests and insect-borne 
plant viruses. In K. S. Harris (Ed.), Virus-
Insect-Plant Interactions (pp. 331–350). 
U.S.A: Academic Press.

Antignus, Y., Mor, N., Ben-Joseph, R., Lapidot, 

M., & Cohen, S. (1996). UV-absorbing 
plastic sheets protect crops from insect pests 
and from virus diseases vectored by insects. 
Environmental Entomology, 25, 919–924.

Asurmendi, S., Berg, R. H., Smith, T. J., 

Bendahmane, M., & Beachy, R. N. (2007). 
Aggregation of TMV CP plays a role in CP 
functions and in coat protein-mediated 
resistance. Virology, 366, 98–106.

Blackman, R. L., & Eastop, V. F. (2000). Aphids 
on the World’s Crops: An identification and 
information guide (2nd ed.), p. 250. New 
York: Wiley. 

Borja, M., Rubio, T., Scholthof, H. B., & 

Jackson, A. O. (1999). Restoration of wild-
type virus by double recombination of 

350

tombusvirus mutants with a host transgene. 
Molecular Plant–Microbe Interactions, 12, 
153–162.

Brigneti, G., Voinnet, O., Li, W., Ji, L., Ding, 

S. W., & Baulcombe, D. (1998). Viral 
pathogenicity determinants are suppressors 
of transgene silencing in Nicotiana 
benthamiana. EMBO Journal, 17, 
6739–6746.

Brumin, M., Stukalov, S., Haviv, S., 

Muruganantham, M., Moskovitz, Y., 
& Batuman, O., et al. (2009). Post-
transcriptional gene silencing and virus 
resistance in Nicotiana benthamiana 
expressing a Grapevine virus a minireplicon. 
Transgenic Research, 18, 331–345.

Bucher, E., Lohuis, D., Van Poppel, P. M. J. A., 

Geerts-Dimitriadou, C., Golbach, R., & 
Prins, M. (1996). Multiple virus resistance 
at a high frequency using a single transgene 
construct. Journal of General Virology, 87, 
3697–3701.

Candelier-Harvey, P., & Hull, R. (1993). 

Cucumber mosaic virus genome is 
encapsidated in alfalfa mosaic virus coat 
protein expressed in transgenic plants. 
Transgenic Research, 2, 277–285.
Cohen, S., & Berlinger, M. J. (1986). 

Transmission and cultural control of whitefly 
borne viruses. Agriculture, Ecosystems & 
Environment, 17, 89–97.

Csizinszky, A. A., Schuster, D. J., & Kring, 

J. B. (1997). Evaluation of color mulches 
and oil sprays for yield and for the control 
of silverleaf whitefly, Bemisia Argentifolii 
(Bellows and Perring) on tomatoes. Crop 
Protection, 16, 475–481.

Dangl, J. L., & Jones, J. D. G. (2001). Plant 

pathogens and integrated defence responses 
to infection. Nature, 411, 826–833.

Deleris, A., Gallego-Bartolome, J., Bao, J., 

Kasschau, K. D., Carrington, J. C., & 
Voinnet, O. (2006). Hierarchical action 
and inhibition of plant dicer-like proteins in 
antiviral defense. Science, 313, 68–71.

Dogimont, C., Chovelon, V., Tual, S., Boissot, 
N., Rittener-Rüff, V., Giovinazzo, N., et al.  
(2008). Molecular diversity at the Vat/
Pm-W resistance locus in melon. In:  
M. Pitrat (Ed), Cucurbitaceae, Proceedings 
of the nineth EUCARPIA meeting on genetics 
and breeding of Cucurbitaceae (pp. 219–
228). Avignon (France), May 21–24th, 2008.
Dougherty, W. G., Lindbo, J. A., Smith, H. A., 

Parks, T. F., Swaney, S., & Proebsting, W. 
M. (1994). RNA-mediated virus resistance 
in transgenic plants: Exploitation of a 
cellular pathway possibly involved in RNA 
degradation. Molecular Plant–Microbe 
Interactions, 7, 544–552.

Doukas, D., & Payne, C. (2007). Greenhouse 

whitefly (Homoptera: Aleyrodidae) dispersal 
under different UV-light environments. 
Journal of Economic Entomology, 100, 
380–397.

EPPO. (2009). EPPO summaries of phytosanitary 

regulations. EPPO Technical Documents.

Fargette, D., Konate, G., Fauquet, C., Muller, 

E., Peterschmitt, M., & Thresh, J. M. 
(2006). Molecular ecology and emergence 
of tropical plant viruses. Annual Review of 
Phytopathology, 44, 235–260.

Farinelli, L., Malnöe, P., & Collet, G. F. (1992). 
Heterologous encapsidation of potato virus 
Y strain P (PVYO) with the transgenic coat 
protein of PVY strain N (PVYN) in Solanum 
tuberosum cv. Bintje. Bio/Technology, 10, 
1020–1025.

Fuchs, M., Gal-On, A., Raccah, B., & 

Gonsalves, D. (1999). Epidemiology of an 
aphid nontransmissible potyvirus in fields of 
nontransgenic and coat protein transgenic 
squash. Transgenic Research, 99, 429–439.

Fuchs, M., & Gonsalves, D. (1995). Resistance 
of transgenic squash Pavo ZW-20 expressing 
the coat protein genes of zucchini yellow 
mosaic virus and watermelon mosaic virus 2 
to mixed infections by both potyviruses. Bio/
Biotechnology, 13, 1466–1473.

Fuchs, M., & Gonsalves, D. (2007). Safety of 

virus-resistant transgenic plants two decades 
after their introduction: Lessons from 
realistic field risk assessment studies. Annual 
Review of Phytopathology, 45, 173–202.

Fuchs, M., Klas, F. E., McFerson, J. R., & 

Gonsalves, D. (1998a). Transgenic melon 
and squash expressing coat protein genes 
of aphid-borne viruses do not assist the 
spread of an aphid non-transmissible strain 
of cucumber mosaic virus in the field. 
Transgenic Research, 7, 1–14.

Fuchs, M., Tricoli, D. M., McMaster, J. R., 

Carney, K. J., Schesser, M., & McFerson, 
J. R., et al. (1998b). Comparative virus 
resistance and fruit yield of transgenic 
squash with single and multiple coat protein 
genes. Plant Disease, 82, 1350–1356.
Garrett, K. A., Dendy, S. P., Frank, E. E., 
Rouse, M. N., & Travers, S. E. (2006). 
Climate change effects on plant disease: 
Genomes to ecosystems. Annual Review of 
Phytopathology, 44, 489–509.

Gera, A., Katzir, P., Tam, Y., Spiegel, S., and 

Zeidan, M. (2010). New and emerging 
viruses in ornamental crops. Acta 
Horticulturae (In press).

Gonsalves, D. (1998). Control of papaya 
ringspot virus in papaya: A case study. 
Annual Review of Phytopathology, 36, 
415–437.

Controlling plant response to the environment: Viral diseases

C H A P T E R   2 2

Gonsalves, D. (2006). Transgenic papaya: 

Development, release, impact, and 
challenges. Advances in Virus Research, 67, 
317–354.

Gonsalves, D., Chee, P., Provvidenti, R., Seem, 

R., & Slightom, J. L. (1992). Comparison 
of coat protein-mediated and genetically-
derived resistance in cucumbers to 
infection by cucumber mosaic virus under 
field conditions with natural challenge 
inoculations by vectors. Biotechnology, 10, 
1562–1570.

Greene, A. E., & Allison, R. F. (1994). 

Recombination between viral RNA and 
transgenic plant transcripts. Science, 263, 
1423–1425.

Hamilton, A. J., & Baulcombe, D. C. (1999). 

A species of small antisense RNA in 
posttranscriptional gene silencing in plants. 
Science, 286, 950–952.

Hammond, J., & Dienelt, M. M. (1997). 

Encapsidation of potyviral RNA in various 
forms of transgene coat protein is not 
correlated with resistance in transgenic 
plants. Molecular Plant–Microbe 
Interactions, 10, 1023–1027.

Hammond, S. M., Caudy, A. A., & Hannon, G. J.  

(2001). Post-transcriptional gene silencing 
by double-stranded RNA. Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 2, 110–119.

Hannon, G. J. (2002). RNA interference. 

Nature, 418, 244–251.

Hilje, L., Costa, H. S., & Stansly, P. A. (2001). 

Cultural practices for managing Bemisia 
tabaci and associated viral diseases. Crop 
Protection, 20, 801–812.

Hull, R. (2002). Matthews’ plant virology (4th 

ed.). San Diego, CA: Academic.

Kaniewski, W., Lawson, C., Sammons, B., 

Haley, L., Hart, J., & Delannay, X., et al. 
(1990). Field resistance of transgenic Russet 
Burbank potato to effects of infection 
by Potato virus X and Potato virus Y. 
Biotechnology, 8, 750–754.

Kaniweski, W. K., & Thomas, P. E. (2004). The 

potato story. Agricultural and Biological 
Forum, 7, 41–46.

Kasschau, K. D., & Carrington, J. C. (1998). A 

counterdefensive strategy of plant viruses: 
Suppression of posttranscriptional gene 
silencing. Cell, 95, 461–470.

Kirk, W. D. J., & Terry, L. I. (2003). The spread 

of the western flower thrips Frankliniella 
occidentalis (Pergande). Agricultural and 
Forest Entomology, 5, 301–310.

Klingler, J., Creasy, R., Gao, L., Nair, R. M., 
& Calix, A. S. (2005). Aphid resistance in 
Medicago truncatula involves antixenosis 
and phloem-specific, inducible antibiosis, 
and maps to a single locus flanked by 
NBS-LRR resistance gene analogs. Plant 
Physiology, 137, 1445–1455.

Kogan, M., & Ortman, E. E. (1978). 

Antixenosis—a new term proposed to 
replace painter’s “nonpreference” modality 
of resistance. Bulletin of the Entomological 
Society of America, 24, 175–176.

König, A., Cockburn, A., Crevel, R. W., 

Debruyne, E., Grafstroem, R., & 
Hammerling, U., et al. (2004). Assessment 
of the safety of foods derived from 
genetically modified (GM) crops. Food and 
Chemical Toxicology, 42, 1047–1088.

Lawson, C., Kaniewski, W., Haley, L., Rozman, 
R., Newell, C., & Sanders, P., et al. (1990). 
Engineering resistance to mixed virus 
infection in a commercial potato cultivar: 
Resistance of potato virus X and potato virus 
Y in transgenic Russet Burban. Biotechnology, 
8, 127–134.

Lawson, R., Gera, A., & Hsu, H. T. (1995). 

Transmission of plant viruses. In  
G. Loebenstein, R. Lawson & A. Brunt 
(Eds.), Viruses and virus-like diseases 
of bulb and flower crops (pp. 117–134). 
Chichester, U.K: Wiley.

Lecoq, H., Ravelonandro, M., Wipf-Scheibel, 

C., Mansion, M., Raccah, B., & Dunez, 
J. (1993). Aphid transmission of a non-
aphid transmissible strain of zucchini 
yellow mosaic virus from transgenic plants 
expressing the capsid protein of plum 
pox potyvirus. Molecular Plant–Microbe 
Interactions, 6, 403–406.

Lee, J. M. (1994). Cultivation of grafted 

vegetables. 1. Current status, grafting methods 
and benefits. HortScience, 29, 235–239.

Lewandowski, D. (2000). Genus Tobamovirus. 

In M. H. V. van Regenmortel, C. M. 
Fauquet, D. H. L. Bishop, E. B. Carstens,  
M. K. Estes, S. M. Lemon, J. Maniloff,  
M. A. Mayo, D. J. McGeoch, C. R. Pringle 
& R. B. Wickner (Eds.), Virus taxonomy, 
seventh report of the international committee 
of taxonomy of viruses (pp. 889–894). San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Li, F., & Ding, S. -W. (2006). Virus 

counterdefense: Diverse strategies for 
evading the RNA-silencing immunity. 
Annual Review of Microbiology, 60, 
503–531.

Li, L., Zhao, Y., McCaig, B. C., Wingerd, B. A., 

Wang, J., & Whalon, M. E., et al. (2004). 
The tomato homolog of CORONATINE-
INSENSITIVE1 is required for the maternal 
control of seed maturation, jasmonate-
signaled defense responses, and glandular 
trichome development. Plant Cell, 16, 
126–143.

Li, Y., Hill, C., Carlson, S., Diers, B., & 
Hartman, G. (2007). Soybean aphid 
resistance genes in the soybean cultivars 
Dowling and Jackson map to linkage group 
M. Molecular Breeding, 19, 25–34.

Lindbo, J. A., & Dougherty, W. G. (1992a). 
Untranslatable transcripts of the tobacco 
etch virus coat protein gene sequence can 
interfere with tobacco etch virus replication 
in transgenic plants and protoplasts. 
Virology, 189, 725–733.

Lindbo, J. A., & Dougherty, W. G. (1992b). 

Pathogen-derived resistance to a potyvirus: 
Immune and resistant phenotypes in 
transgenic tobacco expressing altered form 
of a potyvirus coat protein nucleotide 
sequence. Molecular Plant–Microbe 
Interactions, 5, 144–153.

Lindbo, J. A., & Dougherty, W. G. (2005). Plant 
pathology and RNAi: A brief history. Annual 
Review of Phytopathology, 43, 191–204.

Lopez-Perez, J. A., Le Strange, M., Kaloshian, 

I., & Ploeg, A. T. (2006). Differential 
response of Mi gene-resistant tomato 
rootstocks to root-knot nematodes 
(Meloidogyne incognita). Crop Protection, 
25, 382–388.

Mandahar, C. L. (1990). Virus transmission. In 
C. L. (1990). Mandahar (Ed.), Plant viruses 
(Vol. II, pp. 205–242). Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press.

Martinez de Ilarduya, O., Xie, Q., & Kaloshian, 

I. (2003). Aphid-induced defense 
responses in Mi-1-mediated compatible and 
incompatible tomato interactions. Molecular 
Plant–Microbe Interactions, 16, 699–708.

McGee, D. C. (1997). Plant pathogens and the 

worldwide movement of seeds. APS Press.

Mensah, C., Di Fonzo, C., & Wang, D. (2008). 

Inheritance of soybean aphid resistance in 
PI567541B and PI567598B. Crop Science, 
48, 1759–1763.

Milligan, S. B., Bodeau, J., Yaghoobi, J., Kaloshian, 
I., Zabel, P., & Williamson, V. M. (1998). The 
root knot nematode resistance gene Mi from 
tomato is a member of the leucine zipper, 
nucleotide binding, leucine-rich repeat family 
of plant genes. Plant Cell, 10, 1307–1319.

Missiou, A., Kalantidis, K., Boutla, A., 

Tzortzakaki, S., Tabler, M., & Tsagris, M. 
(2004). Generation of transgenic potato 
plants highly resistant to potato virus Y 
(PVY) through RNA silencing. Molecular 
Breeding, 14, 185–197.

Mitter, N., Sulistyowati, E., & Dietzgen, R. G. 

(2003). Cucumber mosaic virus infection 
transiently breaks dsRNA-induced transgenic 
immunity to potato virus Y in tobacco. 
Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions, 16, 
936–944.

Mitter, N., Sulistyowati, E., Graham, M. W., 
& Dietzgen, R. G. (2001). Suppression of 
gene silencing: A threat to virus-resistant 
transgenic plants? Trends in Plant Science, 6, 
246–247.

Mutwiwa, U. N., Brogemeister, C., Von 

Elsner, B., & Tantu, H. (2005). Effects of 
UV–absorbing plastic films on greenhouse 
whitefly (Homoptera: Aleyrodidae). Journal 
of Economic Entomology, 98, 1221–1228.

Nejidat, A., & Beachy, R. N. (1990). Transgenic 

tobacco plants expressing a coat protein 
gene of Tobacco mosaic virus are resistant to 
some other tobamoviruses. Molecular Plant-
Microbe Interactions, 3, 247–251.

Nelson, R. S., McCormick, S. M., Delannay, 

X., Dube, P., Layton, J., & Anderson, E. J., 
et al. (1988). Virus tolerance, plant growth 
and field performance of transgenic tomato 
plants expressing coat protein from tobacco 
mosaic virus. Biotechnology, 6, 403–409.
Ng, J. C., & Falk, B. W. (2006). Virus-vector 
interactions mediating nonpersistent and 
semipersistent transmission of plant viruses. 
Annual Review of Phytopathology, 44, 
183–212.

Niu, Q. -W., Lin, S. -S., Reyes, J. L., Chen, 
K. -C., Wu, H. -W., & Yeh, S. -D., et al. 
(2006). Expression of artificial microRNAs 
in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana confers 
virus resistance. Nature Biotechnology, 11, 
1420–1428.

Obbard, D. J., Gordon, K. H., Buck, A. H., & 

Jiggins, F. M. (2009). The evolution of RNAi 
as a defence against viruses and transposable 
elements. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B, 364, 99–115.

Oda, M. (1999). Grafting of vegetables to 

improve greenhouse production. http://
www.agnet.org/library/eb/480/ 

351

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

virus or Tomato mosaic virus coat protein 
genes. Phytopathology, 82, 683–690.

Sanford, J. C., & Johnston, S. A. (1985). The 

concept of parasite-derived resistance —
Deriving resistance genes from the parasite’s 
own genome. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 
113, 395–405.

Silhavy, D., Molnar, A., Lucioli, A., Szittya, G., 

Hornyik, C., & Tavazza, M., et al. (2002). 
A viral protein suppresses RNA silencing 
and binds silencing-generated, 21- to 
25-nucleotide doublestranded RNAs. EMBO 
Journal, 21, 3070–3080.

Singer, A. C., Crowley, D. E., & Thompson, I. P.  

(2003). Secondary plant metabolites in 
phytoremediation and biotransformation. 
Trends in Biotechnology, 21, 123–130.

Smith, C. M. (1989). Plant resistance to insects: 

A fundamental approach. New York: Wiley.

Smith, N. A., Singh, S. P., Wang, M. B., 
Stoutjesdijk, P. A., Green, A. G., & 
Waterhouse, P. M. (2000). Total silencing by 
intron-spliced hairpin RNAs. Nature, 407, 
319–320.

Stacesmith, R., & Hamilton, R. I. (1988). 

Inoculum thresholds of seedborne 
pathogens-viruses. Phytopathology, 78, 
875–880.

Summers, C. G., Michell, J. P., & Stapleton, 
J. J. (2005). Mulches reduce aphid-borne 
viruses and whiteflies in cantaloupe. 
California Agriculture, 59, 90–94.

Szittya, G., Silhavy, D., Molnar, A., Havelda, 
Z., Lowas, A., & Lakatos, L., et al. (2003). 
Low temperature inhibits RNA silencing-
mediated defence by the control of siRNA 
generation. EMBO Journal, 22, 633–640.
Takken, F. L. W., Albrech, T. M., & Tameling,  

W. I. L. (2006). Resistance proteins: 
Molecular switches of plant defense. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 9, 383–390.
Tougou, M., Furutani, N., Yamagishi, N., 

Shizukawa, Y., Takahata, Y., & Hidaka, S. 
(2006). Development of resistant transgenic 
soybeans with inverted repeat-coat protein 
genes of soybean dwarf virus. Plant Cell 
Reports, 25, 1213–1218.

Traw, M. B., Kim, J., Enright, S., Cipollini, D. F.,  

& Bergelson, J. (2003). Negative cross-talk 
between salicylate- and jasmonate-mediated 
pathways in the Wassilewskija ecotype of 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Molecular Ecology, 12, 
1125–1135.

Tricoli, D. M., Carney, K. J., Russell, P. F., 

McMaster, J. R., Groff, D. W., & Hadden, 
K. C., et al. (1995). Field evaluation of 
transgenic squash containing single or 
multiple virus coat protein gene constructs 
for resistance to Cucumber mosaic virus, 

Watermelon mosaic virus 2, and Zucchini 
yellow mosaic virus. Biotechnology, 13, 
1458–1465.

Turturo, C., Friscina, A., Gaubert, S., 

Jacquemond, M., Thompson, J. R., & Tepfer, 
M. (2008). Evaluation of potential risks 
associated with recombination in transgenic 
plants expressing viral sequences. Journal of 
General Virology, 89, 327–335.

Ullman, D. E., Sherwood, J. L., & German, 

T. L. (1997). Thrips as vectors of plant 
pathogens. In T. L. Lewis (Ed.), Thrips as 
crop pests (pp. 539–565). London: CAB 
International.

Vigne, E., Komar, V., & Fuchs, M. (2004). 

Field safety assessment of recombination 
in transgenic grapevines expressing the coat 
protein gene of Grapevine fanleaf virus. 
Transgenic Research, 13, 165–179.

Voinnet, O. (2001). RNA silencing as a plant 
immune system against viruses. Trends in 
Genetics, 17, 449–459.

Voinnet, O. (2005). Induction and suppression 

of RNA silencing: Insights from viral 
infections. Nature Reviews Genetics, 6, 
206–221.

Voinnet, O. (2008). Post-transcriptional RNA 
silencing in plant–microbe interactions: A 
touch of robustness and versatility. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 11, 464–470.

Waterhouse, P., Gramham, M., & Wang, M. -B. 
(1998). Virus resistance and gene silencing 
in plants can be induced by simultaneous 
expression of sense and antisense RNA. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 95, 
13959–13964.

Waterhouse, P. M., Wang, M. B., & Lough, T. 

(2001). Gene silencing as an adaptative 
defense against viruses. Nature, 411, 
834–842.

Wesley, V., Helliwell, C. A., Smith, N. A., 

Wang, M. B., Rouse, D. T., & Liu, Q., et al.  
(2001). Construct design for efficient, 
effective and high-throughput gene silencing 
in plants. Plant Journal, 27, 581–591.

Wroblewski, T., Piskurewicz, U., Tomczak, A., 

Ochoa, O., & Michelmore, R. W. (2007). 
Silencing of the major family of NBS-LRR-
encoding genes in lettuce results in the loss 
of multiple resistance specificities. Plant 
Journal, 51, 803–818.

Zagrai, I., Capote, N., Ravelonandro, M., 

Ravelonandro, M., Cambra, M., & Zagrai, L.,  
et al. (2008). Plum pox virus silencing of 
C5 transgenic plums is stable uner challenge 
inoculation with heterologous viruses. 
Journal of Plant Pathology, 90, S1.63–S1.71.

Osbourn, J. K., Watts, J. W., Beachy, R. N., 

& Wilson, T. M. A. (1989). Evidence that 
nucleocapsid disassembly and a later step in 
virus replication are inhibited in transgenic 
tobacco protoplasts expressing TMV coat 
protein. Virology, 172, 370–373.

Pitrat, M., & Lecoq, H. (1980). Inheritance 
of resistance to Cucumber mosaic virus 
transmission by Aphis gossypii in Cucumis 
melo. Phytopathology, 70, 958–961.
Powell-Abel, P., Nelson, R. S., De, B., 

Hoffmann, N., Rogers, S. G., & Fraley, R. T., 
et al. (1986). Delay of disease development 
in transgenic plants that express the tobacco 
mosaic virus coat protein gene. Science, 232, 
738–743.

Praveen, S., Ramesh, S. V., Mishra, A. K., 

Koundal, V., & Palukaitis, P. (2010). 
Silencing potential of viral derived RNAi 
constructs in Tomato leaf curl virus-AC4 
gene suppression in tomato. Transgenic 
Research, 19, 45–55.

Prins, M., & Goldbach, R. (1998). The 

emerging problem of tospovirus infection 
and nonconventional methods of control. 
Trends in Microbiology, 6, 31–35.

Prins, M., Laimer, M., Noris, E., Schubert, 

J., Wassenegger, M., & Tepfer, M. (2008). 
Strategies for antiviral resistance in 
transgenic plants. Molecular Plant Pathology, 
9, 73–83.

Raviv, M., & Antignus, Y. (2004). UV Radiation 

effects on pathogens and insect pests of 
greenhouse-grown crops. Photochemistry and 
Photobiology, 79, 219–226.

Reddy, D. V. R., Sudashana, M. R., Fuch, M., 

Rao, N. C., & Thottappilly, G. (2009). 
Genetically engineered virus-resistant plants 
in developing countries: Current status 
and future prospects. Advances in Virus 
Research, 75, 185–220.

Register, J. C., III, & Beachy, R. N. (1988). 
Resistance to TMV in transgenic plants 
results from interference with an early event 
in infection. Virology, 166, 524–532.
Rossi, M., Goggin, F. L., Milligan, S. B., 

Kaloshian, I., Ullman, D. E., & Williamson, 
V. W. (1998). The nematode resistance gene 
Mi of tomato confers resistance against the 
potato aphid. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 95, 9750–9754.

Sadasivam, S., Thayumanavan, B. B. (2003). 
Molecular host plant resistance to pests  
(pp. 479). New York; Marcel Dekker.

Sanders, P. R., Sammons, B., Kaniewski, W., 

Haley, L., Layton, J., & Lavallee, B. J.,  
et al. (1992). Field resistance of transgenic 
tomatoes expressing the Tobacco mosaic 

352

Molecular responses to extreme 
temperatures

19

Rafael Catalá1  Aurora Díaz2  Julio Salinas1
1Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB-CSIC),Madrid, Spain,
2Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas (IBMCP), CSIC/Universidad Politécnica 
de Valencia, Valencia, Spain

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 287
Plant Response to Low Temperature   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 287
Low temperature perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .288
Transducing the low-temperature signal . . . . . . . . . . .289

Cross-talk between Plant Responses to Extreme 
Temperatures  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 297

The membrane as a node in the perception of 
temperature oscillations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .298
Transducing the signals initiated by temperature 
variations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .298
Conclusions   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 300
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 301

Introduction

In  temperate  regions,  living  organisms  have  to  face  an  ever-
changing  environment.  For  plants,  as  sessile  organisms, 
extreme  temperatures  are  among  the  environmental  fac-
tors  that  most  condition  their  development  and  distribu-
tion. Learning how plants cope with extreme temperatures is 
interesting  not  only  to  understanding  how  they  develop  and 
reproduce, but also from the more practical aspect of design-
ing molecular tools to improve crop tolerance to these adverse 
environmental  conditions.  In  the  past,  different  laboratories 
have  devoted  their  study  to  unveiling  the  molecular  mecha-
nisms  underlying  plant  response  to  low  temperature;  more 
specifically the process of cold acclimation, the adaptive proc-
ess where many plants from temperate regions increase their 
freezing tolerance after a period of exposure to low non-freez-
ing temperature (Levitt, 1980). Cold acclimation constitutes 
a  representative  example  of  plant  interaction  with  the  envi-
ronment and how this interaction has conditioned the evolu-
tion of some species. Interesting data have been reported on 
the characterization of the mechanisms and components that 
govern this adaptive response, which have revealed that plant 

response  to  low  temperature  is  very  complex  and  involves 
many  biochemical  and  physiological  changes  (Salinas,  2002; 
Ruelland  et al.,  2009).  Currently,  it  seems  clear  that  cold 
acclimation is mediated by an intricate signaling network sub-
jected to tight regulation. Research determined that low tem-
perature  response  is  mainly  controlled  at  the  transcriptional 
level  through  an  extensive  reprogramming  of  gene  expres-
sion,  although  post-transcriptional,  translational,  and  post-
translational  regulation  is  also  required  (Catala  and  Salinas, 
2007;  Chinnusamy  et al.,  2010).  In  addition,  plant  response 
to low temperature is also subjected to epigenetic regulation 
(Chinnusamy et al., 2010).

Temperatures  above  the  optimum  are  also  highly  stress-
ful  for  plants,  disturbing  cellular  homeostasis  and  leading  to 
severe retardation in growth and development, and even death. 
Although  it  could  be  assumed  that  the  stresses  provoked  by 
high and low temperatures are opposite, they cause many com-
mon  deleterious  effects  to  plants,  including  the  accumulation 
of  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS).  Accordingly,  plants  sub-
jected to low temperature increase their tolerance to heat (Fu 
et al.,  1998)  and,  vice  versa,  heat  shock  improves  the  chilling 
tolerance of cold-sensitive species (Saltveit and Hepler, 2004; 
Pressman  et al.,  2006).  Heat  stress  response  (HSR)  has  been 
extensively studied in plants (Wang et al., 2004); however, lit-
tle attention has been given to identifying common mechanisms 
and intermediates implicated in both low and high temperature 
responses. In this chapter, we present a general view about the 
current  knowledge  of  how  plants  perceive  and  transduce  the 
cold signal, and how low temperature response is regulated. We 
will also discuss what has been reported on how plant responses 
to low and high temperatures interact and integrate, and on the 
potential common mechanisms and components that can medi-
ate such an integration.

Plant Response to Low Temperature

Exposure  to  low  temperature  initiates  numerous  physiologi-
cal perturbations; the first includes changes in cell membrane 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00019-5

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

fluidity  state  and  fatty  acid  composition  (Murata  and  Los, 
1997; Suzuki et al., 2001). The alteration of fatty acid com-
position involves an increase in polyunsaturated lipids content 
that  is  essential  for  plant  survival  under  cold  conditions  due 
to the deleterious effects of low temperature on membrane-
bound metabolic processes such as respiration and photosyn-
thesis (Cossins, 1994). For example, the combination of light 
and  cold  induces  a  reduction  in  photosynthetic  activity  and 
causes  photo-oxidative  stress  that  has  been  correlated  with 
low temperature sensitivity (Harvaux and Kloppstech, 2001). 
In response to light and cold, plants increase the accumulation 
of light-screening pigments (i.e., anthocyanins) to defend pho-
tosystems from excess light (Mancinelli, 1984; Christie et al., 
1994).  In  addition,  the  protein  composition  of  photosys-
tems is altered in response to cold, and some of the changes 
produced  have  been  described  as  protecting  against  photo-
oxidative  stress  (Gray  et al.,  1997;  Capel  et al.,  1998;  Kro 
et al., 1999). The increase in fatty acid content is not the only 
modification  in  cell  membrane  composition  induced  by  low 
temperature.  It  has  been  reported  that  levels  of  38  plasma 
membrane  proteins  in  Arabidopsis  increase  or  decrease  at 
4°C  (Kawamura  and  Uemura,  2003).  Interestingly,  some  of 
these  proteins  are  involved  in  important  processes  such  as 
CO2 fixation, membrane repair, membrane protection against 
osmotic stress, or proteolysis (Kawamura and Uemura, 2003). 
Exposure to cold also induces the accumulation of many other 
proteins that are not located in cellular membranes, some of 
them  playing  protective  roles  (Bae  et al.,  2003;  Gao  et al., 
2009).  Thus,  it  is  well  known  that  low  temperature  induces 
the  production  of  antifreeze  proteins  (AFPs;  Venketesh  and 
Dayananda,  2008).  The  mechanism  of  AFP  action  occurs 
through its adsorption on the ice surface, leading to a curved 
surface, which prevents further growth of ice by the “Kelvin” 
effect  (Venketesh  and  Dayananda,  2008).  AFPs  have  been 
isolated  from  several  plant  species  including  winter  rye,  car-
rot,  and  perennial  ryegrass  (Antikainen  et al.,  1996;  Worrall 
et al., 1998; Sidebottom et al., 2000). The content of sugar is 
also altered in plants in response to low temperature. Several 
studies  have  found  a  high  correlation  between  sugar  levels 
and  tolerance  to  low  temperature  in  different  plant  species 
(Guy et al., 1992; Sasaki et al., 1996; Sundblad et al., 2001). 
Finally, exposure to low temperature also provokes structural 
changes  in  the  plant,  such  as  modifications  in  the  cell  wall 
composition (Wei et al., 2006).

Data  obtained  indicate  that  changes  induced  by  low  tem-
perature  are  subjected  to  tight  control,  and  many  different 
mechanisms implicated in this regulation have been described. 
In  the  following  paragraphs,  we  provide  a  general  overview 
on  how  the  cold  signal  is  perceived,  decoded,  and  trans-
duced, and about the regulatory mechanisms controlling plant 
response to low temperature.

Low temperature perception

Perception is the first step in the activation of plant response 
to cold conditions. Although the molecular mechanisms used 
by  plants  to  perceive  low  temperature  remain  unknown,  in 
some cases changes in membrane fluidity seem to function as 

a biological thermometer. Orvar and colleagues (2000) found 
a direct relationship between the rigidification of the plasma 
membrane,  the  expression  of  the  alfalfa  cold-inducible  gene 
CAS30,  and  a  higher  capacity  of  alfalfa  cells  to  cold  accli-
mate at warm temperatures. In contrast, an increase in mem-
brane  fluidity  provokes  a  decrease  in  CAS30  cold-induction 
and  a  reduction  in  the  capacity  of  alfalfa  cells  to  cold  accli-
mate  (Orvar  et al.,  2000).  Recent  genetic  evidence  corrobo-
rates  these  results.  Vaultier  and  colleagues  (2006)  reported 
the identification of plants defective in the activity of FAD2 
desaturase,  which  have  a  steeper  membrane  rigidification  in 
response  to  cold.  In  addition,  Arabidopsis  transgenic  plants 
over-expressing  another  desaturase,  FAD3,  show  decreased 
membrane rigidification in response to temperature reduction 
(Vaultier et al., 2006). Interestingly, in fad2 mutant plants the 
activation of the cold-inducible diacylglycerol kinase pathway 
occurs at a higher temperature than in wild-type plants, and 
a  lower  temperature  is  necessary  to  activate  this  pathway  in 
FAD3  over-expessing  plants  (Vaultier  et al.,  2006).  From 
these results, the authors inferred that the rigidification of the 
cell  membrane  is  indeed  one  of  the  primary  events  in  plant 
response to low temperature.

Work  in  Synechocystis  has  provided  some  clues  on  how 
changes  in  membrane  fluidity  could  be  perceived  and  subse-
quently  transduced.  The  characterization  of  Synechocystis 
PCC6803 insertion mutants allowed the identification of two 
putative  histidine  kinases,  HIK33  and  HIK19,  and  a  protein 
with  typical  two-component  regulator  domains,  RER1,  that 
acts  as  a  cold-receptor  system  (Suzuki  et al.,  2000).  The 
proposed  model  suggests  that  HIK33  would  be  activated  by 
a  decrease  in  membrane  fluidity,  inducing  its  own  phospho-
rylation  and  subsequent  transfer  of  the  phosphorus  group 
to  HIK19  and  finally  to  RER1.  Expression  analysis  of  hik 
mutants  revealed  that  this  system  controls  the  expression  of 
several cold-regulated genes (Suzuki et al., 2000). Although a 
similar mechanism has not been described in plants, different 
results support the existence of a related system. In this way, 
several genes encoding histidine kinases related to the percep-
tion  of  different  environmental  stimuli  have  been  isolated  in 
plants (Urao et al., 2000).

The  implication  of  light  perception  in  regulating  plant 
response  to  low  temperature  has  been  known  for  a  long 
time.  Many  plant  species,  including  alfalfa  (Dexter,  1933), 
ivy  (Steponkus,  1971),  winter  rye  (Griffith  and  McIntyre, 
1993),  or  Arabidopsis  (Wanner  and  Junttila,  1999),  need 
light to completely develop the freezing tolerance induced by 
cold  acclimation.  Moreover,  it  has  been  described  that  cold-
induced gene expression controlled by the C-repeat/dehydra-
tion responsive element (CRT/DRE) motif (see next section) 
is  compromised  in  the  phyB  mutant  (Kim  et al.,  2002a), 
revealing an important role for the light receptor PHYB as a 
mediator of gene expression in response to low temperature. 
Additionally,  changes  in  the  red  to  far-red  ratio  (R/FR)  are 
sufficient  to  control  the  expression  of  CBF  genes  in  a  circa-
dian-clock-dependent  manner  and  to  increase  Arabidopsis 
freezing  tolerance  (Franklin  and  Whitelam,  2007).  On  the 
other  hand,  the  over-expression  of  PHYA  in  hybrid  aspen 
reduces the critical day length to which these trees are able to 
cold  acclimate,  indicating  that  PHYA  functions  as  a  negative 

288

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

regulator  of  plant  response  to  cold  (Olsen  et al.,  1997).  All 
of these data stress the importance of light perception in low 
temperature response.

Transducing the low-temperature signal

Changes  in  temperature  perceived  by  cellular  membranes 
seem  to  induce  an  increase  in  cytoplasmic  calcium  concen-
tration  ([Ca2]cyt).  Afterwards,  this  Ca2  signal  presumably 
would be transmitted through Ca2-binding proteins to acti-
vate  reversible  phosphorylation/dephosphorylation  cascades. 
Finally, 
these  phosphorylation/dephosphorylation  events 
would  control  the  accumulation  of  different  signaling  mol-
ecules, such as plant hormones that, in turn, would modulate 
the  activity  of  different  transcription  factors  and,  therefore, 
the induction of cold-regulated gene expression.

Ca2 as a second messenger in low-temperature 
response
Most eukaryotic cells use Ca2 to transduce external signals to 
cytosolic  information  and,  therefore,  to  control  the  response 
to these stimuli. In plants, Ca2 is involved in the response to 
several environmental conditions (Reddy, 2001). Low tempera-
ture induces a transient increase in [Ca2]cyt in different spe-
cies,  including  tobacco  (Knight  et al.,  1991)  and  Arabidopsis 
(Knight et al., 1996). It seems that Ca2 influx into the cyto-
plasm  is  mediated  by  Ca2-permeable  channels,  which  are 
assumed to be solely dependent on the cooling rate, and Ca2 
efflux  is  mediated  by  Ca2  pumps,  which  have  been  shown 
to  be  dependent  on  absolute  temperature  (Carpaneto  et al., 
2007).  This  hypothesis  suggests  a  role  for  Ca2-permeable 
channels  as  a  primary  temperature  sensor  in  plants  (Plieth, 
1999).  However,  Sangwan  and  colleagues  (2002)  reported 
pharmacological  data  revealing  that,  along  with  Ca2-
permeable  channels,  mechanosensitive  Ca2  channels  are  also 
implicated  in  cold  response.  Nonetheless,  temperature-sen-
sitive  Ca2  channels  have  not  been  described.  Using  tobacco 
protoplasts,  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the  magnitude  of 
the peak of [Ca2]cyt depends on the cytoskeleton organization 
(Mazars et al., 1997). In addition to the influx of extracellular 
Ca2, Knight and colleagues (1996) showed that the increase 
in  [Ca2]cyt  induced  by  cold  is  also  dependent  on  vacuolar 
Ca2. Different results confirm that Ca2 influx into the cyto-
plasm is essential for the cold acclimation process. Extracellular 
Ca2  chelators  and  Ca2  channel  inhibitors  reduce  cold-
induced  gene  expression  and  the  cold  acclimation  capacity  of 
alfalfa  cells  and  Arabidopsis;  in  addition,  they  alter  protein 
phosphorylation levels during cold acclimation (Monroy et al., 
1993). In this way, it has been described that the activation of 
SAMK,  an  alfalfa  stress-inducible  mitogen-activated  protein 
kinase (MAPK; Jonak et al., 1996), by cold depends on Ca2 
influx into the cytoplasm and the activation of Ca2-dependent 
protein kinases (CDPK; Mazars et al., 1997).

Due  to  the  role  of  Ca2  as  a  second  messenger  in  cold 
response,  the  regulation  of  its  levels  in  the  cytoplasm  and  in 
the different cellular organelles is essential. The basal levels of 
[Ca2]cyt  need  to  be  restored,  both  in  the  cytoplasm  and  the 

organelles, immediately after the increase induced by low tem-
perature  (Sanders  et al.,  2002).  This  is  mainly  carried  out  by 
Ca2-ATPases and Ca2/H exchangers (Knight, 2000). CAX1 
(CAtion  eXchanger  1)  was  the  first  Ca2/H  exchanger  to 
be  described  in  plants  (Hirschi  et al.,  1996).  Subsequently,  a 
highly homologous, VCAX1, has been described in Vigna radi-
ate  (Ueoka-Nakanishi  et al.,  1999).  CAX1  and  VCAX1  local-
ize  in  the  vacuolar  membrane  (Ueoka-Nakanishi  et al.,  1999; 
Cheng  et al.,  2003).  Interestingly,  transgenic  tobacco  plants 
over-expressing  CAX1  are  more  sensitive  to  low  temperature 
than  wild-type  plants  (Hirschi  et al.,  1996).  Moreover,  cax1 
null  mutants  show  higher  capacity  to  cold  acclimate  than 
wild-type  plants;  this  phenotype  correlates  with  an  enhanced 
induction of the CBFs and of the CBF-regulon under low-tem-
perature conditions (Catala et al., 2003).

Several intermediates involved in the transmission of cold-
induced Ca2 signal have been identified. In 1996, Knight and 
colleagues reported that the alteration of the inositol triphos-
phate  (IP3)  metabolism  affects  the  rise  in  [Ca2]cyt  induced 
by low temperature in Arabidopsis seedlings, denoting a pos-
sible role for IP3 in decoding the Ca2 signal. A temperature 
drop induces the activation of two enzymes of the IP3 biosyn-
thetic pathway, PLC and PLD, leading to an increase in phos-
phatidic  acid  (PtdOH)  content  (Ruelland  et al.,  2002).  This 
activation is blocked by inhibitors of the phosphoinositide sig-
naling pathway and is Ca2 dependent (Ruelland et al., 2002). 
The  identification  and  characterization  of  the  Arabidopsis 
mutant  fry1  provided  the  first  genetic  evidence  that  IP3  is 
implicated in abiotic stress responses. FRY1 encodes an inosi-
tol  polyphosphate  1-phosphatase  involved  in  IP3  catabolism 
(Xiong et al., 2004). fry1 mutation confers higher cold induc-
tion of ABA- and stress-responsive genes and increased sensi-
tivity of germination in ABA. However, tolerance to freezing, 
drought,  and  salt  stresses  is  lower  in  fry1  than  in  wild-type 
plants  (Xiong  et al.,  2004).  The  fry1  mutant  accumulates 
higher levels of IP3 than wild-type plants in the presence of 
ABA, suggesting that IP3 acts as a negative regulator attenuat-
ing ABA and stress signaling (Xiong et al., 2004).

Because of their expression patterns under cold conditions, 
calmodulin-like  proteins  (CaM)  are  also  good  candidates 
to  transduce  the  Ca2  signal.  The  expression  of  NpCaM-1, 
which encodes a tobacco CaM, is induced by cold through a 
Ca2-dependent  pathway  (van  der  Luit  et al.,  1999).  Other 
Ca2-dependent  cold-inducible  genes  encoding  CaM  are 
TCH2  and  TCH3  (Polisensky  and  Braam,  1996).  Yang  and 
Poovaiah  (2002)  identified  a  family  of  nuclear  proteins  in 
Arabidopsis (AtSR) that interact with CaM and with a DNA 
sequence  present  in  some  promoters.  The  expression  of  the 
corresponding  genes  is  rapidly  and  differentially  induced  by 
cold and other related stresses, which suggests their involve-
ment in abiotic stress signaling (Yang and Poovaiah, 2002). In 
addition,  CBL1,  an  Arabidopsis  Ca2  sensor  showing  homo-
logy  to  the  regulatory  subunit  of  the  calcineurin,  has  been 
implicated  in  plant  response  to  different  stresses  (Cheong 
et al.,  2003).  Transgenic  and  genetic  analysis  revealed  that 
CBL1 has a negative role in the modulation of plant response 
to low and freezing temperatures, most probably by regulating 
gene expression (Cheong et al., 2003). However, CBL1 posi-
tively  regulates  plant  response  to  other  abiotic  stresses,  such 

289

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

as drought and high salt, indicating that it has a complex role 
in  the  integration  of  adverse  environmental  conditions.  Kim 
and  colleagues  (2003)  characterized  an  Arabidopsis  mutant 
defective  in  CIPK3  expression,  a  cold-inducible  gene  that 
encodes  a  protein  kinase  (PK)  that  interacts  with  CBL-like 
proteins. Data support that CIPK3 also constitutes a point of 
cross-talk  between  different  Ca2-dependent  signaling  path-
ways when plants are exposed to low temperature (Kim et al., 
2003).

Different works reveal a possible role for CDPKs in plant 
response  to  cold.  Alfalfa  cell  cultures  treated  with  W7,  a 
CDPK antagonist, showed an inhibition of cold-induced gene 
expression  and  a  decrease  in  their  cold  acclimation  capacity 
(Monroy  et al.,  1993).  In  maize  protoplasts,  the  expression 
of AtCDPK1 is enough to activate the promoter of the barley 
cold-inducible gene HVA1 (Sheen, 1996). In rice, a CDPK is 
activated by cold, manifesting the implication of a post-trans-
lational  regulation  in  the  function  of  this  type  of  PK  under 
low-temperature conditions (Martin and Busconi, 2001).

In  addition  to  CDPKs,  MAPKs  are  other  PKs  that  seem 
to  be  implicated  in  transducing  the  Ca2  signal  in  the  cold. 
As  mentioned  previously,  Sangwan  and  colleagues  (2002) 
described the activation of SAMK as mediated by an increase 
in [Ca2]cyt induced by cold, which implicates this MAPK in 
low-temperature  signaling.  On  the  other  hand,  several  cold-
inducible  genes  encoding  components  of  the  MAPK  cascade 
have been described. Among them, the alfalfa MMK4, which 
encodes  a  MAPK  (Jonak  et al.,  1996),  and  the  Arabidopsis 
AtMPK3,  AtMEKK1,  and  AtMAP3Kβ3,  which  code  for  a 
MAPK,  a  MAPKK  (MAP  kinase  kinase),  and  a  MAPKKK 
(MAP  kinase  kinase  kinase),  respectively  (Mizoguchi  et al., 
1996;  Jouannic  et al.,  1999).  AtMEK3  participates  in  the 
phosphorylation  cascade  initiated  by  the  MAPKKK  ANP1  in 
response  to  H2O2  (Kovtun  et al.,  2000).  Interestingly,  trans-
genic  tobacco  plants  over-expressing  NPK1,  an  ortholog  of 
ANP1, display increased tolerance to low temperature (Kovtun 
et al.,  2000).  Teige  and  colleagues  (2004)  reported  the  char-
acterization of an MAPK cascade involved in Arabidopsis cold 
response. This cascade is activated by low temperature and is 
composed  of  MEKK1,  a  MAPKKK,  MKK2,  a  MAPKK,  and 
MPK2/MPK6,  which  is  a  MAPK  (Teige  et al.,  2004).  MKK2 
controls  cold  acclimation  by  regulating  the  expression  of  at 
least  152  cold-inducible  genes  (Teige  et al.,  2004).  Other 
genes coding for PKs different than MAPKs, such as PKABA1 
from wheat (Holappa and Walker-Simmons, 1995), and RPK1 
(Hong  et al.,  1997)  and  DBF2  from  Arabidopsis  (Lee  et al., 
1999),  are  also  induced  by  low  temperature.  This  suggests  a 
possible  implication  in  cold  response;  constitutive  expression 
of  AtDBF2  in  Arabidopsis  induces  the  expression  of  several 
cold-inducible genes (Lee et al., 1999).

Transduction  of  a  low-temperature  signal  depends  on 
the  reversible  phosphorylation  of  already  present  proteins. 
This  denotes  that,  in  addition  to  PKs,  phosphatase  activ-
ity  is  required  (Monroy  et al.,  1993,  1997,  1998;  Tahtiharju 
et al.,  1997).  The  expression  of  AtPP2CA,  an  Arabidopsis 
gene encoding a protein phosphatase (PP), is induced by cold 
(Tahtiharju and Palva, 2001). Transgenic plants over-expressing an 
antisense  version  of  this  gene  show  increased  levels  of  cold-
induced  gene  expression  when  exposed  to  4°C,  and  higher 

290

capacity  to  cold  acclimate  than  wild-type  plants,  provid-
ing  evidence  that  AtPP2CA  acts  as  a  negative  regulator  of 
Arabidopsis  response  to  low  temperature  (Tahtiharju  and 
Palva, 2001).

Other molecules involved in transducing the cold 
signal
Some  plant  hormones,  including  ABA,  polyamines,  gibberellic 
acid (GA), nitric oxide (NO), brassinosteroids (BR), and ethyl-
ene (ET), also act as intermediates in cold signaling (Figure 19.1).
ABA levels increase in plants exposed to low temperature 
and  exogenous  treatment  with  ABA  enhances  freezing  toler-
ance (Chen and Gusta, 1983; Lang et al., 1989). In Cicer ari-
etinum  and  wheat,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  increase  in 
freezing  tolerance  induced  by  exogenous  ABA  treatments  is 
mediated by changes in the composition of the plasma mem-
brane  (i.e.,  increasing  sterols,  unsaturated  fatty  acid,  etc.; 
Bakht  et al.,  2006).  Moreover,  ABA-deficient  and  insensi-
tive  mutants  have  a  decreased  capacity  to  cold  acclimate, 
indicating  that  ABA  is  essential  for  a  full  cold  acclimation 
(Heino et al., 1990; Gilmour and Thomashow, 1991; Llorente 
et al.,  2000).  Additionally,  ABA  is  implicated  in  the  consti-
tutive  tolerance  of  Arabidopsis  to  freezing  (Llorente  et al., 
2000).  Some  components  of  the  ABA-signaling  pathway 
have  also  been  involved  in  the  regulation  of  cold  response. 
ABI3,  a  transcriptional  activator  that  regulates  ABA-induced 
gene  expression  and  different  ABA-mediated  vegetative 
processes  in  Arabidopsis,  enhances  the  expression  of  cold-
inducible  genes  and  freezing  tolerance  (Tamminen  et al., 
2001).  An  ABA-hypersensitive  wheat  mutant,  aba27,  shows 
increased  constitutive  freezing  tolerance  and 
increased 
expression  of  ABA-responsive  genes  under  both  control  and 

Figure 19.1 l Schematic representation showing the role of plant 
hormones in low-temperature response. Brassinosteroids (BR), 
nitric oxide (NO), ethylene (ET), ABA, and polyamines act as positive 
regulators. Gibberellins (GA) act as negative regulators. Salicylic acid 
(SA) can act as a positive (cereals, banana) or negative (Arabidopsis) 
regulator. Arrowheads and end lines indicate positive and negative 
regulation, respectively. 

 

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

low-temperature  conditions  (Kobayashi  et al.,  2008a).  All  of 
these  results  manifest  a  complex  role  of  the  ABA-signaling 
pathway  in  low-temperature  response.  Recent  works  have 
reported the identification of ABA receptors (Ma et al., 2009; 
Park et al., 2009a), although their implication in cold response 
still remains to be determined.

Polyamines  accumulate  in  plants  under  low-temperature 
conditions  (Lee  et al.,  1995;  Shen  et al.,  2000;  Kim  et al., 
2002b;  Pillai  et al.,  2004;  Cuevas  et al.,  2008;  Kovacs  et al., 
2010). They are compounds that, because of their biochemi-
cal properties, are able to interact with macromolecules such 
as  DNA,  RNA,  proteins,  or  phospholipids,  regulating  their 
structure  and  function  (Galston  and  Sawhney,  1990).  Kim 
and colleagues (2002b) reported that cold exposure increases 
putrescine  accumulation  in  tomato  leaves.  This  increase 
seems  to  have  a  protective  role  and  is  negatively  controlled 
by ABA (Kim et al., 2002b). Hummel and colleagues (2004) 
described  that  cold  tolerance  of  Pringlea  antiscorbutica  is 
associated  with  polyamine  accumulation  and  maintenance. 
Furthermore, the over-expression of CaPF1, a gene encoding 
a pepper freezing-tolerance-related protein, in pine enhances 
freezing  tolerance  due  to  a  high  polyamine  accumulation 
(Tang  et al.,  2007).  Recently,  Cuevas  and  co-workers  (2008) 
obtained genetic evidence on the implication of polyamines in 
the regulation of cold acclimation by modulating ABA biosyn-
thesis  and  gene  expression.  They  characterized  the  freezing 
tolerance  of  two  mutants  defective  in  polyamine  biosynthe-
sis, adc1 and adc2, and found that both have a reduced abil-
ity to cold acclimate compared to wild-type. Low polyamine 
levels in adc1 and adc2 mutants correlate with low levels of 
cold-induced  ABA  accumulation  due  to  a  reduced  induction 
of  ABA-biosynthetic  genes  in  response  to  low  temperature, 
pointing out that polyamines positively regulate the accumula-
tion of ABA under low temperature (Cuevas et al., 2008).

The  over-expression  in  tobacco  of  GhDREB1,  a  cotton 
gene  encoding  a  transcription  factor,  increases  the  tolerance 
to low temperature, although growth and flowering time were 
delayed  (Shan  et al.,  2007).  GhDREB1  expression  in  cotton 
is  induced  by  low  temperature  but  inhibited  by  GA,  reveal-
ing  a  possible  implication  of  this  gene  in  the  regulation  of 
growth via GA (Shan et al., 2007). Recently, genetic evidence 
has  been  published  demonstrating  a  reduction  in  GA  func-
tion  when  plants  are  exposed  to  low  temperature  (Achard 
et al., 2008). It has been proposed that the reduction in plant 
growth is mainly due to an accumulation of DELLAs, a family 
of  proteins  that  acts  as  negative  regulators  of  GA-responsive 
plant  processes  (Achard  et al.,  2008).  Furthermore,  DELLA 
accumulation also seems to contribute to the enhanced freez-
ing tolerance that is mediated by CBF1 expression, although 
through  a  pathway  that  is  independent  of  the  CBF-regulon 
(Achard et al., 2008).

Results  revealing  an  important  role  for  NO  in  plant 
response to low temperature have also been described. In pea, 
low  temperature  has  been  reported  to  increase  the  activity 
of  NO  synthase  (NOS)  and  S-nitrosoglutathione  reductase 
(GSNOR), two enzymes involved in NO biosynthesis (Corpas 
et al.,  2008).  In  Arabidopsis,  NO  levels  increase  under  cold 
conditions  as  a  consequence  of  the  induction  of  nitrate 
reductase  (NR)  activity  (Zhao  et al.,  2009).  Furthermore, 

double mutants for NR1 and NR2 (nia1nia2), which are una-
ble  to  accumulate  NO  after  cold  exposure,  display  reduced 
cold acclimation capacity compared to wild-type plants (Zhao 
et al., 2009). Molecular analysis of nia1nia2 mutants revealed 
that  cold  induction  of  P5CS1  and  repression  of  ProDH, 
and  therefore  proline  accumulation,  is  much  lower  in  these 
plants than in wild-type ones, which would account for their 
decreased cold acclimation capability (Zhao et al., 2009).

Brassinosteroids  are  a  class  of  steroids  implicated  in  the 
control  of  a  broad  range  of  plant  responses  (Sasse,  2003). 
Results obtained in recent work support a possible role of BR 
in  cold  signaling.  Arabidopsis  and  Brassica  napus  seedlings 
treated with exogenous BR display increased tolerance to low 
temperature  that  is  dependent  on  changes  in  cold-induced 
gene  expression  (Kagale  et al.,  2007).  Xia  and  colleagues 
(2009)  found  that  BRs  also  positively  regulate  tolerance  to 
low  temperature  in  cucumber,  controlling  NADPH  oxidase 
activity and H2O2 accumulation.

Exposure  to  low  temperature  induces  ET  production 
in  species  such  as  bean  (Field,  1981),  tomato  (Ciardi  et al., 
1997),  or  winter  rye  (Yu  et al.,  2001).  Moreover,  exogenous 
ET  application  to  rhododendron  plants  increases  their  toler-
ance  to  freezing  (Harber  and  Fuchigami,  1989),  and  win-
ter rye plants exposed to cold show higher levels of ET that 
control  the  accumulation  of  antifreeze  proteins  in  leaves 
and  increase  plant  freezing  tolerance  (Yu  et al.,  2001). 
Constitutive  over-expression  in  tobacco  of  the  tomato  gene 
JERF3, which encodes a transcription factor related to ET sig-
naling, increases freezing tolerance by inducing the expression 
of  genes  encoding  antioxidant  enzymes  with  the  consequent 
reduction  of  ROS  (Wu  et al.,  2008).  In  addition,  antisense 
expression  in  tomato  and  tobacco  of  TERF2/LeERF2,  a 
tomato  gene  encoding  an  ET-inducible  transcription  factor, 
inhibits ET production and reduces freezing tolerance. In con-
trast, TERF2/LeERF2 over-expression in tobacco and tomato 
increases  freezing  tolerance  by  activating  cold-induced  gene 
expression  (Zhang  and  Huang,  2010).  As  described  previ-
ously, the implication of ET in cold signaling seems to be clear 
and very little is still known about the mechanisms that medi-
ate its function.

Substantial work has reported potential valuable effects of 
salicylic acid (SA) treatment on cold and/or freezing tolerance 
in cereals (Janda et al., 1999; Kang and Saltveit, 2002; Szalai 
et al.,  2000;  Tasgin  et al.,  2003;  Saltveit  and  Hepler,  2004), 
bean (Ding et al., 2002), cucumber (Kang and Saltveit, 2002), 
tomato  (Ding  et al.,  2002),  banana  (Kang  et al.,  2007),  and 
Persian  lilac  (Bernard  et al.,  2002).  The  role  of  SA  in  plant 
tolerance to low temperature appears to be related to differ-
ent  protective  responses,  such  as  the  increase  in  the  activity 
of antioxidant enzymes (Janda et al., 1999; Kang and Saltveit, 
2002)  and  the  enhancement  of  ice  nucleation  activity  in  the 
apoplast  (Tasgin  et al.,  2003).  In  contraposition  with  these 
data, recent results indicate that SA is a negative regulator of 
cold acclimation in Arabidopsis (Miura and Ohta, 2010). Two 
SA-accumulating  mutants,  siz1  and  acd6,  have  reduced  cold 
acclimation capacity and are more sensitive to chilling stress, 
mainly because of a lower expression of CBF3 and the corre-
sponding regulon (Miura and Ohta, 2010). The restoration of 
SA accumulation to wild-type levels suppresses the sensitivity 

291

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

of these mutants to chilling and freezing temperatures (Miura 
and Ohta, 2010).

Gene expression in response to low temperature
As mentioned previously, most changes induced by low tem-
perature  are  controlled  by  extensive  reprogramming  of  gene 
expression. Global analyses of gene expression in Arabidopsis 
have  revealed  that  about  1400  genes  are  regulated  by  low 
temperature (Matsui et al., 2008; Zeller et al., 2009). Among 
these  genes,  one-third  are  repressed,  with  only  one  gene 
encoding  a  transcription  factor,  which  denotes  that  gene 
expression  during  cold  acclimation  is  mainly  activated  (Lee 
et al.,  2005).  In  addition,  many  early  cold-induced  genes 
encode transcription factors or proteins involved in transcrip-
tion.  Thus,  more  than  100  genes  have  been  annotated  to 
function in transcription, 95 of them coding for transcription 
factors  (Lee  et al.,  2005).  Interestingly,  many  cold  inducible 
genes  are  also  induced  by  other  related  abiotic  stresses  such 
as  drought  or  high  salt  (Matsui  et al.,  2008).  The  use  of  til-
ing  array  technology  has  allowed  the  identification  of  new 
non-annotated transcriptional units, as well as a high number 
of  non-protein-coding  and  sense-antisense  transcripts  whose 
expression  is  also  controlled  by  low  temperature  (Matsui 
et al.,  2008).  Different  functions  for  antisense  RNAs  have 
been  described,  including  gene  silencing,  RNA  stability, 
alternative  splicing,  RNA  editing,  RNA  masking,  and  RNA 
methylation  (Matsui  et al.,  2008);  however,  the  role  of  non-
protein-coding transcripts is still poorly understood. Although 
the majority of the results reported so far have shown that the 
regulation  of  gene  expression  by  low  temperature  is  mainly 
controlled  at  the  transcriptional  level,  recent  data  manifest 
that post-transcriptional regulatory events are also relevant.

low-temperature 

response  element 

Transcriptional control of cold-regulated gene 
expression
One of the main goals when studying the transcriptional reg-
ulation  of  gene  expression  in  response  to  cold  has  been  the 
identification  of  the  cis  and  trans  elements  implicated.  To 
date, several cis-acting elements and transcription factors have 
been related to cold-regulated gene expression.
Cis-acting elements mediating cold-regulated gene 
expression
The  first 
(LTRE) 
described  in  plants  was  the  CRT/DRE  motif  (CCGAC).  It 
was  identified  in  the  promoter  regions  of  Arabidopsis  cold-
inducible  genes  COR15A  and  RD29A  (Baker  et al.,  1994; 
Yamaguchi-Shinozaki  and  Shinozaki,  1994),  and  has  also 
been  reported  in  rapeseed  (Jiang  et al.,  1996),  maize  (Wang 
et al.,  2008),  and  wheat  (Ouellet  et al.,  1998;  Takumi  et al., 
2008)  cold-inducible  genes.  In  addition,  a  similar  sequence 
(CCGAAA)  identified  in  the  promoter  region  of  the  bar-
ley  gene  blt4.9  functions  as  an  LTRE  (Dunn  et al.,  1998). 
Interestingly, the CRT/DRE element also mediates the induc-
tion  of  gene  expression  by  drought  and  ABA  (Baker  et al., 
1994;  Yamaguchi-Shinozaki  and  Shinozaki,  1994;  Knight 
et al.,  2004).  Deletion  analysis  in  the  promoter  of  the  bar-
ley  cold-inducible  gene  blt101.1  allowed  the  identifica-
tion  of  a  new  LTRE,  named  CR1,  which  is  also  included  in 

the promoters of other components of the blt101 gene fam-
ily  (Brown  et al.,  2001).  Different  cis-acting  elements  that 
account  for  the  cold-induction  of  CBFs  have  been  described 
(Chinnusamy  et al.,  2003;  Zarka  et al.,  2003;  Agarwal  et al., 
2006).  The  promoter  region  of  CBF3  contains  five  MYC-
recognition sequences, named MYC1-5, that seem to control 
the cold-induction of this gene (Chinnusamy et al., 2003). In 
contrast,  the  CBF3  promoter  also  includes  three  MYB  bind-
ing sites that are involved in the negative regulation of CBF3 
expression (Agarwal et al., 2006). Analysis of the CBF2 pro-
moter region revealed the existence of two sequences, ICEr1 
and ICEr2, which contain the consensus recognition sequence 
for  bHLH  proteins  and  could  control  the  low-temperature 
induction of CBF2 (Zarka et al., 2003). Moreover, the CBF2 
promoter also contains seven conserved DNA motifs, named 
CM1-7  (Doherty  et al.,  2009).  While  CM4  and  CM6  act  as 
negative  regulators,  CM2  seems  to  have  both  negative  and 
positive  activity  (Doherty  et al.,  2009).  CM2  overlaps  with 
the ICEr1 present in the CBF2 promoter, which can account 
for its role as a positive regulator (Doherty et al., 2009). CM 
motifs  have  also  been  detected  in  the  promoters  of  other 
early  cold-inducible  genes,  including  ZAT12  that  encodes  a 
transcription factor, indicating that they play a relevant role in 
the control of early-induced gene expression by low tempera-
ture (Doherty et al., 2009).

Bioinformatic  analysis  of  the  promoters  of  cold-induced 
genes  unveiled  an  enrichment  of  evening  elements  (EEL; 
Mikkelsen  and  Thomashow,  2009),  which  were  previously 
related  to  the  regulation  of  gene  expression  by  the  circadian 
clock  (Harmer  et al.,  2000).  Mikkelsen  and  Thomashow 
(2009) showed that the EEL motif mediates the cold induc-
tion  of  COL1  and  COR27,  confirming  its  role  in  cold  sig-
naling.  The  RSRE  box  (rapid  stress  response  element, 
CGCGTT)  was  identified  because  of  its  elevated  presence 
in the promoter regions of Arabidopsis genes rapidly induced 
by  wounding  (Walley  et al.,  2007).  Intriguingly,  around  49% 
of these genes are also cold induced, suggesting a hypothetical 
role  for  the  RSRE  box  in  low-temperature  response.  A  syn-
thetic promoter including six copies of RSRE is able to induce 
the expression of a reporter gene under cold conditions, dem-
onstrating  that  it  is  an  LTRE  (Walley  et al.,  2007).  The  fact 
that  some  LTREs  identified  so  far  are  also  implicated  in  the 
response  to  other  stimuli,  such  as  light  (EEL)  or  wounding 
(RSRE), points out the importance for plants, as sessile organ-
isms, to integrate different environmental cues to adequately 
respond to variations in growth conditions.

Trans-acting elements mediating cold-regulated gene 
expression
CBF1, also known as DREB1B, was the first trans-acting fac-
tor involved in cold signaling to be identified due to its abil-
ity to interact with the CRT/DRE motif (Baker et al., 1994; 
Yamaguchi-Shinozaki  and  Shinozaki,  1994).  It  is  a  24 kDa 
protein  with  an  AP2  DNA  binding  domain  and  an  acidic 
C-terminal  region  that  acts  as  a  transcriptional  activator 
(Stockinger  et al.,  1997).  Subsequently,  it  was  reported  that 
CBF1 belongs to a small family composed of two more pro-
teins,  CBF2/DREB1C  and  CBF3/DREB1A  (Gilmour  et al., 
1998;  Liu  et al.,  1998;  Medina  et al.,  1999).  The  expression 

292

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

of CBF genes is specifically induced by cold in a fast and tran-
sient  way  (Gilmour  et al.,  1998;  Liu  et al.,  1998;  Medina 
et al., 1999). The CBF proteins seem to regulate the expres-
sion of around 12% of the Arabidopsis cold-induced genes and 
its  over-expression  significantly  increases  Arabidopsis  freez-
ing  tolerance  (Fowler  and  Thomashow,  2002).  Furthermore, 
plants  over-expressing  CBF3  show  metabolic  changes  associ-
ated  with  cold  acclimation,  such  as  an  increment  in  the  lev-
els  of  proline  and  different  soluble  sugars  (Gilmour  et al., 
2000). Recently, Novillo and co-workers (2004) reported that 
the  absence  of  CBF2  enhances  the  tolerance  of  Arabidopsis 
to  freezing  temperatures,  before  and  after  cold  acclima-
tion, drought, and salt stress. This phenotype correlates with 
a  higher  accumulation  of  CBF1  and  CBF3  transcripts,  and 
consequently  with  the  activation  of  the  CBF-regulon,  both 
under control conditions and after low-temperature exposure 
(Novillo  et al.,  2004).  These  results  are  evidence  that  CBF2 
negatively controls the expression of CBF1 and CBF3, ensur-
ing an accurate regulation of the CBF-regulon and, therefore, 
of Arabidopsis  response  to  cold  stress  (Figure  19.2).  On  the 
other  hand,  the  characterization  of  Arabidopsis  plants  with 
reduced  induction  of  CBF1  or  CBF3  by  low  temperature 
revealed  that,  contrary  to  CBF2,  CBF1  and  CBF3  are  not 
implicated  in  regulating  the  expression  of  other  CBF  genes, 
confirming that the three CBFs do not have the same function 
(Novillo  et al.,  2007).  Moreover,  data  showed  that  although 
CBF1 and CBF3 seem to positively control the cold-induction 
of  the  same  target  genes,  they  are  concertedly  required  to 
induce  the  whole  CBF-regulon  and,  therefore,  the  complete 
development  of  the  cold  acclimation  process  in  Arabidopsis 
(Novillo et al., 2007).

ICE1  is  an  Arabidopsis  MYC-like  bLHL  transcriptional 
activator  that  induces  CBF3  expression  under  low-temper-
ature  conditions  by  interacting  with  the  MYC  sequences 
present  in  the  CBF3  promoter  (as  previously  mentioned; 
Figure  19.2)  (Chinnusamy  et al.,  2003).  ice1  mutant  plants 
show  an  altered  induction  of  CBF3  and  of  CBF-target  genes 
and  reduced  freezing  tolerance  when  compared  to  wild- 
type  (Chinnusamy  et al.,  2003).  Lee  and  colleagues  (2005) 
reported that ICE1 controls the expression of around 40% of 
cold-regulated  genes.  Unexpectedly,  ICE1  expression  is  not 
cold  induced,  indicating  that  it  should  be  activated  by  post-
transcriptional mechanisms (see the next paragraph). Fursova 
and co-workers (2009) described another Arabidopsis positive 
trans-acting  regulator,  ICE2,  with  high  sequence  homology 
to  ICE1  that  is  also  related  to  cold  acclimation.  ICE2  over-
expression enhances CBF1 expression and Arabidopsis freez-
ing tolerance (Figure 19.2; Fursova et al., 2009). However, its 
ability to bind to the ICE box has not been analyzed yet.

In  addition  to  ICE1  and  ICE2,  CAMTA3  is  another  tran-
scription  factor  that  positively  controls  CBF  expression  by 
low temperature (Figure 19.2; Doherty et al., 2009). CAMTA 
proteins  are  calmodulin-binding  transcriptional  activators 
that  bind  to  the  CM2  motif  (CCGCGT)  in  the  CBF2  pro-
moter inducing its expression under cold conditions (Doherty 
et al., 2009). camta3 null mutants show reduced cold induc-
tion  of  CBF1,  CBF2,  and  some  CBF-target  genes,  although 
they  are  not  affected  in  their  capacity  to  cold  acclimate. 
camta1/camta3  double  mutant,  however,  has  reduced  cold 

Figure 19.2 l CBFs constitute central intermediates in cold signaling 
to induce gene expression. ICE1, ICE2, and CAMTA3 positively 
regulate CBF expression. MYB15 and ZAT12 act as negative 
regulators of CBFs. CBF2 negatively regulates the expression of 
CBF1 and CBF3. ICE1 inhibits MYB15 expression. Broken arrow 
means activation by unknown mechanisms. Arrowheads and end 
lines indicate positive and negative regulation, respectively. 

acclimation  capacity,  demonstrating  that  both  CAMTA1  and 
CAMTA3  are  required  for  full  development  of  this  adaptive 
process (Doherty et al., 2009).

Analysis  of  data  obtained  from  microarray  experiments  in 
Arabidopsis revealed that some genes have similar expression 
patterns  under  cold  conditions  like  the  CBFs,  denoting  that 
they could be coordinately regulated (Vogel e al., 2005). One 
of  these  genes  is  ZAT12,  whose  expression  is  activated  after 
1  hour  of  cold  exposure  and  encodes  a  zinc-finger  protein 
(Vogel et al., 2005). Over-expression of ZAT12 in Arabidopsis 
enhances  the  induction  of  24  cold-induced  genes,  some  of 
them  CBF-targets,  and  produces  a  slight  increase  in  consti-
tutive  freezing  tolerance  (Vogel  et al.,  2005).  Interestingly, 
ZAT12 negatively controls the cold induction of CBFs (Figure 
19.2; Vogel et al., 2005). The mechanism with which ZAT12 
regulates gene expression still remains unknown.

HOS9 is a homeodomain transcription factor that has also 
been  implicated  in  activating  gene  expression  during  cold 
acclimation  (Zhu  et al.,  2004).  hos9  mutant  plants  display 
reduced  freezing  tolerance,  both  before  and  after  cold  accli-
mation  (Zhu  et al.,  2004).  Intriguingly,  whereas  the  cold-
induction of CBFs in hos9 mutants is as in the wild-type, the 
cold-induction of some CBF-target genes is higher, providing 
evidence  that  HOS9  controls  the  cold  acclimation  process 
by  ensuring  a  proper  cold-inducible  gene  expression  through 
CBF-independent  pathways  (Zhu  et al.,  2004).  The  identi-
fication  and  characterization  of  Arabidopsis  lov1-4  mutant 
allowed the isolation of an NAC-domain transcription factor, 

293

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

LOV1,  which  mediates  the  activation  of  gene  expression  in 
response  to  low  temperature  by  a  CBF-independent  path-
way  (Yoo  et al.,  2007).  lov1-4  null  mutant  is  hypersensitive 
to  freezing  temperatures  and  has  a  reduced  cold  acclimation 
capacity, confirming that LOV1 is a positive regulator of freez-
ing  tolerance  and  cold  acclimation  (Yoo  et al.,  2007).  lov1-4 
shows reduced cold induction of CBF-target genes when com-
pared to wild-type plants, but the cold induction of CBFs is 
not affected, which demonstrates that LOV1 function is CBF-
independent  (Yoo  et al.,  2007).  Although  the  implication  of 
HOS9 and LOV1 in cold signaling is clear, the DNA motifs to 
which they bind to remain to be determined.

Several  cold-inducible  genes,  including  some  CBF  targets, 
contain in their promoters an ABA-responsive element (ABRE, 
PyACGTGCC; Guiltinan et al., 1990) that might control cold-
induced CBF-independent gene expression (Baker et al., 1994; 
Yamaguchi-Shinozaki  and  Shinozaki,  1994;  Wang  and  Cutler, 
1995). SCOF1 is a gene whose expression is induced by cold 
and  ABA,  and  its  over-expression  in  Arabidopsis  provokes 
constitutive  expression  of  cold-induced  genes  and  increased 
tolerance  to  freezing  temperature  (Kim  et al.,  2001).  SCOF1 
encodes  a  zinc  finger  protein  that  enhances  the  binding  of 
SGB1,  a  bZIP  transcription  factor,  to  the  ABRE  motif  (Kim 
et al.,  2001),  indicating  that  it  is  a  positive  regulator  of  cold 
acclimation through the ABRE-dependent pathway.

LOS2  constitutes  a  very  interesting  trans-acting  element 
involved  in  the  regulation  of  cold-induced  gene  expression. 
The  Arabidopsis  mutant  los2  displays  impaired  cold  induc-
tion  of  RD29A  and  other  cold-inducible  genes,  and  reduced 
cold  acclimation  capacity  (Lee  et al.,  2002).  However,  the 
cold  induction  of  CBFs  is  as  in  the  wild-type.  LOS2  codes 
for an enolase that also seems to have a function in transcrip-
tional repression (Lee et al., 2002). It can bind to the c-MYC 
cis-element  in  the  promoter  of  STZ/ZAT10,  an  Arabidopsis 
cold-inducible  gene  that  encodes  a  transcriptional  repressor 
(Lee et al., 2002). STZ/ZAT10 is able to bind to the RD29A 
promoter  to  repress  its  transcription  in  transient  expres-
sion  analysis  (Lee  et al.,  2002).  The  cold  induction  of  STZ/
ZAT10 is increased in los2 mutant plants, accounting for the 
reduced induction of RD29A by low temperature. Therefore, 
in response to low temperature, LOS2 would bind to the pro-
moter of STZ/ZAT10 to induce its expression, which in turn 
would repress the cold induction of genes such as RD29A.

Recent  data  have  established  that  MYB15,  a  R2R3-MYB 
transcription  factor  that  binds  to  the  MYB  recognition  sites 
in the promoters of the three CBFs, acts as negative regulator 
of CBF expression (Figure 19.2; Agarwal et al., 2006). myb15 
mutant plants show enhanced induction of CBFs and their tar-
gets under low-temperature conditions, and increased capacity 
to cold acclimate. On the other hand, transgenic Arabidopsis 
over-expressing  MYB15  display  reduced  cold  induction  of 
CBFs  and  impaired  freezing  tolerance  (Agarwal  et al.,  2006). 
MYB15  expression  is  induced  by  cold  and  negatively  regu-
lated  by  ICE1  (Agarwal  et al.,  2006).  Interestingly,  it  has 
been  shown  that  MYB15  can  physically  interact  with  ICE1, 
although  the  function  of  this  interaction  has  not  been  deter-
mined  (Agarwal  et al.,  2006).  RAP2.1  is  another  trans-acting 
factor  that  negatively  controls  cold-regulated  gene  expression 
in  Arabidopsis  (Dong  and  Liu,  2010).  The  expression  of 

RAP2.1 is induced by cold through an ABA-independent path-
way  (Dong  and  Liu,  2010).  RAP2.1  has  an  AP2  domain  that 
binds to the CRT/DRE domain, an ERF-associated amphiphilic 
repression (EAR) motif, and represses the induction of several 
cold-induced  genes,  including  itself,  by  binding  to  the  CRT/
DRE motifs present in their promoters (Dong and Liu, 2010). 
The  function  of  RAP2.1  in  cold  acclimation,  if  any,  needs  to 
be  determined.  Finally,  MYBC1  encodes  an  Arabidopsis 
nuclear  R3-MYB  protein  that  negatively  controls  the  consti-
tutive  freezing  tolerance  and  the  cold  induction  of  the  CBFs 
and  their  targets  (Zhai  et al.,  2010).  Interestingly,  however, 
the  induction  of  MYBC1  by  low  temperature  seems  to  be 
CBF-independent, supporting the idea that MYBC1 negatively 
regulates freezing tolerance through a CBF-independent path-
way (Zhai et al., 2010). As in the case of RAP2.1, the role of 
MYBC1 in cold acclimation is still unknown.

In  addition  to  the  Arabidopsis  trans-acting  regulators  just 
mentioned,  some  other  factors  have  been  described  in  dif-
ferent plant species that control gene expression in response 
to  low  temperature.  Thus,  the  over-expression  of  three  soy-
bean  genes  encoding  bZIP  transcription  factors  (GmbZIP44, 
GmbZIP62, and GmbZIP78) in Arabidopsis increases freezing 
tolerance through the activation of ABA-induced gene expres-
sion  (Liao  et al.,  2008).  In  rice,  OsMYB4  encodes  an  MYB 
transcription  factor  and  its  expression  is  induced  under  cold 
conditions  (Vannini  et al.,  2004).  Constitutive  expression  of 
OsMYB4 in Arabidopsis increases cold and freezing tolerance 
by  inducing  cold-regulated  gene  expression  (Vannini  et al., 
2004).  Also  in  rice,  SNAC2,  a  gene  encoding  an  NAC-type 
transcription factor, is cold induced and its over-expression in 
rice increases plant tolerance to cold stress (Hu et al., 2008). 
WABI5  is  a  cold-induced  wheat  gene  encoding  an  AREB/
ABF-type  transcription  factor  that  increases  freezing  toler-
ance  when  constitutively  expressed  in  tobacco  (Kobayashi 
et al., 2008b). Recently, Liu and co-workers (2005) reported 
the identification of an LOS2 homolog in Capsella bursapas-
toris, named CbLOS2, that has the enolase domain as well as 
the DNA-binding and repression domains. Similarly to LOS2, 
CbLOS2 expression is induced by low temperature and seems 
to  play  a  role  in  the  cold  acclimation  process  (Liu  et al., 
2005).  In  tomato,  transcription  factors  JERF3  and  TERF2/
LeERF2  (as  previously  mentioned)  are  also  implicated  in 
increasing  freezing  tolerance  by  activating  cold-induced  gene 
expression (Zhang and Huang, 2010). Finally, CBF homologs 
have  been  found  in  different  species,  including  dicots  (Xue, 
2003; Zhang et al., 2004; Benedict et al., 2006; Huang et al., 
2007;  Pennycooke  et al.,  2008a,b;  Welling  and  Palva  et al., 
2008) and moncots (Dubouzet et al., 2003; Qin et al., 2004; 
Pellegrineschi  et al.,  2004;  Brautigam  et al.,  2005;  Skinner 
et al.,  2005;  Vagujfalvi  et al.,  2005;  Xiong  and  Fei,  2006; 
James et al., 2008; Zhao and Bughrara, 2008). The functional 
characterization of some of these homologs revealed that they 
function like the Arabidopsis factors. Overexpression of CBF 
homologs  from  rice,  perennial  ryegrass,  maize,  barley,  and 
wheat  in  transgenic  tobacco  or  Arabidopsis  plants  resulted 
in  increased  freezing  tolerance  and  expression  of  cold-regu-
lated  genes  belonging  to  the  CBF-regulon  (Qin  et al.,  2004; 
Pellegrineschi  et al.,  2004;  Brautigam  et al.,  2005;  Vagujfalvi 
et al., 2005; James et al., 2008).

294

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

All  of  the  results  described  earlier  confirm  the  require-
ment  for  an  accurate  regulation  of  gene  expression  for  the 
development of a correct plant response to low temperature, 
including the cold acclimation process, where, in addition to 
the activation of gene expression, the repression also plays an 
essential role.

Post-transcriptional control of cold-regulated gene 
expression
Data  reveal  that,  in  addition  to  the  transcriptional  regula-
tion, controlling mRNA stability and translation are also piv-
otal for an accurate cold response. The accumulation of some 
transcripts  during  cold  acclimation  seems  to  be  regulated  at 
the  post-transcriptional  level  (Hajela  et al.,  1990;  Wolfraim 
et al.,  1993;  Dunn  et al.,  1994).  Using  pharmacological 
approaches,  Phillips  and  colleagues  (1997)  showed  that  an 
unknown  nuclear  protein  actively  stabilizes  transcripts  cor-
responding to blt4.0, a cold-induced barley gene. In the case 
of  the  Arabidopsis  TCH4  gene,  cold  induction  is  mediated 
by  a  102  bp  5-untranscribed  region  that  seems  to  partici-
pate in the stabilization of TCH4 mRNAs (Iliev et al., 2002). 
On  the  other  hand,  Xiong  and  colleagues  (2002a)  identified 
an  Arabidopsis  gene,  FRY2,  which  encodes  a  protein  similar 
to  animal  and  yeast  factors  involved  in  transcription  regula-
tion and pre-mRNA processing. Recessive mutations in FRY2 
cause  the  superinduction  of  CBF-target  genes  by  cold,  indi-
cating that FRY2 is a negative regulator of cold-induced gene 
expression (Xiong et al., 2002a). In contrast, fry2 mutants are 
more sensitive to freezing temperatures than wild-type plants. 
Taking into consideration the RNA binding domain of FRY2, 
Xiong  and  colleagues  (2002a)  proposed  that  it  could  act  as 
an  RNA  chaperone  under  low-temperature  conditions.  The 
glycine-rich RNA-binding proteins (GR-RBPs) have also been 
proposed to act as RNA chaperones in plants. In this regard, 
it has been described that the expression of several GR-RBP 
genes  is  induced  by  different  abiotic  stresses,  including  cold 
(Sachetto-Martins  et al.,  2000).  Functional  characterization 
of  one  Arabidopsis  GR-RBP,  the  AtRZ-1,  provided  interest-
ing  data  about  the  role  of  these  proteins  in  cold  acclimation 
(Kim et al., 2005). atRZ-1 mutants are more sensitive to low 
and  freezing  temperatures,  whereas  AtRZ-1  over-expressing 
plants  are  more  tolerant  to  these  stresses  (Kim  et al.,  2005). 
On the basis of these results, Kim and colleagues (2005) con-
cluded that AtRZ-1 might have RNA chaperone activity leading 
to  the  destabilization  of  the  overstabilized  secondary  struc-
tures, facilitating an efficient translation under low-temperature 
conditions.  GR-RBPs  genes  regulated  by  cold  have  also  been 
described  in  other  species.  Shinozuka  and  co-workers  (2006) 
reported the isolation of a GR-RBP gene from ryegrass whose 
expression is induced after low-temperature exposure, suggest-
ing  a  role  in  the  cold  response.  Park  and  colleagues  (2009b) 
reported the identification of OsDEG10, a GR-RBP gene from 
rice  whose  expression  is  induced  by  different  abiotic  stresses, 
including  cold.  Interestingly,  rice  OsDEG10  RNAi  transgenic 
plants  showed  a  reduction  in  their  tolerance  to  low  tempera-
ture  compared  to  wild-type  plants  (Park  et al.,  2009b).  STA1 
is  another  Arabidopsis  protein  related  to  pre-mRNA  process-
ing and cold signaling. STA1 is similar to the human U5 small 
ribonucleoprotein-associated 102 kDa protein and to the yeast 

pre-mRNA  splicing  factors  Prp1p  and  Prp6p,  whose  cor-
responding  genes,  as  STA1,  are  induced  by  low  temperature 
(Lee  et al.,  2006).  Mutations  in  STA1  increase  Arabidopsis 
chilling sensitivity, although they do not seem to affect cold-
induced  gene  expression.  The  stability  of  some  mRNAs  and 
the splicing of the cold-induced gene COR15A are altered in 
sta1-1  mutants,  providing  evidence  that  these  processes  are 
important  in  low-temperature  signaling  (Lee  et al.,  2006). 
Further  data  demonstrating  the  implication  of  alternative 
splicing  in  plant  response  to  cold  stress  have  recently  been 
reported.  The  isolation  and  characterization  of  a  DREB2 
homolog  in  wheat,  Wdreb2,  showed  that  three  transcript 
forms,  Wdreb2α,  Wdreb2β,  and  Wdreb2γ,  are  produced  by 
alternative splicing (Egawa et al., 2006). Wdreb2 expression is 
induced by drought, salt, ABA, and cold. Under drought and 
salt stress conditions only an increase in the accumulation of 
Wdreb2α  and  Wdreb2γ  transcripts  is  observed.  In  contrast, 
when  plants  are  exposed  to  low  temperature  the  levels  of 
all  transcript  forms  are  significantly  enhanced  (Egawa  et al., 
2006).

The control of mRNA export to the cytoplasm also seems 
to  be  influential  in  cold  response.  Thus,  the  implication  of 
the Arabidopsis nucleoporin AtNUP160 in cold signaling has 
been described (Dong et al., 2006a). This protein is involved 
in  mRNA  export  since  a  null  mutation  in  the  correspond-
ing  gene  causes  mRNA  accumulation  in  the  nucleus  (Dong 
et al.,  2006a).  Furthermore,  the  atnup160-1  mutant  shows 
a  reduced  tolerance  to  chilling  and  freezing  temperatures, 
probably  due  to  a  decrease  in  the  induction  of  several  cold-
responsive  genes,  including  the  CBFs  (Dong  et al.,  2006a). 
LOS4,  a  DEAD-box  RNA  helicase,  has  also  been  implicated 
in cold acclimation (Gong et al., 2005). los4 mutants display 
enhanced  cold-induction  of  CBF  genes  under  low-tempera-
ture conditions, and are more sensitive to freezing than wild-
type plants (Gong et al., 2005). As in the case of AtNUP160, 
in  situ  poly(A)  hybridizations  revealed  that  LOS4  is  needed 
for  a  correct  partition  of  mRNAs  in  the  cell  (Gong  et al., 
2005).  Taken  together,  all  of  these  results  provide  a  new 
scenario  on  the  regulation  of  gene  expression  during  cold 
acclimation,  where  mRNA  stability  and  processing,  as  well 
as  mobilization,  seem  to  be  as  important  as  transcriptional 
activation.

MicroRNAs  (miRNAs)  are  small  non-coding  RNAs  that 
have  emerged  as  important  regulators  of  gene  expression  in 
a  multitude  of  plant  processes.  Cold-induced  miRNAs  have 
been  identified  by  different  laboratories.  Thus,  Sunkar  and 
Zhu (2004) reported that the expression of miR393, miR319, 
and  miR402  is  induced  at  different  levels  in  Arabidopsis 
plants  exposed  to  4°C.  Moreover,  recent  works  have 
described additional miRNAs whose expression is induced by 
low temperature (Zhou et al., 2008; Jian et al., 2010). In any 
case, the role of these miRNAs in cold signaling still remains 
to be deciphered.

Translational and post-translational control of  
cold-regulated gene expression
Cold-regulated  gene  expression  is  also  subjected  to  transla-
tional  control,  indicating  that  protein  synthesis  is  essential 
for an adequate response to low temperature in plants. Thus, 

295

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

the  translation  elongation  factor-2-like  protein,  LOS1,  has 
been  shown  to  be  a  positive  regulator  of  cold-induced  gene 
expression and cold acclimation (Guo et al., 2002). The los1-
1 mutant displays reduced cold acclimation capacity due to a 
reduced  cold  induction  of  the  CBF-target  genes  (Guo  et al., 
2002). The induction of the CBFs by low temperature, how-
ever, is higher in los1-1 than in wild-type plants (Guo et al., 
2002).  Synthesis  of  new  proteins  under  cold  conditions 
is  severely  impaired  in  los1-1,  which  may  account  for  the 
decrease in cold-induced gene expression (Guo et al., 2002). 
These  results  suggest  that  the  expression  of  CBFs  is  inde-
pendent of new protein synthesis, since they are overinduced 
in los1-1 mutants growing under low-temperature conditions; 
therefore,  it  is  subjected  to  feedback  regulation  (Guo  et al., 
2002). Another protein that might also have a role in protein 
synthesis under stress conditions is the pea DNA helicase 47 
(PDH47). PDH47 expression is induced by cold in shoots and 
roots  of  the  pea  (Vashisht  et al.,  2005).  Biochemical  analysis 
of purified PDH47 protein revealed that it has helicase activ-
ity, both 3 to 5 and 5 to 3, and promotes protein synthesis 
in vitro. PDH47 is localized into the nucleus and its activity 
seems  to  be  regulated  by  phosphorylation  events  (Vashisht 
et al., 2005). Further genetic analysis of this protein will help 
to figure out the function of DNA metabolism in the regula-
tion of plant response to temperature stress.

Protein  stability  has  also  been  revealed  to  have  important 
implications  in  the  control  of  cold-regulated  gene  expres-
sion. In Arabidopsis, Ishitani and colleagues (1998) identified 
HOS1, a negative regulator of the CBF-regulon that contains 
a  RING  finger  domain  characteristic  of  some  E3  ubiquitin 
ligases. In agreement with its role as negative regulator, HOS1 
expression is transiently inhibited by cold treatment (Ishitani 
et al.,  1998).  Although  HOS1  negatively  regulates  cold-
induced  gene  expression,  hos1-1  mutants  are  chilling-  and 
freezing-sensitive  when  compared  to  wild-type  plants,  indi-
cating  that  accurate  expression  of  HOS1  is  essential  for  the 
correct  response  to  low  temperature  (Ishitani  et al.,  1998). 
Subsequently,  it  was  demonstrated  that  HOS1  has  E3  ubiq-
uitin ligase activity and polyubiquitinates ICE1 (see previous 
discussion)  mediating  its  inactivation  and,  therefore,  inhibit-
ing  the  cold-induction  of  CBF3  and  the  CBF-regulon  (Dong 
et al., 2006b). AtCHIP also encodes an Arabidopsis E3 ubiq-
uitin  ligase  and  its  expression  is  cold  induced  (Yan  et al., 
2003).  When  over-expressed  in  Arabidopsis,  it  increases  the 
sensitivity to freezing temperature denoting that AtCHIP is a 
negative regulator of freezing tolerance (Yan et al., 2003). The 
A subunit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) has been identi-
fied as one of the AtCHIP substrates (Luo et al., 2006). PP2A 
is  a  negative  regulator  of  the  sucrose  synthase  (SUS)  and, 
therefore, of sugar biosynthesis, which has an important role 
in  chilling  and  freezing  tolerance.  AtCHIP-over-expressing 
plants show an increased PP2A activity under cold conditions 
that could account for the freezing sensitivity of these plants 
(Luo  et al.,  2006).  AtCHIP  seems  to  monoubiquitinate  the 
A subunit of PP2A, increasing its phosphatase activity, which 
would, in turn, decrease freezing tolerance (Luo e al., 2006). 
A different proteolysis pathway is controlled by the cysteine 
proteases,  whose  activity  is  inhibited  by  cysteine  protease 
inhibitors (cystatins). The characterization of two Arabidopsis 

cystatins,  AtCYSa  and  AtCYSb,  revealed  that  they  play  a 
role  in  cold  tolerance  (Zhang  et al.,  2008a).  AtCYSa  and 
AtCYSb genes are induced under low-temperature conditions 
and  constitutively  expressed  in  CBF3  overexpressing  plants, 
which suggests that they are induced by cold through a CBF-
dependent  pathway  (Zhang  et al.,  2008a).  Accordingly,  the 
promoter region of both genes contains a CRT/DRE element 
(Zhang  et al.,  2008a).  Transgenic  Arabidopsis  overexpressing 
AtCYSa or AtCYSb have increased tolerance to low tempera-
ture, confirming that the corresponding cystatins have a func-
tion in cold signaling (Zhang et al., 2008a).

SUMOylation 

is  another  post-translational  modifica-
tion  involved  in  protein  stability  and  activity.  SUMOylation, 
as  ubiquitination,  requires  the  sequential  action  of  three 
enzymes,  E1,  E2,  and  E3  (Kurepa  et al.,  2003;  Colby  et al., 
2006).  The  Arabidopsis  genome  only  contains  one  gene, 
SIZ1,  that  has  homology  with  genes  encoding  E3  SUMO 
ligases (Miura et al., 2007). SIZ1 expression is not induced by 
cold, although mutations in SIZ1 decrease Arabidopsis toler-
ance  to  freezing  and  chilling  temperatures,  indicating  that 
SUMOylation  also  plays  an  important  role  in  plant  response 
to  low  temperature  (Miura  et al.,  2007).  SIZ1  catalyzes  the 
SUMOylation  of  ICE1,  impeding  its  ubiquitination  (as  pre-
viously  mentioned)  and,  therefore,  the  repression  of  CBF3 
(Miura et al., 2007). Furthermore, the SUMOylation of ICE1 
inhibits the expression of MYB15, a negative regulator of CBF 
expression (previously mentioned; Miura et al., 2007). It has 
been  proposed  that,  most  probably,  SUMOylation  of  ICE1 
would  induce  its  stabilization  (Miura  et al.,  2007).  A  hypo-
thetical  model  that  would  integrate  HOS1,  SIZ1,  and  ICE1 
activities in the regulation of cold acclimation is presented in 
Figure  19.3.  In  this  model,  under  control  conditions,  HOS1 
would  be  targeting  ICE1  for  its  degradation  by  the  proteas-
ome, maintaining low levels of protein. Temperature decrease 
would  activate  SIZ1,  by  still  unknown  pathways,  and  would 
inhibit  HOS1  expression.  SIZ1  activation  would  induce  the 
SUMOylation  of  ICE1  and,  together  with  the  reduction  of 
HOS1  expression,  would  produce  a  decrease  in  its  ubiquiti-
nation levels. The increase in ICE1 accumulation would then 
induce  the  expression  of  the  CBFs,  directly  by  its  interac-
tion  with  their  promoters,  and  indirectly  by  the  repression 
of  MYB15  and,  therefore,  of  the  CBF-regulon  and  the  cold 
acclimation process. Results obtained by Chaikam and Karlson 
(2010)  showed  that  the  SUMO  pathway  could  also  contrib-
ute to the cold response in rice. Exposure of rice plants to low 
temperature  induces  an  accumulation  of  SUMO-conjugates 
(Chaikam  and  Karlson,  2010).  Although  the  expression  of 
the  genes  encoding  SUMO  protein  and  SUMO  activating 
enzymes is repressed at 4°C, the expression of the conjugat-
ing enzymes and the SUMO ligase is activated (Chaikam and 
Karlson, 2010).

Epigenetic regulation of low-temperature 
response
Histone  acetylation  mediated  by  histone  acetyltransferases 
(HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDAC) has also been impli-
cated in low-temperature signaling. Several reports have con-
nected  HATs  with  transcriptional  regulation  by  remodeling 

296

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

more  sensitive  to  freezing  temperature  than  wild  types  and 
have  reduced  capacity  to  cold  acclimate  (Zhu  et al.,  2008). 
All of these results indicate that the levels of histone acetyla-
tion  are  regulated  to  ensure  the  adequate  reprogramming  of 
gene  expression  required  for  the  accurate  plant  response  to 
low temperature, including the full development of the cold 
acclimation process.

Sokol and co-workers (2007) reported a nucleosomal analy-
sis  in  cells  of  tobacco  and  Arabidopsis  under  different  abi-
otic  stress  conditions.  After  cold  exposure,  they  observed  a 
transient  increase  in  the  phosphorylation  levels  of  histone 
H3-Ser10, followed by the upregulation of the phosphoacetyla-
tion  of  histone  H3  and  the  acetylation  of  histone  H4.  All  of 
these changes correlated with the induction of stress-regulated 
genes, denoting a possible role of the nucleosome in the regula-
tion of cold-induced gene expression (Sokol et al., 2007). On 
the  other  hand,  HMGB  is  a  family  of  proteins  implicated  in 
nucleosome assembly, replication, and transcription that could 
also have a function in cold signaling. In this way, the expres-
sion of Arabidopsis HMGB2, HMGB3, and HMGB4 genes is 
induced by low temperature (Kwak et al., 2007).

Methylation is another mechanism linked to histone modi-
fication and transcriptional regulation that is involved in plant 
response  to  low  temperature.  Kwon  and  colleagues  (2009) 
reported that cold exposure gradually decreases the trimeth-
ylation  levels  of  histone  H3  (H3K27me3)  in  the  promoter 
region  of  the  cold-induced  genes  COR15A  and  AtGOLS2. 
Interestingly,  in  plants  returned  to  control  temperature  the 
expression  of  these  genes  decreases  to  unstimulated  lev-
els,  but  HE3K27me3  still  remains  low.  It  was  proposed  that 
reduction  of  HE3K27me3  after  exposure  to  low  tempera-
ture could be a mark of recent transcriptional activity (Kwon 
et al., 2009). In tobacco, it has been reported that the levels 
of DNA methylation in the cold-inducible gene NtGPDL are 
reduced  when  plants  are  exposed  to  cold  (Choi  and  Sano, 
2007).  Moreover,  the  reduction  in  methylation  levels  corre-
lates  with  the  induction  of  NtGPDL  expression  (Choi  and 
Sano,  2007).  In  the  same  way,  global  methylation  analysis 
in  the  maize  genome  revealed  a  general  demethylation  after 
low-temperature exposure (Steward et al., 2002). The analy-
sis  of  a  DNA  fragment  named  ZmMI1,  which  includes  the 
coding  region  of  a  putative  protein  and  a  retrotransposon- 
like  sequence,  showed  that  cold  demethylation  is  followed 
by  transcriptional  activation.  This  suggests  that  methylation 
levels  may  serve  to  coordinate  the  cold  induction  of  several 
stress-inducible genes (Steward et al., 2002).

Cross-talk between Plant Responses 
to Extreme Temperatures

Cold and heat stress responses have been extensively studied 
in plants as independent processes, but little is known about 
their  connections  and  interactions.  Strikingly,  heat  shock 
seems  to  improve  chilling  tolerance  in  cold-sensitive  species 
(Saltveit  and  Hepler,  2004;  Pressman  et al.,  2006)  and  vice 
versa,  plants  exposed  to  low  temperature  develop  heat  tol-
erance  (Fu  et al.,  1998),  which  indicates  the  existence  of  a 
cross-talk between plant responses to extreme temperatures.

297

Figure 19.3 l Hypothetical model for post-translational regulation of 
CBF3 expression. Ubiquitin (U) and SUMO (S). From Medina et al. 
(2010). 

repressive  chromatin  structures  (Sterner  and  Berger,  2000; 
Roth  et al.,  2001).  In  Arabidopsis,  different  components 
of  the  HATs  complex  (ADA2a,  ADA2b,  and  GCN5)  have 
been  described  to  interact  with  CBF1  in  vitro  and  seem 
to  be  needed  for  CBF1  function  (Stockinger  et al.,  2001). 
Functional  characterization  of  ADA2b  and  GCN5  showed 
that  these  proteins  control  cold-induced  gene  expression 
(Vlachonasios  et al.,  2003).  ada2b  and  gcn5  mutant  plants 
display  wild-type  CBF  expression,  although  the  cold  induc-
tion  of  their  targets  is  reduced  (Vlachonasios  et al.,  2003). 
Interestingly,  only  the  induction  of  the  CBF-regulon  is 
affected in ada2b and gcn5 mutants, suggesting that the activ-
ity of the HATs complex in response to cold is highly specific 
(Vlachonasios  et al.,  2003).  Reversibility  of  histone  acetyla-
tion also seems to be involved in regulating cold-induced gene 
expression.  Thus,  Kim  and  colleagues  (2004)  identified  the 
Arabidopsis mutant acg1 as a negative regulator of the CBF-
regulon.  The  acg1  mutant  has  a  constitutive  freezing  toler-
ance  similar  to  the  wild-type  but  increased  capacity  to  cold 
acclimate,  which  correlates  with  a  higher  induction  of  CBFs 
and  their  target  genes  (Kim  et al.,  2004).  ACG1  resulted  to 
encode  FVE,  a  component  of  the  Arabidopsis  HDAC  com-
plex  homolog  to  the  mammalian  retinoblastoma  associated 
protein  (Kim  et al.,  2004).  These  data  show  that  histone 
acetylation is important for the interaction of CBFs with the 
CRT/DRE  element  and  the  subsequent  activation  of  gene 
expression under low temperature; in all likelihood preventing 
inhibitory  chromatin  structures.  Another  protein  related  to 
the control of histone acetylation under cold conditions is the 
Arabidopsis HOS15, which is very similar to a component of 
the human SMRT/N-CoR gene repressor complex that asso-
ciates  with  HDACs  (Zhu  et al.,  2008).  HOS15  specifically 
interacts with histone H4 and mediates its deacetylation (Zhu 
et al.,  2008).  Compared  to  wild-type  plants,  hos15  mutants 
show  increased  levels  of  H4  acetylation  that,  interestingly, 
correlate  with  a  hyperinduction  of  the  cold-induced  gene 
LTI78 at 4°C (Zhu et al., 2008). In contrast, hos15 plants are 

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

As  in  the  case  of  low  temperature,  heat  shock  has  direct 
consequences  on  plant  growth  and  development  that 
adversely influence the capacity of plants to reproduce. Under 
high  temperature  conditions,  many  physiological  and  meta-
bolic  processes  are  compromised.  At  the  molecular  level, 
protein synthesis and degradation are negatively affected and 
the heat-induced oxidative stress can cause important damage 
leading plant cells ultimately to death. In general, the chances 
of a plant to survive depend on basal and acquired tolerance 
mechanisms. Similarly to cold acclimation, when subjected to 
mild  non-lethal  temperature,  plants  can  acquire  thermotol-
erance to otherwise lethal high temperature. The heat shock 
response (HSR) orchestrated by plants is very complex, with 
a  plethora  of  signaling  molecules  interlacing  their  pathways 
and the related genes tightly regulated at different levels.

The membrane as a node in the perception 
of temperature oscillations

As  previously  commented,  membrane  rigidification  seems 
to  be  one  of  the  first  steps  in  cold  perception  in  plant  cells. 
In  contrast,  the  maintenance  of  membrane  fluidity  has  been 
revealed  as  one  of  the  earliest  responses  to  high  tempera-
ture  (Hofmann,  2009).  Actually,  the  role  of  the  membrane 
as a sensor of high temperature has been recently reinforced 
by  Saidi  and  colleagues  (2009)  who  used  different  pharma-
cological  compounds  that  fluidize  the  membrane  to  mimic 
the  HSR.  Cell  membrane  fluidity  is  controlled,  at  least  in 
part,  by  transcriptional  and  post-translational  regulation  of 
some fatty acid desaturase (FAD) isoforms. The Arabidopsis 
ω-3 desaturase FAD8 is a good illustration of dual regulation 
at  both  transcriptional  and  post-translational  levels.  At  high 
temperature, the expression levels of FAD8 are reduced and 
the  stability  of  FAD8  is  impaired  by  an  autoregulatory  post-
translational  mechanism  (Matsuda  et al.,  2005).  The  most 
determining  type  of  fatty  acids  in  plant  adaptation  to  high 
temperature  seem  to  be  the  trienoics,  and  more  precisely 
their content in the plastidial membranes. Accordingly, FAD8 
over-expressing  Arabidopsis  plants  with  altered  plastidial 
trienoic  fatty  acid  content  were  more  compromised  in  their 
heat tolerance than FAD3 over-expressing lines in which only 
the  extraplastidic  trienoic  fatty  acid  content  was  affected 
(Zhang et al., 2008b).

Transducing the signals initiated by 
temperature variations

Ca2 is a versatile second messenger in plant 
responses to extreme temperatures
The  essential  role  of  Ca2  at  the  onset  of  plant  response  to 
high  temperature  has  become  clear  as  the  addition  of  Ca2 
chelators  and/or  Ca2  channel  blockers  and  CaM  inhibitors 
during  heat  shock  dramatically inhibits  the  HSR  in  different 
species (Gong et al., 1997; Larkindale and Knight, 2002; Saidi 
et al.,  2009).  Furthermore,  treatment  with  these  pharmaco-
logical compounds during the acclimation to high temperature 

blocks the accumulation of an HSP70 protein, inhibiting plants 
from acquired thermotolerance (Saidi et al., 2009). Inversely, 
pre-treatment  of  maize  seeds  with  CaCl2  has  been  reported 
to  significantly  enhance  the  extent  of  the  acquired  thermo-
tolerance (Gong et al., 1997), highlighting that, as in the cold 
response, the extracellular Ca2 and its transport through the 
membrane  are  necessary  for  the  heat  response.  Moreover, 
under  cold  and  heat  conditions,  the  accumulation  of  the 
second  messenger  IP3,  likely  due  to  the  hydrolytic  activity 
of  the  PLC,  has  been  described  to  intensify  the  Ca2  influx 
(Liu et al., 2006). However, in contrast to the cold response, 
[Ca2]cyt  remains  unaltered  after  high-temperature  expo-
sure.  Only  during  the  subsequent  recovery  period  are  tran-
sient  elevations  in  [Ca2]cyt  detected,  and  these  peaks  are 
more  pronounced  in  plants  having  acquired  thermotolerance 
(Larkindale and Knight, 2002).

Hormones mediate extreme temperature 
signaling
ABA  biosynthesis  is  essential  during  the  cold  acclimation 
process, as seen earlier, and has been recently reported to be 
required  for  the  acquisition  of  thermotolerance.  Intriguingly, 
however,  it  seems  to  be  unnecessary  for  basal  thermotoler-
ance (Larkindale et al., 2005). Under low and high tempera-
ture,  ABA  biosynthesis  is  induced  (Xiong  et al.,  2002b;  Toh 
et al.,  2008).  Furthermore,  genetic  analysis  supports  that 
ABA is a major player in tolerance to high temperature. The 
Arabidopsis  ABA-hypersensitive  mutant  hat1  is  able  to  sur-
vive up to five more days at 42°C and 10–15% humidity than 
wild-type  plants,  unveiling  an  ABA-dependent  heat  response 
pathway  (Yan  et al.,  2006).  Conversely,  ABA-insensitive 
mutants, like abi1, are heat sensitive and the addition of exog-
enous ABA protects them from heat-induced oxidative dam-
ages (Larkindale and Knight, 2002). The implication of ABA 
in protecting plants from oxidative stress makes this hormone 
an important element of intersection in the cross-talk among 
plant  responses  to  low  and  high  temperatures.  Nonetheless, 
the  precise  mode  of  action  of  ABA  during  HSR  is  far  from 
clear. It seems that ABA positively regulates the expression of 
genes encoding critical proteins for plant survival at high tem-
perature,  such  as  HSPs,  and  more  precisely  HSP70,  which 
acts as a chaperone ensuring the proper folding of other pro-
teins (Zou et al., 2009; Hu et al., 2010). The HSP70 family 
is also known to function in protecting cells from the oxida-
tive  stress  produced  under  drought  and  heat  stress  in  maize 
in an ABA-dependent way (Hu et al., 2010). Members of the 
HSP70  family  that  are  strongly  induced  by  heat  shock  are 
also positively controlled by ABA in other plant species (Zou 
et al., 2009).

Gibberellin  metabolism  has  a  pivotal  function  in  plant 
development  under  high  temperature  conditions.  In  vegeta-
tive  tissues  of  citrus,  a  rise  in  the  levels  of  transcripts  cor-
responding  to  GA20-oxidase,  an  enzyme  involved  in  GA 
biosynthesis,  has  been  observed  under  high  temperature 
conditions  (Vidal  et al.,  2003).  Interestingly,  the  opposite 
occurs  in  Arabidopsis  plants  growing  under  cold  conditions, 
where the induction of genes corresponding to GA catabolism 

298

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

enzymes,  like  GA2-oxidase,  and  the  repression  of  genes  cor-
responding  to  GA  biosynthetic  enzymes,  like  GA20-oxidase, 
have  been  reported  (Lee  and  Zeevaart,  2005).  Recent  find-
ings have revealed that CBFs regulate the induction of GA2-
oxidase  expression  by  low  temperature  and  the  subsequent 
stabilization  of  DELLAs  (Achard  et al.,  2008),  supporting 
previous  observations  and  offering  a  coordinated  mechanism 
to  explain  the  growth  retardation  normally  observed  when 
Arabidopsis plants are exposed to low temperature. Perhaps, 
this coordination between cold response and GA degradation 
could  be  extrapolated  to  heat  stress  conditions.  In  this  way, 
exogenous treatment with tetcyclacis (an inhibitor of GA bio-
synthesis)  confers  some  heat-shock  protection  to  moth  bean 
seedlings,  avoiding  the  lipid  peroxidation  normally  caused 
by  high  temperature  (Upadhyaya  et al.,  1991).  Something 
similar  has  been  observed  in  seeds,  as  barley  aleurone  layers 
treated  with  GA3  show  reduced  heat-shock  tolerance  com-
pared to untreated controls.

In  reed,  NO  levels  increase  when  exposed  to  heat  stress, 
and  seem  to  act  as  a  molecular  intermediate  in  the  acquisi-
tion of ABA-induced thermotolerance (Song et al., 2008). In 
Arabidopsis,  NO  also  plays  an  important  role  in  heat  accli-
mation. The HOT5 gene encodes a GSNOR, which metabo-
lizes  the  NO  adduct  S-nitrosoglutathione  (Lee  et al.,  2008). 
Arabidopsis  mutants  carrying  hot5  null  and  missense  alle-
les  cannot  heat  acclimate  due  to  the  heat  sensitivity  associ-
ated  with  a  rise  in  NO  species  levels  (Lee  et al.,  2008).  As 
expected,  nox1,  an  NO-overproducing  mutant,  turned  out 
to  be  defective  in  its  thermotolerance  capacity  (Lee  et al., 
2008).

The  levels  of  SA  increase  rapidly  under  low-  and  high-
temperature  conditions,  pointing  out  the  importance  of  this 
plant  hormone  in  an  early  phase  of  the  response  to  extreme 
temperatures  (Kaplan  et al.,  2004).  Salicylic  acid  seems  to 
be  implicated  in  protecting  Arabidopsis  from  heat-induced 
oxidative  damage,  since  transgenic  plants  with  blocked  SA 
biosynthesis  show  increased  susceptibility  to  oxidative  stress 
(Larkindale  and  Knight,  2002).  Subsequently,  a  reduced 
capacity  to  acquire  thermotolerance  in  SA  deficient  mutants 
was  reported,  suggesting  a  function  for  SA  in  acquired  ther-
motolerance  (Larkindale  and  Knight,  2002).  Nonetheless, 
there  is  a  lack  of  consensus  on  this  matter,  as  SA  has  been 
reported  to  promote  basal  thermotolerance  and  not  to  be 
essential for acquired thermotolerance (Clarke et al., 2004).

Regulation of gene expression in response to 
extreme temperatures
Transcriptional regulation of gene expression in 
response to high and low temperatures
Although  HSFs  and  HSPs  were  first  described  to  function 
under  high  temperature  conditions,  both  of  them  have  been 
shown  to  take  part  in  cellular  responses  induced  by  abiotic 
stresses  including  high  and  low  temperatures.  Thus,  Swindell 
and  co-workers  (2007)  proposed  the  existence  of  an  intense 
cross-talk  between  heat  and  cold  stress  regulatory  networks 
mediated by HSFs and HSPs in Arabidopsis. The expression of 
HSF and HSP genes is enhanced by both cold and heat stress, 

although  a  different  expression  pattern  was  observed  in  the 
case of the HSFs genes with a late induction under cold condi-
tions and an early response under high temperature (Swindell 
et al.,  2007).  This  expression  pattern  under  heat  shock  con-
ditions  is  consistent  with  the  function  of  HSFs  as  transcrip-
tional regulators of HSPs, which act as chaperones preventing 
heat  denatured  protein  aggregations  and  assisting  proteins  to 
refold  properly  (Borges  and  Ramos,  2005).  Interestingly,  an 
Arabidopsis  HSF,  AtHsfA1b,  seems  to  play  a  relevant  role  in 
high-temperature-induced  chilling  tolerance  (Li  et al.,  2003). 
Tomato  transgenic  plants  over-expressing  AtHsfA1b  exhibit 
enhanced  tolerance  to  both  high  and  low  temperatures,  the 
latter without the need for a previous heat acclimation period 
(Li et al., 2003). On the other hand, Arabidopsis plants over-
expressing  the  yeast  HSP26  gene  show  increased  amounts 
of  free  proline  and  soluble  sugars,  higher  expression  levels  of 
stress  defense  genes  and,  ultimately,  enhanced  tolerance  to 
freezing temperature (Xue et al., 2009). LeHSP23.8 is a gene 
from tomato that encodes a small HSP and whose expression 
is  responsive  to  high  and  low  temperatures  (Yi  et al.,  2006). 
The  HSP90  family  is  also  involved  in  heat  and  cold  toler-
ance  in  Arabidopsis  (Krishna  and  Gloor,  2001).  Recently,  the 
Arabidopsis  protein  AtBAG7,  which  is  a  component  of  the 
unfolded  protein  response  (UPR),  a  mechanism  triggered  by 
the  presence  of  misfolded  proteins  under  stress  conditions  to 
increase  the  production  of  molecular  chaperones,  has  been 
reported  to  have  a  protective  function  during  heat  shock  and 
under  low-temperature  conditions  (Williams  et al.,  2010). 
Consistently,  Atbag7  null  mutants  are  hypersensitive  to  both 
extreme temperatures (Williams et al., 2010).

Post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in 
response to high and low temperatures
In maize, the DREB2A transcription factor has been reported 
to  be  regulated  by  alternative  splicing  among  other  mecha-
nisms  (Qin  et al.,  2007).  The  longest  transcript,  coding  for 
the  functional  protein,  is  more  abundant  under  cold  stress, 
whereas at high temperature it is underproduced (Qin et al., 
2007).  Adding  complexity  to  the  regulatory  networks,  the 
pre-mRNAs  of  a  conserved  family  of  splicing  regulators  in 
eukaryotes,  the  Serine/arginine-Rich  (SR)  proteins,  are  sub-
jected  to  alternative  splicing  under  cold  and  heat  stresses  in 
Arabidopsis (Lazar and Goodman, 2000; Palusa et al., 2007). 
More precisely, extreme temperatures dramatically affect the 
alternative splicing of pre-mRNAs of most SR genes studied; 
some splicing products are increased or decreased depending 
on the temperature tested (Lazar and Goodman, 2000; Palusa 
et al., 2007). These results unveil an enormous transcriptome 
complexity,  as  the  different  SR  isoforms  produced  under 
extreme temperatures probably have altered functions in pre-
mRNA splicing.

As mentioned earlier, miRNAs are known to silence genes 
at  a  post-transcriptional  level  (Baulcombe,  2004).  In Populus 
trichocarpa, the expression of a considerable number of miR-
NAs has been described to be repressed by both low and high 
temperatures,  which  suggests  that  they  can  also  constitute 
common intermediaries in plant response to extreme temper-
atures (Lu et al., 2008).

299

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Translational and post-translational regulation of gene 
expression in response to high and low temperatures
Post-translational  modifications 
like  ubiquitination  and 
SUMOylation  regulate  the  activity  of  proteins  under  both 
low  and  high  temperatures.  In  the  case  of  ubiquitination, 
Calderon-Villalobos  and  colleagues  (2007)  have  reported 
that the expression of AtFBP7 gene from Arabidopsis, which 
encodes an F-box protein essential for an efficient translation 
under  temperature  stress,  is  induced  by  low  and  high  tem-
peratures. In addition to function as an E3 ligase (see earlier 
discussion), AtCHIP also has a role as HSP70 co-chaperone. 
This role has been described to be temperature sensitive and, 
as  expected,  markedly  induced  by  heat  stress  (Rosser  et al., 
2007).  The  accumulation  of  AtCHIP  transcripts  has  been 
reported  under  high-temperature  conditions,  although  it  has 
not  been  correlated  with  an  enhanced  stress  tolerance  (Yan 
et al.,  2003).  In  contrast,  the  over-expression  of  AtCHIP  in 
Arabidopsis  renders  plants  more  sensitive  to  both  low  and 
high temperatures (Yan et al., 2003). This indicates that this 
E3 ligase functions as a negative regulator during temperature 
stress, which is necessary for an accurate modulation of plant 
response  to  extreme  temperatures.  The  classical  function 
assigned  to  E3  ligases  under  heat  shock  has  been  to  tag  the 
unstable  proteins  generated  for  their  degradation  via  protea-
some.  In  light  of  the  results  described  earlier,  however,  this 
could be only one of a range of functions.

Regarding  SUMOylation,  as  in  the  case  of  low  tempera-
ture  response,  an  increase  in  SUMO-conjugates  mediated 
by  SIZ1  has  been  reported  in  Arabidopsis  exposed  to  high-
temperature  conditions  (Kurepa  et al.,  2003;  Miura  et al., 
2005;  Saracco  et al.,  2007).  Interestingly,  siz1  mutants 
exhibit  reduced  basal  thermotolerance  and  wild-type  levels 
of acquired thermotolerance (Yoo et al., 2006). The effect of 
SIZ1 on basal thermotolerance seems to be SA-independent, 
although  a  substantial  accumulation  of  SA  was  observed 
in  siz1  mutants  subjected  to  heat  shock  (Yoo  et al.,  2006). 
These  results  support  a  role  for  SA  in  promoting  basal  ther-
motolerance, but are not essential for the acquisition of ther-
motolerance  in  agreement  with  the  data  reported  by  Clarke 
and  co-workers  (2004).  In  Figure  19.4,  a  schematic  model 
that  summarizes  the  regulation  levels  in  which  low  and  high 
temperature  signaling  pathways  converge  and  diverge  is 
presented.

Conclusions

As  sessile  organisms,  plants  are  constantly  challenged  by 
a  myriad  of  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses  simultaneously.  To 
cope,  plants  have  evolved  sophisticated  cross-talk  strategies 
between  the  different  response  mechanisms.  Specifically, 
from  the  temperature  change  sensing  to  the  temperature-
responsive  gene  expression,  with  the  signal  transduction 
pathways  in  between,  there  are  many  levels  at  which  cold 
and heat responses overlap. This intricate web of interactions 
is  beginning  to  be  revealed  and  the  molecular  mechanisms 
underlying plant responses to low and high temperatures are 
unveiling.  Unfortunately,  little  is  known  on  how  extreme 

300

Figure 19.4 l Proposed model for integration of low- and high-
temperature signaling pathways. Changes in membrane fluidity are 
thought to be one of the first steps in the perception of temperature 
variation. Calcium acts as a second messenger in both low- and 
high-temperature responses, transducing the signal generated. On 
the other hand, cold and heat stresses cause an increase in ABA, 
NO, and SA levels that mediate changes in gene expression and 
are required for plant tolerance. Gibberellins (GA) are also involved 
in extreme temperature responses. Finally, plant responses to both 
low and high temperatures are regulated at the transcriptional, post-
transcriptional and post-translational levels. Arrowheads and end 
lines indicate positive and negative regulation, respectively. 

temperatures  are  perceived  and  their  signals  integrated  and 
transmitted to ultimately activate the protective mechanisms. 
As commented in this chapter, some intermediates have been 
identified  that  seem  to  be  particularly  relevant  and  would 
constitute  important  nodes  of  integration  between  low-  and 
high-temperature  responses.  In  the  current  scenario  of  glo-
bal  climate  change,  steeper  temperature  variations  can  have 
profound effects on crop yield. Understanding the molecular 

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

mechanisms controlling plant responses to low and high tem-
peratures,  and  deciphering  the  cross-talk  nodes  governing 
such responses, should provide new strategies for developing 
crops with enhanced plasticity against extreme temperatures. 
These strategies would be of particular interest in temperate 
regions where dramatic variations in temperature in seasons or 
even  during  the  same  day  (i.e.,  between  day  and  night),  can 
have devastating effects on agriculture.

Acknowledgments

Work  in  our  laboratory  is  supported  by  grants  GEN2006-
27787-E/VEG,  BIO2007-65284,  CSD2007-00057,  and 
EUI2009-04074  from  the  Spanish  Ministry  of  Science  and 
Innovation,  and  grant  P2006/GEN-0191  from  the  Regional 
Government of Madrid.

References

Achard, P., Gong, F., Cheminant, S., 

Alioua, M., Hedden, P., & Genschik, P. 
(2008). The cold-inducible CBF1 factor-
dependent signaling pathway modulates 
the accumulation of the growth-repressing 
DELLA proteins via its effect on gibberellin 
metabolism. Plant Cell, 20, 2117–2129.

Agarwal, M., Hao, Y., Kapoor, A., Dong, C. H., 
Fujii, H., & Zheng, X., et al. (2006). A R2R3 
type MYB transcription factor is involved 
in the cold regulation of CBF genes and 
in acquired freezing tolerance. Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, 281, 37636–37645.
Antikainen, M., Griffith, M., Zhang, J., Hon, 

W. C., Yang, D., & Pihakaski-Maunsbach, K. 
(1996). Immunolocalization of antifreeze 
proteins in winter rye leaves, crowns, and 
roots by tissue printing. Plant Physiology, 
110, 845–857.

Bae, M. S., Cho, E. J., Choi, E. Y., & Park, O. K. 

(2003). Analysis of the Arabidopsis nuclear 
proteome and its response to cold stress. 
Plant Journal, 36, 652–663.

Baker, S. S., Wilhelm, K. S., & Thomashow, 

M. F. (1994). The 5'-region of Arabidopsis 
thaliana cor15a has cis-acting elements that 
confer cold-, drought- and ABA-regulated 
gene expression. Plant Molecular Biology, 
24, 701–713.

Bakht, J., Bano, A., & Dominy, P. (2006). The 
role of abscisic acid and low temperature in 
chickpea (Cicer arietinum) cold tolerance. 
II. Effects on plasma membrane structure 
and function. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 57, 3707–3715.

Baulcombe, D. (2004). RNA silencing in plants. 

Nature, 431, 356–363.

Benedict, C., Skinner, J. S., Meng, R., 

Chang, Y., Bhalerao, R., & Huner, N. P., 
et al. (2006). The CBF1-dependent low 
temperature signalling pathway, regulon and 
increase in freeze tolerance are conserved in 
Populus spp. Plant, Cell & Environment, 29, 
1259–1272.

Bernard, F., Shaker-Bazarnov, H., & Kaviani, 

B. (2002). Effects of salicylic acid on 
cold preservation and cryopreservation of 
encapsulated embryonic axes of Persian 
lilac (Melia azedarach L.). Euphytica, 123, 
85–88.

Borges, J. C., & Ramos, C. H. (2005). Protein 

folding assisted by chaperones. Protein & 
Peptide Letters, 12, 257–261.

Brautigam, M., Lindlof, A., Zakhrabekova, S., 
Gharti-Chhetri, G., Olsson, B., & Olsson, 
O. (2005). Generation and analysis of 9792 

EST sequences from cold acclimated oat, 
Avena sativa. BMC Plant Biology, 5, 18.

Brown, A. P., Dunn, M. A., Goddard, N. J., & 
Hughes, M. A. (2001). Identification of a 
novel low-temperature-response element 
in the promoter of the barley (Hordeum 
vulgare L) gene blt101.1. Planta, 213, 
770–780.

Calderon-Villalobos, L. I., Nill, C., Marrocco, 

K., Kretsch, T., & Schwechheimer, C. 
(2007). The evolutionarily conserved 
Arabidopsis thaliana F-box protein AtFBP7 
is required for efficient translation during 
temperature stress. Gene, 392, 106–116.

Capel, J., Jarillo, J. A., Madueno, F., Jorquera, 

M. J., Martinez-Zapater, J. M., & Salinas, 
J. (1998). Low temperature regulates 
Arabidopsis Lhcb gene expression in a light-
independent manner. Plant Journal, 13, 
411–418.

Carpaneto, A., Ivashikina, N., Levchenko, 

V., Krol, E., Jeworutzki, E., & Zhu, J. K., 
et al. (2007). Cold transiently activates 
calcium-permeable channels in Arabidopsis 
mesophyll cells. Plant Physiology, 143, 
487–494.

Catala, R., & Salinas, J. (2007). Regulatory 
mechanisms involved in cold acclimation 
response. Spanish Journal of Agricultural 
Research, 6, 211–220.

Catala, R., Santos, E., Alonso, J. M., Ecker, 
J. R., Martinez-Zapater, J. M., & Salinas, 
J. (2003). Mutations in the Ca2/H 
transporter CAX1 increase CBF/DREB1 
expression and the cold-acclimation 
response in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 15, 
2940–2951.

Chaikam, V., & Karlson, D. T. (2010). Response 

and transcriptional regulation of rice 
SUMOylation system during development 
and stress conditions. BMB Reports, 43, 
103–109.

Chen, T. H., & Gusta, L. V. (1983). Abscisic 

acid-induced freezing resistance in cultured 
plant cells. Plant Physiology, 73, 71–75.
Cheng, N. H., Pittman, J. K., Barkla, B. J., 

Shigaki, T., & Hirschi, K. D. (2003). The 
Arabidopsis cax1 mutant exhibits impaired 
ion homeostasis, development, and 
hormonal responses and reveals interplay 
among vacuolar transporters. Plant Cell, 15, 
347–364.

Cheong, Y. H., Kim, K. N., Pandey, G. K., 

Gupta, R., Grant, J. J., & Luan, S. (2003). 
CBL1, a calcium sensor that differentially 

regulates salt, drought, and cold responses in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 15, 1833–1845.
Chinnusamy, V., Ohta, M., Kanrar, S., Lee, 

B. H., Hong, X., & Agarwal, M., et al. 
(2003). ICE1: A regulator of cold-induced 
transcriptome and freezing tolerance in 
Arabidopsis. Genes and Development, 17, 
1043–1054.

Chinnusamy, V., Zhu, J. K., & Sunkar, R. 

(2010). Gene regulation during cold stress 
acclimation in plants. Methods in Molecular 
Biology (Totowa, NJ, U. S.), 639, 39–55.

Choi, C. S., & Sano, H. (2007). Abiotic-

stress induces demethylation and 
transcriptional activation of a gene encoding 
a glycerophosphodiesterase-like protein 
in tobacco plants. Molecular Genetics and 
Genomics, 277, 589–600.

Christie, P. J., Alfenito, M. R., & Walbot, V. 

(1994). Impact of low-temperature stress 
on general phenylpropanoid and anthocyanin 
pathways: Enhancement of transcript 
abundance and anthocyanin pigmentation in 
maiz seedlings. Planta, 194, 541–549.
Ciardi, J. A., Deikman, J., & Orzolek, M. 

D. (1997). Increased ethylene synthesis 
enhances chilling tolerance in tomato. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 101, 333–340.

Clarke, S. M., Mur, L. A., Wood, J. E., & Scott, 

I. M. (2004). Salicylic acid dependent 
signaling promotes basal thermotolerance 
but is not essential for acquired 
thermotolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Plant Journal, 38, 432–447.

Colby, T., Matthai, A., Boeckelmann, A., & 

Stuible, H. P. (2006). SUMO-conjugating 
and SUMO-deconjugating enzymes from 
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 142, 318–
332.

Corpas, F. J., Chaki, M., Fernandez-Ocana, A., 

Valderrama, R., Palma, J. M., & Carreras, 
A., et al. (2008). Metabolism of reactive 
nitrogen species in pea plants under abiotic 
stress conditions. Plant and Cell Physiology, 
49, 1711–1722.

Cossins, A. R. (1994). Temperature adaptation 

in biological membranes (pp. 63–76). 
London: Portland Press. 

Cuevas, J. C., Lopez-Cobollo, R., Alcazar, R., 
Zarza, X., Koncz, C., & Altabella, T., et al. 
(2008). Putrescine is involved in Arabidopsis 
freezing tolerance and cold acclimation by 
regulating abscisic acid levels in response 
to low temperature. Plant Physiology, 148, 
1094–1105.

301

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Dexter, S. T. (1933). Effect of several 

environmental factors on the hardening of 
plants. Plant Physiology, 8, 123–129.
Ding, C. K., Wang, C. Y., Gross, K. C., 
& Smith, D. L. (2002). Jasmonate 
and salicylate induce the expression 
of pathogenesis-related-protein signal 
transducers genes and increase resistance to 
chilling injury in tomato fruit. Planta, 214, 
895–901.

Doherty, C. J., Van Buskirk, H. A., Myers, S. 
J., & Thomashow, M. F. (2009). Roles for 
Arabidopsis CAMTA transcription factors in 
cold-regulated gene expression and freezing 
tolerance. Plant Cell, 21, 972–984.

Dong, C. H., Agarwal, M., Zhang, Y., Xie, Q., 

& Zhu, J. K. (2006b). The negative regulator 
of plant cold responses, HOS1, is a RING 
E3 ligase that mediates the ubiquitination 
and degradation of ICE1. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 8281–8286.

Dong, C. H., Hu, X., Tang, W., Zheng, X., Kim, 
Y. S., & Lee, B. H., et al. (2006a). A putative 
Arabidopsis nucleoporin, AtNUP160, is 
critical for RNA export and required for 
plant tolerance to cold stress. Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, 26, 9533–9543.
Dong, C. J., & Liu, J. Y. (2010). The 

Arabidopsis EAR-motif-containing protein 
RAP2.1 functions as an active transcriptional 
repressor to keep stress responses under 
tight control. BMC Plant Biology, 10, 47.
Dubouzet, J. G., Sakuma, Y., Ito, Y., Kasuga, 

M., Dubouzet, E. G., & Miura, S., et al. 
(2003). OsDREB genes in rice, Oryza sativa 
L., encode transcription activators that 
function in drought-, high-salt- and cold-
responsive gene expression. Plant Journal, 
33, 751–763.

Dunn, M. A., Goddard, N. J., Zhang, L., 

Pearce, R. S., & Hughes, M. A. (1994). 
Low-temperature-responsive barley genes 
have different control mechanisms. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 24, 879–888.

Dunn, M. A., White, A. J., Vural, S., & Hughes, 

M. A. (1998). Identification of promoter 
elements in a low-temperature-responsive gene 
(blt4.9) from barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). 
Plant Molecular Biology, 38, 551–564.
Egawa, C., Kobayashi, F., Ishibashi, M., 

Nakamura, T., Nakamura, C., & Takumi, S. 
(2006). Differential regulation of transcript 
accumulation and alternative splicing of 
a DREB2 homolog under abiotic stress 
conditions in common wheat. Genes & 
Genetic Systems, 81, 77–91.

Field, R. J. (1981). The effect of low 

temperature on ethylene production by leaf 
tissues of Phaseolus vulgaris L. Annals of 
Botany, 47, 215–221.

Fowler, S., & Thomashow, M. F. (2002). 

Arabidopsis transcriptome profiling indicates 
that multiple regulatory pathways are 
activated during cold acclimation in addition 
to the CBF cold response pathway. Plant 
Cell, 14, 1675–1690.

Franklin, K. A., & Whitelam, G. C. (2007). 

Light-quality regulation of freezing tolerance 
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature Genetics, 
39, 1410–1413.

Fu, P., Wilen, R. W., Robertson, A. J., Low, 

N. H., Tyler, R. T., & Gusta, L. V. (1998). 

302

Heat tolerance of cold acclimated puma 
winter rye seedlings and the effect of a heat 
shock on freezing tolerance. Plant and Cell 
Physiology, 39, 942–949.

Fursova, O. V., Pogorelko, G. V., & Tarasov, 
V. A. (2009). Identification of ICE2, a 
gene involved in cold acclimation which 
determines freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Gene, 429, 98–103.

Galston, A. W., & Sawhney, R. K. (1990). 

Polyamines in plant physiology. Plant 
Physiology, 94, 406–410.

Gao, F., Zhou, Y., Zhu, W., Li, X., Fan, L., 
& Zhang, G. (2009). Proteomic analysis 
of cold stress-responsive proteins in 
Thellungiella rosette leaves. Planta, 230, 
1033–1046.

Gilmour, S. J., & Thomashow, M. F. (1991). 
Cold acclimation and cold-regulated gene 
expression in ABA mutants of Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Plant Molecular Biology, 17, 
1233–1240.

Gilmour, S. J., Sebolt, A. M., Salazar, M. P., 

Everard, J. D., & Thomashow, M. F. (2000). 
Overexpression of the Arabidopsis CBF3 
transcriptional activator mimics multiple 
biochemical changes associated with cold 
acclimation. Plant Physiology, 124, 1854–
1865.

Gilmour, S. J., Zarka, D. G., Stockinger, 

E. J., Salazar, M. P., Houghton, J. M., & 
Thomashow, M. F. (1998). Low temperature 
regulation of the Arabidopsis CBF family 
of AP2 transcriptional activators as an early 
step in cold-induced COR gene expression. 
Plant Journal, 16, 433–442.

Gong, M., Li, Y. J., Dai, X., Tian, M., & Li, 

Z. G. (1997). Involvement of calcium and 
calmodulin in the acquisition of heat-shock 
induced thermotolerance in maize seedlings. 
Journal of Plant Physiology, 150, 615–621.

Gong, Z., Dong, C. H., Lee, H., Zhu, J., Xiong, 
L., & Gong, D., et al. (2005). A DEAD box 
RNA helicase is essential for mRNA export 
and important for development and stress 
responses in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 17, 
256–267.

Gray, G. R., Chauvin, L. P., Sarhan, F., & 

Huner, N. (1997). Cold acclimation and 
freezing tolerance (A complex interaction 
of light and temperature). Plant Physiology, 
114, 467–474.

Griffith, M., & McIntyre, H. C. H. (1993). 

The interrelationship of growth and 
frost tolerance in winter rye. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 87, 335–344.

Guiltinan, M. J., Marcotte, W. R., Jr., & 

Quatrano, R. S. (1990). A plant leucine 
zipper protein that recognizes an abscisic acid 
response element. Science, 250, 267–271.

Guo, Y., Xiong, L., Ishitani, M., & Zhu, J. 
K. (2002). An Arabidopsis mutation in 
translation elongation factor 2 causes 
superinduction of CBF/DREB1 transcription 
factor genes but blocks the induction 
of their downstream targets under low 
temperatures. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 99, 7786–7791.

Guy, C. L., Huber, J. L., & Huber, S. C. (1992). 

Sucrose phosphate synthase and sucrose 
accumulation at low temperature. Plant 
Physiology, 100, 502–508.

Hajela, R. K., Horvath, D. P., Gilmour, S. J., 
& Thomashow, M. F. (1990). Molecular 
cloning and expression of cor (Cold-
Regulated) genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Plant Physiology, 93, 1246–1252.

Harber, R. M., & Fuchigami, L. H. (1989). 
Ethylene-induced stress resistance. Boca 
Raton: CRC Press.

Harmer, S. L., Hogenesch, J. B., Straume, M., 

Chang, H. S., Han, B., & Zhu, T., et al. 
(2000). Orchestrated transcription of key 
pathways in Arabidopsis by the circadian 
clock. Science, 290, 2110–2113.

Harvaux, M., & Kloppstech, K. (2001). The 

protective functions of carotenoid and 
flavonoid pigments against excess visible 
radiation at chilling temperature investigated 
in Arabidopsis npq and tt mutants. Planta, 
213, 953–966.

Heino, P., Sandman, G., Lang, V., Nordin, 
K., & Palva, E. T. (1990). Abscisic acid 
deficiency prevents development of freezing 
tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) 
Heynh. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
79, 801–806.

Hirschi, K. D., Zhen, R. G., Cunningham, K. 

W., Rea, P. A., & Fink, G. R. (1996). CAX1, 
an H/Ca2 antiporter from Arabidopsis. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 93, 
8782–8786.

Hofmann, N. R. (2009). The plasma membrane 

as first responder to heat stress. Plant Cell, 
21, 2544.

Holappa, L. D., & Walker-Simmons, M. K. 

(1995). The wheat abscisic acid-responsive 
protein kinase mRNA, PKABA1, is up-
regulated by dehydration, cold temperature, 
and osmotic stress. Plant Physiology, 108, 
1203–1210.

Hong, S. W., Jon, J. H., Kwak, J. M., & Nam, 
H. G. (1997). Identification of a receptor-
like protein kinase gene rapidly induced by 
abscisic acid, dehydration, high salt, and cold 
treatments in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant 
Physiology, 113, 1203–1212.

Hu, H., You, J., Fang, Y., Zhu, X., Qi, Z., 

& Xiong, L. (2008). Characterization of 
transcription factor gene SNAC2 conferring 
cold and salt tolerance in rice. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 67, 169–181.

Hu, X. L., Liu, R. X., Li, Y. H., Wang, W., 

Tai, F. J., & Xue, R. L., et al. (2010). Heat 
shock protein 70 regulates the abscisic acid-
induced antioxidant response of maize to 
combined drought and heat stress. Plant 
Growth Regulation, 60, 225–235.

Huang, B., Jin, L., & Liu, J. (2007). Molecular 
cloning and functional characterization of a 
DREB1/CBF-like gene (GhDREB1L) from 
cotton. Science in China. Series C, Life 
sciences, 50, 7–14.

Hummel, I., El-Amrani, A., Gouesbet, 

G., Hennion, F., & Couee, I. (2004). 
Involvement of polyamines in the interacting 
effects of low temperature and mineral 
supply on Pringlea antiscorbutica (Kerguelen 
cabbage) seedlings. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 55, 1125–1134.

Iliev, E. A., Xu, W., Polisensky, D. H., 

Oh, M. H., Torisky, R. S., & Clouse, S. 
D., et al. (2002). Transcriptional and 
posttranscriptional regulation of Arabidopsis 

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

TCH4 expression by diverse stimuli. Roles 
of cis regions and brassinosteroids. Plant 
Physiology, 130, 770–783.

Ishitani, M., Xiong, L., Lee, H., Stevenson, B., 
& Zhu, J. K. (1998). HOS1, a genetic locus 
involved in cold-responsive gene expression 
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 10, 1151–1161.

James, V. A., Neibaur, I., & Altpeter, F. (2008). 
Stress inducible expression of the DREB1A 
transcription factor from xeric, Hordeum 
spontaneum L. in turf and forage grass 
(Paspalum notatum Flugge) enhances abiotic 
stress tolerance. Transgenic Research, 17, 
93–104.

Janda, T., Szalai, G., Tari, I., & Páldi, E. (1999). 

Hydroponic treatment with salicylic acid 
decreases the effects of chilling injury in 
maize (Zea mays L.) plants. Planta, 208, 
175–180.

Jian, X., Zhang, L., Li, G., Zhang, L., Wang, 

X., & Cao, X., et al. (2010). Identification 
of novel stress-regulated microRNAs from 
Oryza sativa L. Genomics, 95, 47–55.

Jiang, C., Iu, B., & Singh, J. (1996). 

Requirement of a CCGAC cis-acting 
element for cold induction of the BN115 
gene from winter Brassica napus. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 30, 679–684.

Jonak, C., Kiegerl, S., Ligterink, W., Barker, 

P. J., Huskisson, N. S., & Hirt, H. (1996). 
Stress signaling in plants: A mitogen-
activated protein kinase pathway is activated 
by cold and drought. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 93, 11274–11279.
Jouannic, S., Hamal, A., Leprince, A. S., 

Tregear, J. W., Kreis, M., & Henry, Y. (1999). 
Plant MAP kinase kinase kinases structure, 
classification and evolution. Gene, 233, 
1–11.

Kagale, S., Divi, U. K., Krochko, J. E., Keller, 

W. A., & Krishna, P. (2007). Brassinosteroid 
confers tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana 
and Brassica napus to a range of abiotic 
stresses. Planta, 225, 353–364.

Kang, G. Z., Wang, Z. X., Xia, K. F., & Sun, G. 

C. (2007). Protection of ultrastructure in 
chilling-stressed banana leaves by salicylic 
acid. Journal of Zhejiang University. Science, 
8, 277–282.

Kang, H. M., & Saltveit, M. E. (2002). Chilling 

tolerance of maize, cucumber and rice 
seedling leaves and roots are differentially 
affected by salicylic acid. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 115, 571–576.

Kaplan, F., Kopka, J., Haskell, D. W., Schiller, 

C., Gatzke, N., & Sung, D. Y., et al. 
(2004). Exploring the temperature-
stress metabolome of Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiology, 136, 4159–4168.

Kawamura, Y., & Uemura, M. (2003). Mass 

spectrometric approach for identifying 
putative plasma membrane proteins of 
Arabidopsis leaves associated with cold 
acclimation. Plant Journal, 36, 141–154.
Kim, H. J., Hyun, Y., Park, J. Y., Park, M. J., 
Park, M. K., & Kim, M. D., et al. (2004). 
A genetic link between cold responses and 
flowering time through FVE in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Nature Genetics, 36, 167–171.
Kim, H. J., Kim, Y. K., Park, J. Y., & Kim, J.  

(2002a). Light signalling mediated by 
phytochrome plays an important role in 

cold-induced gene expression through the 
C-repeat/dehydration responsive element 
(C/DRE) in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant 
Journal, 29, 693–704.

Kim, J. C., Lee, S. H., Cheong, Y. H., Yoo, C. 
M., Lee, S. I., & Chun, H. J., et al. (2001). 
A novel cold-inducible zinc finger protein 
from soybean, SCOF-1, enhances cold 
tolerance in transgenic plants. Plant Journal, 
25, 247–259.

Kim, K. N., Cheong, Y. H., Grant, J. J., 

Pandey, G. K., & Luan, S. (2003). CIPK3, 
a calcium sensor-associated protein kinase 
that regulates abscisic acid and cold signal 
transduction in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 15, 
411–423.

Kim, T. E., Kim, S. K., Han, T. J., Lee, J. S., & 
Chang, S. C. (2002b). ABA and polyamines 
act independently in primary leaves of cold-
stressed tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum). 
Physiologia Plantarum, 115, 370–376.
Kim, Y. O., Kim, J. S., & Kang, H. (2005). 

Cold-inducible zinc finger-containing 
glycine-rich RNA-binding protein 
contributes to the enhancement of freezing 
tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant 
Journal, 42, 890–900.

Knight, H. (2000). Calcium signaling during 

abiotic stress in plants. International Review 
of Cytology, 195, 269–324.

Knight, H., Trewavas, A. J., & Knight, M. 

R. (1996). Cold calcium signaling in 
Arabidopsis involves two cellular pools 
and a change in calcium signature after 
acclimation. Plant Cell, 8, 489–503.
Knight, H., Zarka, D. G., Okamoto, H., 

Thomashow, M. F., & Knight, M. R. (2004). 
Abscisic acid induces CBF gene transcription 
and subsequent induction of cold-regulated 
genes via the CRT promoter element. Plant 
Physiology, 135, 1710–1717.

Knight, M., Campbell, A. K., Smith, S. M., & 

Trewavas, A. J. (1991). Transgenic plant 
aequorin reports the effects or touch and 
cold-shock and elicitors on cytoplasmic 
calcium. Nature, 352, 524–526.

Kobayashi, F., Maeta, E., Terashima, A., & 

Takumi, S. (2008b). Positive role of a wheat 
HvABI5 ortholog in abiotic stress response 
of seedlings. Physiologia Plantarum, 134, 
74–86.

Kobayashi, F., Takumi, S., & Nakamura, C. 

(2008a). Increased freezing tolerance in an 
ABA-hypersensitive mutant of common 
wheat. Journal of Plant Physiology, 165, 
224–232.

Kovacs, Z., Simon-Sarkadi, L., Szucs, A., & 
Kocsy, G. (2010). Differential effects of 
cold, osmotic stress and abscisic acid on 
polyamine accumulation in wheat. Amino 
acids, 38, 623–631.

Kovtun, Y., Chiu, W. L., Tena, G., & Sheen, 

J. (2000). Functional analysis of oxidative 
stress-activated mitogen-activated protein 
kinase cascade in plants. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 97, 2940–2945.

Krishna, P., & Gloor, G. (2001). The Hsp90 

family of proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Cell Stress & Chaperones, 6, 238–246.

Krol, M., Ivanov, A. G., Jansson, S., Kloppstech, 

K., & Huner, N. P. (1999). Greening under 
high light or cold temperature affects the 

level of xanthophyll-cycle pigments, early 
light-inducible proteins, and light-harvesting 
polypeptides in wild-type barley and the 
chlorina f2 mutant. Plant Physiology, 120, 
193–204.

Kurepa, J., Walker, J. M., Smalle, J., Gosink, 
M. M., Davis, S. J., & Durham, T. L., et al. 
(2003). The small ubiquitin-like modifier 
(SUMO) protein modification system in 
Arabidopsis. Accumulation of SUMO1 and 
-2 conjugates is increased by stress. Journal 
of Biological Chemistry, 278, 6862–6872.
Kwak, K. J., Kim, J. Y., Kim, Y. O., & Kang, 
H. (2007). Characterization of transgenic 
Arabidopsis plants overexpressing high 
mobility group B proteins under high 
salinity, drought or cold stress. Plant and 
Cell Physiology, 48, 221–231.

Kwon, C. S., Lee, D., Choi, G., & Chung, W. 
I. (2009). Histone occupancy-dependent 
and -independent removal of H3K27 
trimethylation at cold-responsive genes in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 60, 112–121.

Lang, V., Heino, P., & Palva, E. T. (1989). Low 

temperature acclimation and treatment with 
exogenous abscisic acid induce common 
polypeptides in Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) 
Heynh. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
77, 729–734.

Larkindale, J., & Knight, M. R. (2002). 

Protection against heat stress-induced 
oxidative damage in Arabidopsis involves 
calcium, abscisic acid, ethylene, and salicylic 
acid. Plant Physiology, 128, 682–695.

Larkindale, J., Hall, J. D., Knight, M. R., & 

Vierling, E. (2005). Heat stress phenotypes 
of Arabidopsis mutants implicate multiple 
signaling pathways in the acquisition of 
thermotolerance. Plant Physiology, 138, 
882–897.

Lazar, G., & Goodman, H. M. (2000). The 

Arabidopsis splicing factor SR1 is regulated 
by alternative splicing. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 42, 571–581.

Lee, B. H., Henderson, D. A., & Zhu, J. K. 
(2005). The Arabidopsis cold-responsive 
transcriptome and its regulation by ICE1. 
Plant Cell, 17, 3155–3175.

Lee, B. H., Kapoor, A., Zhu, J., & Zhu, J. K. 

(2006). STABILIZED1, a stress-upregulated 
nuclear protein, is required for pre-mRNA 
splicing, mRNA turnover, and stress 
tolerance in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 18, 
1736–1749.

Lee, D. J., & Zeevaart, J. A. (2005). Molecular 
cloning of GA 2-oxidase3 from spinach and 
its ectopic expression in Nicotiana sylvestris. 
Plant Physiology, 138, 243–254.

Lee, H., Guo, Y., Ohta, M., Xiong, L., 

Stevenson, B., & Zhu, J. K. (2002). LOS2, 
a genetic locus required for cold-responsive 
gene transcription encodes a bi-functional 
enolase. EMBO Journal, 21, 2692–2702.
Lee, J. H., Van Montagu, M., & Verbruggen, 

N. (1999). A highly conserved kinase is an 
essential component for stress tolerance 
in yeast and plant cells. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 96, 5873–5877.

Lee, T. M., Lur, H. S., & Chu, C. (1995). 

Abscisic acid and putrecine accumulation in 
chilling-tolerant rice cultivars. Crop Science, 
35, 502–508.

303

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Lee, U., Wie, C., Fernandez, B. O., Feelisch, 
M., & Vierling, E. (2008). Modulation of 
nitrosative stress by S-nitrosoglutathione 
reductase is critical for thermotolerance and 
plant growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 20, 
786–802.

Levitt, J. (1980). Responses of plants to 

environmental stresses: Chilling, freezing 
and high temperatures stresses. New York: 
Academic Press.

Li, H. Y., Chang, C. S., Lu, L. S., Liu, C. A., 

Chan, M. T., & Charng, Y. Y. (2003). Over-
expression of Arabidopsis thaliana heat 
shock factor gene (AtHsf1b) enhances 
chilling tolerance in transgenic tomato. 
Botanical Bulletin of Academia Sinica, 44, 
129–140.

Liao, Y., Zou, H. F., Wei, W., Hao, Y. J., Tian, 
A. G., & Huang, J., et al. (2008). Soybean 
GmbZIP44, GmbZIP62 and GmbZIP78 
genes function as negative regulator of 
ABA signaling and confer salt and freezing 
tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis. Planta, 
228, 225–240.

Liu, H. T., Gao, F., Cui, S. J., Han, J. L., Sun, 

D. Y., & Zhou, R. G. (2006). Primary 
evidence for involvement of IP3 in heat-
shock signal transduction in Arabidopsis. 
Cell Research, 16, 394–400.

Liu, Q., Kasuga, M., Sakuma, Y., Abe, H., 

Miura, S., & Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K., et al. 
(1998). Two transcription factors, DREB1 
and DREB2, with an EREBP/AP2 DNA 
binding domain separate two cellular signal 
transduction pathways in drought- and low-
temperature-responsive gene expression, 
respectively, in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 10, 
1391–1406.

Liu, S. X., Wang, X. L., Yang, J. S., Fan, Z. Q., 

Sun, X. F., & Wang, X. R., et al. (2005). 
Molecular cloning of a novel LOS2 gene 
from Capsella bursa-pastoris. Yichuan 
Xuebao, 32, 600–607.

Llorente, F., Oliveros, J. C., Martinez-Zapater, 

J. M., & Salinas, J. (2000). A freezing-
sensitive mutant of Arabidopsis, frs1, is a 
new aba3 allele. Planta, 211, 648–655.
Lu, S., Sun, Y. H., & Chiang, V. L. (2008). 

Stress-responsive microRNAs in Populus. 
Plant Journal, 55, 131–151.

Luo, J., Shen, G., Yan, J., He, C., & Zhang, 
H. (2006). AtCHIP functions as an E3 
ubiquitin ligase of protein phosphatase 2A 
subunits and alters plant response to abscisic 
acid treatment. Plant Journal, 46, 649–657.

Ma, Y., Szostkiewicz, I., Korte, A., Moes, D., 
Yang, Y., & Christmann, A., et al. (2009). 
Regulators of PP2C phosphatase activity 
function as abscisic acid sensors. Science, 
324, 1064–1068.

Mancinelli, A. L. (1984). Photoregulation 

of anthocyanin synthesis : VIII. Effect of 
light pretreatments. Plant Physiology, 75, 
447–453.

Martin, M. L., & Busconi, L. (2001). A rice 

membrane-bound calcium-dependent 
protein kinase is activated in response to 
low temperature. Plant Physiology, 125, 
1442–1449.

Matsuda, O., Sakamoto, H., Hashimoto, T., 

& Iba, K. (2005). A temperature-sensitive 
mechanism that regulates post-translational 
stability of a plastidial omega-3 fatty acid 

304

desaturase (FAD8) in Arabidopsis leaf 
tissues. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 280, 
3597–3604.

Matsui, A., Ishida, J., Morosawa, T., Mochizuki, 

Y., Kaminuma, E., & Endo, T. A., et al. 
(2008). Arabidopsis transcriptome analysis 
under drought, cold, high-salinity and ABA 
treatment conditions using a tiling array. 
Plant and Cell Physiology, 49, 1135–1149.

Mazars, C., Thion, L., Thuleau, P., Graziana, A., 
Knight, M. R., & Moreau, M., et al. (1997). 
Organization of cytoskeleton controls the 
changes in cytosolic calcium of cold-shocked 
Nicotiana plumbaginifolia protoplasts. Cell 
Calcium, 22, 413–420.

Medina, J., Bargues, M., Terol, J., Perez-Alonso, 

M., & Salinas, J. (1999). The Arabidopsis 
CBF gene family is composed of three 
genes encoding AP2 domain-containing 
proteins whose expression is regulated by 
low temperature but not by abscisic acid 
or dehydration. Plant Physiology, 119, 
463–470.

Mikkelsen, M. D., & Thomashow, M. F. (2009). 

A role for circadian evening elements 
in cold-regulated gene expression in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 60, 328–339.
Miura, K., & Ohta, M. (2010). SIZ1, a small 
ubiquitin-related modifier ligase, controls 
cold signaling through regulation of 
salicylic acid accumulation. Journal of Plant 
Physiology, 167, 555–560.

Miura, K., Jin, J. B., Lee, J., Yoo, C. Y., Stirm, 

V., & Miura, T., et al. (2007). SIZ1-mediated 
sumoylation of ICE1 controls CBF3/
DREB1A expression and freezing tolerance 
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 19, 1403–1414.

Miura, K., Rus, A., Sharkhuu, A., Yokoi, S., 

Karthikeyan, A. S., & Raghothama, K. G., 
et al. (2005). The Arabidopsis SUMO E3 
ligase SIZ1 controls phosphate deficiency 
responses. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 102, 7760–7765.

Mizoguchi, T., Irie, K., Hirayama, T., Hayashida, 
N., Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K., & Matsumoto, 
K., et al. (1996). A gene encoding a 
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 
kinase is induced simultaneously with genes 
for a mitogen-activated protein kinase and 
an S6 ribosomal protein kinase by touch, 
cold, and water stress in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 93, 765–769.

Monroy, A. F., Labbe, E., & Dhindsa, R. S. 

(1997). Low temperature perception 
in plants: Effects of cold on protein 
phosphorylation in cell-free extracts. FEBS 
Letters, 410, 206–209.

Monroy, A. F., Sangwan, V., & Dhindsa, R. S. 

(1998). Low temperature signal transduction 
during cold acclimation: Protein phosphatase 
2A as an early target for cold-inactivation. 
Plant Journal, 13, 653–660.

Monroy, A. F., Sarhan, F., & Dhindsa, R. S. 

(1993). Cold-induced changes in freezing 
tolerance, protein phosphorylation, and gene 
expression (evidence for a role of calcium). 
Plant Physiology, 102, 1227–1235.

Murata, N., & Los, D. A. (1997). Membrane 
fluidity and temperature perception. Plant 
Physiology, 115, 875–879.

Novillo, F., Alonso, J. M., Ecker, J. R., & 
Salinas, J. (2004). CBF2/DREB1C is 
a negative regulator of CBF1/DREB1B 
and CBF3/DREB1A expression and 
plays a central role in stress tolerance in 
Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 101, 3985–3990.

Novillo, F., Medina, J., & Salinas, J. (2007). 

Arabidopsis CBF1 and CBF3 have a 
different function than CBF2 in cold 
acclimation and define different gene classes 
in the CBF regulon. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 104, 21002–21007.

Olsen, J. E., Junttila, O., Nilsen, J., Eriksson, 

M. E., Martinussen, I., & Olsson, O., 
et al. (1997). Ectopic expression of oat 
phytochrome A in hybrid aspen changes 
critical day length for growth and prevents 
cold acclimation. Plant Journal, 12, 1339–
1350.

Orvar, B. L., Sangwan, V., Omann, F., & 

Dhindsa, R. S. (2000). Early steps in cold 
sensing by plant cells: The role of actin 
cytoskeleton and membrane fluidity. Plant 
Journal, 23, 785–794.

Ouellet, F., Vazquez-Tello, A., & Sarhan, F. 

(1998). The wheat wcs120 promoter is cold-
inducible in both monocotyledonous and 
dicotyledonous species. FEBS Letters, 423, 
324–328.

Palusa, S. G., Ali, G. S., & Reddy, A. S. (2007). 

Alternative splicing of pre-mRNAs of 
Arabidopsis serine/arginine-rich proteins: 
Regulation by hormones and stresses. Plant 
Journal, 49, 1091–1107.

Park, H. Y., Kang, I. S., Han, J. S., Lee, C. 

H., An, G., & Moon, Y. H. (2009b). 
OsDEG10 encoding a small RNA-binding 
protein is involved in abiotic stress signaling. 
Biochemical and Biophysical Research 
Communications, 380, 597–602.

Park, S. Y., Fung, P., Nishimura, N., Jensen, 

D. R., Fujii, H., & Zhao, Y., et al. (2009a). 
Abscisic acid inhibits type 2C protein 
phosphatases via the PYR/PYL family of 
START proteins. Science, 324, 1068–1071.
Pellegrineschi, A., Reynolds, M., Pacheco, M., 

Brito, R. M., Almeraya, R., & Yamaguchi-
Shinozaki, K., et al. (2004). Stress-induced 
expression in wheat of the Arabidopsis 
thaliana DREB1A gene delays water stress 
symptoms under greenhouse conditions. 
Genome, 47, 493–500.

Pennycooke, J. C., Cheng, H., & Stockinger, E. 
J. (2008a). Comparative genomic sequence 
and expression analyses of Medicago 
truncatula and alfalfa subspecies falcata 
COLD-ACCLIMATION-SPECIFIC genes. 
Plant Physiology, 146, 1242–1254.

Pennycooke, J. C., Cheng, H., Roberts, S. M., 

Yang, Q., Rhee, S. Y., & Stockinger, E. J. 
(2008b). The low temperature-responsive, 
SolanumCBF1 genes maintain high identity 
in their upstream regions in a genomic 
environment undergoing gene duplications, 
deletions, and rearrangements. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 67, 483–497.

Phillips, J. R., Dunn, M. A., & Hughes, M. A. 
(1997). mRNA stability and localisation of 
the low-temperature-responsive barley gene 
family blt14. Plant Molecular Biology, 33, 
1013–1023.

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

Pillai, M. A., & Akiyama, T. (2004). Differential 

expression of an S-adenosyl-L-methionine 
decarboxylase gene involved in polyamine 
biosynthesis under low temperature stress 
in japonica and indica rice genotypes. 
Molecular Genetics and Genomics, 271, 
141–149.

Plieth, C. (1999). Temperature sensing by 
plants: Calcium-permeable channels as 
primary sensors – a model. Journal of 
Membrane Biology, 172, 121–127.

Polisensky, D. H., & Braam, J. (1996). Cold-
shock regulation of the Arabidopsis TCH 
genes and the effects of modulating 
intracellular calcium levels. Plant Physiology, 
111, 1271–1279.

Pressman, E., Shaked, R., & Firon, N. (2006). 

Exposing pepper plants to high day 
temperatures prevents the adverse low 
night temperature symptoms. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 126, 618–626.

Qin, F., Kakimoto, M., Sakuma, Y., Maruyama, 
K., Osakabe, Y., & Tran, L. S., et al. (2007). 
Regulation and functional analysis of 
ZmDREB2A in response to drought and 
heat stresses in Zea mays L. Plant Journal, 
50, 54–69.

Qin, F., Sakuma, Y., Li, J., Liu, Q., Li, Y. Q., 

& Shinozaki, K., et al. (2004). Cloning 
and functional analysis of a novel DREB1/
CBF transcription factor involved in cold-
responsive gene expression in Zea mays L. 
Plant and Cell Physiology, 45, 1042–1052.
Reddy, A. S. (2001). Calcium: Silver bullet in 

signaling. Plant Science, 160, 381–404.

Rosser, M. F., Washburn, E., Muchowski, P. 
J., Patterson, C., & Cyr, D. M. (2007). 
Chaperone functions of the E3 ubiquitin 
ligase CHIP. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 
282, 22267–22277.

Roth, S. Y., Denu, J. M., & Allis, C. D. (2001). 
Histone acetyltransferases. Annual Review of 
Biochemistry, 70, 81–120.

Ruelland, E., Cantrel, C., Gawer, M., Kader, J. 
C., & Zachowski, A. (2002). Activation of 
phospholipases C and D is an early response 
to a cold exposure in Arabidopsis suspension 
cells. Plant Physiology, 130, 999–1007.

Ruelland, E., Vaultier, M. N., Zachowski, A., & 

Hurry, V. (2009). Cold signalling and cold 
acclimation in plants. Advances in Botanical 
Research, 49, 36–126.

Sachetto-Martins, G., Franco, L. O., & de 

Oliveira, D. E. (2000). Plant glycine-rich 
proteins: A family or just proteins with a 
common motif? Biochimica et Biophysica 
ACTA, 1492, 1–14.

Saidi, Y., Finka, A., Muriset, M., Bromberg, Z., 
Weiss, Y. G., & Maathuis, F. J., et al. (2009). 
The heat shock response in moss plants is 
regulated by specific calcium-permeable 
channels in the plasma membrane. Plant 
Cell, 21, 2829–2843.

Salinas, J. (2002). Molecular mechanisms of 
signal transduction in cold acclimation. 
Oxford University Press.

Saltveit, M. E., & Hepler, P. K. (2004). Effect 

of heat shock on the chilling sensitivity 
of trichomes and petioles of African 
violet (Saintpaulia ionantha). Physiologia 
Plantarum, 121, 35–43.

Sanders, D., Pelloux, J., Brownlee, C., & 
Harper, J. F. (2002). Calcium at the 

crossroads of signaling. Plant Cell, 
14(Suppl), S401–417.

Sangwan, V., Orvar, B. L., Beyerly, J., Hirt, 
H., & Dhindsa, R. S. (2002). Opposite 
changes in membrane fluidity mimic cold 
and heat stress activation of distinct plant 
MAP kinase pathways. Plant Journal, 31, 
629–638.

Saracco, S. A., Miller, M. J., Kurepa, J., & 

Vierstra, R. D. (2007). Genetic analysis of 
SUMOylation in Arabidopsis: Conjugation 
of SUMO1 and SUMO2 to nuclear proteins 
is essential. Plant Physiology, 145, 119–134.

Sasaki, H., Ichimura, K., & Oda, M. (1996). 

Changes in sugar content during cold 
acclimation and deacclimation of cabbage 
seedlings. Annals of Botany, 78, 365–369.
Sasse, J. M. (2003). Physiological actions of 

brassinosteroids: An update. Journal of Plant 
Growth Regulation, 22, 276–288.

Shan, D. P., Huang, J. G., Yang, Y. T., Guo, 

Y. H., Wu, C. A., & Yang, G. D., et al. 
(2007). Cotton GhDREB1 increases 
plant tolerance to low temperature and is 
negatively regulated by gibberellic acid. New 
Phytologist, 176, 70–81.

Sheen, J. (1996). Ca2-dependent protein 
kinases and stress signal transduction in 
plants. Science, 274, 1900–1902.

Shen, W., Nada, K., & Tachibana, S. (2000). 
Involvement of polyamines in the chilling 
tolerance of cucumber cultivars. Plant 
Physiology, 124, 431–439.

Shinozuka, H., Hisano, H., Yoneyama, S., 

Shimamoto, Y., Jones, E. S., & Forster, J. W., 
et al. (2006). Gene expression and genetic 
mapping analyses of a perennial ryegrass 
glycine-rich RNA-binding protein gene 
suggest a role in cold adaptation. Molecular 
Genetics and Genomics, 275, 399–408.

Sidebottom, C., Buckley, S., Pudney, P., Twigg, 

S., Jarman, C., & Holt, C., et al. (2000). 
Heat-stable antifreeze protein from grass. 
Nature, 406, 256.

Skinner, J. S., von Zitzewitz, J., Szucs, P., 

Marquez-Cedillo, L., Filichkin, T., & 
Amundsen, K., et al. (2005). Structural, 
functional, and phylogenetic characterization 
of a large CBF gene family in barley. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 59, 533–551.

Sokol, A., Kwiatkowska, A., Jerzmanowski, 
A., & Prymakowska-Bosak, M. (2007). 
Up-regulation of stress-inducible genes in 
tobacco and Arabidopsis cells in response 
to abiotic stresses and ABA treatment 
correlates with dynamic changes in histone 
H3 and H4 modifications. Planta, 227, 
245–254.

Song, L. L., Ding, W., Shen, J., Zhang, Z. G., 

Bi, Y. R., & Zhang, L. X. (2008). Nitric 
oxide mediates abscisic acid induced 
thermotolerance in the calluses from two 
ecotypes of reed under heat stress. Plant 
Science, 175, 826–832.

Steponkus, P. L. (1971). Cold acclimation of 

Hedera helix: Evidence for a two phase 
process. Plant Physiology, 47, 175–180.

Sterner, D. E., & Berger, S. L. (2000). 

Acetylation of histones and transcription-
related factors. Microbiology and Molecular 
Biology Reviews, 64, 435–459.

Steward, N., Ito, M., Yamaguchi, Y., Koizumi, 

N., & Sano, H. (2002). Periodic DNA 

methylation in maize nucleosomes and 
demethylation by environmental stress. 
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 277, 
37741–37746.

Stockinger, E. J., Gilmour, S. J., & Thomashow, 

M. F. (1997). Arabidopsis thaliana CBF1 
encodes an AP2 domain-containing 
transcriptional activator that binds to the 
C-repeat/DRE, a cis-acting DNA regulatory 
element that stimulates transcription in 
response to low temperature and water 
deficit. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
94, 1035–1040.

Stockinger, E. J., Mao, Y., Regier, M. K., 

Triezenberg, S. J., & Thomashow, M. F. 
(2001). Transcriptional adaptor and histone 
acetyltransferase proteins in Arabidopsis 
and their interactions with CBF1, a 
transcriptional activator involved in cold-
regulated gene expression. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 29, 1524–1533.

Sundblad, L. G., Andersson, M., Geladi, P., 
Salomonson, A., & Sjostrom, M. (2001). 
Fast, nondestructive measurement of frost 
hardiness in conifer seedlings by VIS  NIR 
spectroscopy. Tree Physiology, 21, 751–757.

Sunkar, R., & Zhu, J. K. (2004). Novel and 

stress-regulated microRNAs and other small 
RNAs from Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 16, 
2001–2019.

Suzuki, I., Los, D. A., Kanesaki, Y., Mikami, 

K., & Murata, N. (2000). The pathway 
for perception and transduction of low-
temperature signals in Synechocystis. EMBO 
Journal, 19, 1327–1334.

Suzuki, R., Noguchi, R., Ota, T., Abe, M., 

Miyashita, K., & Kawada, T. (2001). 
Cytotoxic effect of conjugated trienoic fatty 
acids on mouse tumor and human monocytic 
leukemia cells. Lipids, 36, 477–482.
Swindell, W. R., Huebner, M., & Weber, 
A. P. (2007). Transcriptional profiling 
of Arabidopsis heat shock proteins and 
transcription factors reveals extensive 
overlap between heat and non-heat stress 
response pathways. BMC Genomics, 8, 125.

Szalai, G., Tari, I., Janda, T., Pestenácz, A., & 

Páldi, E. (2000). Effects of cold acclimation 
and salicylic acid on changes in ACC and 
MACC contents in maize during chilling. 
Biologia Plantarum, 43, 637–640.

Tahtiharju, S., & Palva, T. (2001). Antisense 

inhibition of protein phosphatase 2C 
accelerates cold acclimation in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Plant Journal, 26, 461–470.

Tahtiharju, S., Sangwan, V., Monroy, A. F., 
Dhindsa, R. S., & Borg, M. (1997). The 
induction of kin genes in cold-acclimating 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Evidence of a role for 
calcium. Planta, 203, 442–447.

Takumi, S., Shimamura, C., & Kobayashi, F. 

(2008). Increased freezing tolerance through 
up-regulation of downstream genes via the 
wheat CBF gene in transgenic tobacco. Plant 
Physiology and Biochemistry, 46, 205–211.

Tamminen, I., Makela, P., Heino, P., & Palva, 
E. T. (2001). Ectopic expression of ABI3 
gene enhances freezing tolerance in response 
to abscisic acid and low temperature in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Journal, 25, 1–8.

Tang, W., Newton, R. J., Li, C., & Charles, 
T. M. (2007). Enhanced stress tolerance 

305

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

in transgenic pine expressing the pepper 
CaPF1 gene is associated with the 
polyamine biosynthesis. Plant Cell Reports, 
26, 115–124.

Tasgin, E., Attici, O., & Nalbantogly, B. (2003). 
Effect of salicylic acid and cold on freezing 
tolerance in winter wheat leaves. Plant 
Growth Regulation, 41, 231–236.

Teige, M., Scheikl, E., Eulgem, T., Doczi, R., 

Ichimura, K., & Shinozaki, K., et al. (2004). 
The MKK2 pathway mediates cold and salt 
stress signaling in Arabidopsis. Molecular 
Cell., 15, 141–152.

Toh, S., Imamura, A., Watanabe, A., 

Nakabayashi, K., Okamoto, M., & Jikumaru, 
Y., et al. (2008). High temperature-induced 
abscisic acid biosynthesis and its role in the 
inhibition of gibberellin action in Arabidopsis 
seeds. Plant Physiology, 146, 1368–1385.
Ueoka-Nakanishi, H., Nakanishi, Y., Tanaka, 

Y., & Maeshima, M. (1999). Properties and 
molecular cloning of Ca2/H antiporter 
in the vacuolar membrane of mung bean. 
European Journal of Biochemistry, 262, 
417–425.

Upadhyaya, A., Davis, T. D., & Sankhla, 
N. (1991). Heat-shock tolerance and 
antioxidant activity in moth bean seedlings 
treated with tetcyclacis. Plant Growth 
Regulation, 10, 215–222.

Urao, T., Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K., & Shinozaki, 
K. (2000). Two-component systems in plant 
signal transduction. Trends in Plant Science, 
5, 67–74.

Vagujfalvi, A., Aprile, A., Miller, A., Dubcovsky, 

J., Delugu, G., & Galiba, G., et al. (2005). 
The expression of several CBF genes at the 
Fr-A2 locus is linked to frost resistance in 
wheat. Molecular Genetics and Genomics, 
274, 506–514.

van der Luit, A. H., Olivari, C., Haley, A., 

Knight, M. R., & Trewavas, A. J. (1999). 
Distinct calcium signaling pathways regulate 
calmodulin gene expression in tobacco. Plant 
Physiology, 121, 705–714.

Vannini, C., Locatelli, F., Bracale, M., Magnani, 
E., Marsoni, M., & Osnato, M., et al. (2004). 
Overexpression of the rice Osmyb4 gene 
increases chilling and freezing tolerance of 
Arabidopsis thaliana plants. Plant Journal, 
37, 115–127.

Vashisht, A. A., Pradhan, A., Tuteja, R., & 

Tuteja, N. (2005). Cold- and salinity stress-
induced bipolar pea DNA helicase 47 is 
involved in protein synthesis and stimulated 
by phosphorylation with protein kinase C. 
Plant Journal, 44, 76–87.

Vaultier, M. N., Cantrel, C., Vergnolle, C., 

Justin, A. M., Demandre, C., & Benhassaine-
Kesri, G., et al. (2006). Desaturase mutants 
reveal that membrane rigidification acts as a 
cold perception mechanism upstream of the 
diacylglycerol kinase pathway in Arabidopsis 
cells. FEBS letters, 580, 4218–4223.
Venketesh, S., & Dayananda, C. (2008). 

Properties, potentials, and prospects of 
antifreeze proteins. Critical Reviews in 
Biotechnology, 28, 57–82.

Vidal, A. M., Ben-Cheikh, W., Talon, M., & 

Garcia-Martinez, J. L. (2003). Regulation of 
gibberellin 20-oxidase gene expression and 
gibberellin content in citrus by temperature 

306

and citrus exocortis viroid. Planta, 217, 
442–448.

Vlachonasios, K. E., Thomashow, M. F., & 

Triezenberg, S. J. (2003). Disruption 
mutations of ADA2b and GCN5 
transcriptional adaptor genes dramatically 
affect Arabidopsis growth, development, and 
gene expression. Plant Cell, 15, 626–638.

Vogel, J. T., Zarka, D. G., Van Buskirk, H. A., 
Fowler, S. G., & Thomashow, M. F. (2005). 
Roles of the CBF2 and ZAT12 transcription 
factors in configuring the low temperature 
transcriptome of Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 
41, 195–211.

Walley, J. W., Coughlan, S., Hudson, M. E., 
Covington, M. F., Kaspi, R., & Banu, G., 
et al. (2007). Mechanical stress induces 
biotic and abiotic stress responses via a novel 
cis-element. PLoS genetics, 3, 1800–1812.
Wang, H., & Cutler, A. J. (1995). Promoters 

from kin1 and cor6.6, two Arabidopsis 
thaliana low-temperature- and ABA-
inducible genes, direct strong beta-
glucuronidase expression in guard cells, 
pollen and young developing seeds. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 28, 619–634.

Wang, L., Luo, Y., Zhang, L., Zhao, J., Hu, 
Z., & Fan, Y., et al. (2008). Isolation and 
characterization of a C-repeat binding 
transcription factor from maize. Journal of 
Integrative Plant Biology, 50, 965–974.

Wang, W., Vinocur, B., Shoseyov, O., & Altman, 
A. (2004). Role of plant heat-shock proteins 
and molecular chaperones in the abiotic 
stress response. Trends in Plant Science, 9, 
244–252.

Wanner, L. A., & Junttila, O. (1999). Cold-

induced freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Physiology, 120, 391–400.

Wei, H., Dhanaraj, A. L., Arora, R., Rowland, L. 
J., Fu, Y., & Sun, L. (2006). Identification of 
cold acclimation-responsive Rhododendron 
genes for lipid metabolism, membrane 
transport and lignin biosynthesis: Importance 
of moderately abundant ESTs in genomic 
studies. Plant Cell and Environment, 29, 
558–570.

Welling, A., & Palva, E. T. (2008). Involvement 

of CBF transcription factors in winter 
hardiness in birch. Plant Physiology, 147, 
1199–1211.

Williams, B., Kabbage, M., Britt, R., & 

Dickman, M. B. (2010). AtBAG7, an 
Arabidopsis Bcl-2-associated athanogene, 
resides in the endoplasmic reticulum and is 
involved in the unfolded protein response. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
107, 6088–6093.

Wolfraim, L. A., Langis, R., Tyson, H., & 

Dhindsa, R. S. (1993). cDNA sequence, 
expression, and transcript stability of a cold 
acclimation-specific gene, cas18, of alfalfa 
(Medicago falcata) cells. Plant Physiology, 
101, 1275–1282.

Worrall, D., Elias, L., Ashford, D., Smallwood, 

M., Sidebottom, C., & Lillford, P., et al. 
(1998). A carrot leucine-rich-repeat protein 
that inhibits ice recrystallization. Science, 
282, 115–117.

Wu, L., Zhang, Z., Zhang, H., Wang, X. 

C., & Huang, R. (2008). Transcriptional 
modulation of ethylene response factor 

protein JERF3 in the oxidative stress 
response enhances tolerance of tobacco 
seedlings to salt, drought, and freezing. Plant 
Physiology, 148, 1953–1963.

Xia, X. J., Wang, Y. J., Zhou, Y. H., Tao, 

Y., Mao, W. H., & Shi, K., et al. (2009). 
Reactive oxygen species are involved in 
brassinosteroid-induced stress tolerance in 
cucumber. Plant Physiology, 150, 801–814.

Xiong, L., Lee, H., Huang, R., & Zhu, J. K. 
(2004). A single amino acid substitution 
in the Arabidopsis FIERY1/HOS2 protein 
confers cold signaling specificity and lithium 
tolerance. Plant Journal, 40, 536–545.

Xiong, L., Lee, H., Ishitani, M., Tanaka, Y., 

Stevenson, B., & Koiwa, H., et al. (2002a). 
Repression of stress-responsive genes by 
FIERY2, a novel transcriptional regulator 
in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 99, 10899–10904.

Xiong, L., Schumaker, K. S., & Zhu, J. K. 

(2002b). Cell signaling during cold, drought, 
and salt stress. Plant Cell, 14(Suppl), 
S165–183.

Xiong, Y., & Fei, S. Z. (2006). Functional and 
phylogenetic analysis of a DREB/CBF-like 
gene in perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne L.). 
Planta, 224, 878–888.

Xue, G. P. (2003). The DNA-binding activity 

of an AP2 transcriptional activator HvCBF2 
involved in regulation of low-temperature 
responsive genes in barley is modulated by 
temperature. Plant Journal, 33, 373–383.
Xue, Y., Peng, R., Xiong, A., Li, X., Zha, D., 

& Yao, Q. (2009). Yeast heat-shock protein 
gene HSP26 enhances freezing tolerance 
in Arabidopsis. Journal of Plant Physiology, 
166, 844–850.

Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K., & Shinozaki, 

K. (1994). A novel cis-acting element 
in an Arabidopsis gene is involved in 
responsiveness to drought, low-temperature, 
or high-salt stress. Plant Cell, 6, 251–264.

Yan, C. S., Shen, H., Li, Q., & He, Z. H. 

(2006). A novel ABA-hypersensitive mutant 
in Arabidopsis defines a genetic locus that 
confers tolerance to xerothermic stress. 
Planta, 224, 889–899.

Yan, J., Wang, J., Li, Q., Hwang, J. R., 

Patterson, C., & Zhang, H. (2003). AtCHIP, 
a U-box-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase, 
plays a critical role in temperature stress 
tolerance in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 
132, 861–869.

Yang, T., & Poovaiah, B. W. (2002). A 

calmodulin-binding/CGCG box DNA-
binding protein family involved in multiple 
signaling pathways in plants. Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, 277, 45049–45058.

Yi, S. Y., Sun, A. Q., Sun, Y., Yang, J. Y., 

Zhao, C. M., & Liu, J. (2006). Differential 
regulation of Lehsp23.8 in tomato plants: 
Analysis of a multiple stress-inducible 
promoter. Plant Science, 171, 398–407.

Yoo, C. Y., Miura, K., Jin, J. B., Lee, J., Park, H. 

C., & Salt, D. E., et al. (2006). SIZ1 small 
ubiquitin-like modifier E3 ligase facilitates 
basal thermotolerance in Arabidopsis 
independent of salicylic acid. Plant 
Physiology, 142, 1548–1558.

Yoo, S. Y., Kim, Y., Kim, S. Y., Lee, J. S., & 

Ahn, J. H. (2007). Control of flowering time 

Molecular responses to extreme temperatures

C H A P T E R   1 9

and cold response by a NAC-domain protein 
in Arabidopsis. PloS One, 2, e642.

Yu, X. M., Griffith, M., & Wiseman, S. B. 

(2001). Ethylene induces antifreeze activity 
in winter rye leaves. Plant Physiology, 126, 
1232–1240.

Zarka, D. G., Vogel, J. T., Cook, D., & 

Thomashow, M. F. (2003). Cold induction 
of Arabidopsis CBF genes involves multiple 
ICE (inducer of CBF expression) promoter 
elements and a cold-regulatory circuit that 
is desensitized by low temperature. Plant 
Physiology, 133, 910–918.

Zeller, G., Henz, S. R., Widmer, C. K., 

Sachsenberg, T., Ratsch, G., & Weigel, D., 
et al. (2009). Stress-induced changes in the 
Arabidopsis thaliana transcriptome analyzed 
using whole-genome tiling arrays. Plant 
Journal, 58, 1068–1082.

Zhai, H., Bai, X., Zhu, Y., Li, Y., Cai, H., & Ji, 
W., et al. (2010). A single-repeat R3-MYB 
transcription factor MYBC1 negatively 
regulates freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis. 
Biochemical and Biophysical Research 
Communications, 394, 1018–1023.

Zhang, X., Fowler, S. G., Cheng, H., Lou, 
Y., Rhee, S. Y., & Stockinger, E. J., et al. 
(2004). Freezing-sensitive tomato has a 
functional CBF cold response pathway, but 

a CBF regulon that differs from that of 
freezing-tolerant Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 
39, 905–919.

Zhang, X., Li, M., Wei, D., & Xing, L. (2008b). 
Identification and characterization of a novel 
yeast omega3-fatty acid desaturase acting 
on long-chain n-6 fatty acid substrates from 
Pichia pastoris. Yeast, 25, 21–27.

Zhang, X., Liu, S., & Takano, T. (2008a). 

Two cysteine proteinase inhibitors from 
Arabidopsis thaliana, AtCYSa and AtCYSb, 
increasing the salt, drought, oxidation and 
cold tolerance. Plant Molecular Biology, 68, 
131–143.

Zhang, Z., & Huang, R. (2010). Enhanced 

tolerance to freezing in tobacco and 
tomato overexpressing transcription factor 
TERF2/LeERF2 is modulated by ethylene 
biosynthesis. Plant Molecular Biology, 73, 
241–249.

Zhao, H., & Bughrara, S. S. (2008). Isolation 

and characterization of cold-regulated 
transcriptional activator LpCBF3 gene from 
perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne L.). 
Molecular Genetics and Genomics, 279, 
585–594.

Zhao, M. G., Chen, L., Zhang, L. L., & Zhang, 
W. H. (2009). Nitric reductase-dependent 
nitric oxide production is involved in 

cold acclimation and freezing tolerance 
in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 151, 
755–767.

Zhou, X., Wang, G., Sutoh, K., Zhu, J. K., 

& Zhang, W. (2008). Identification of 
cold-inducible microRNAs in plants by 
transcriptome analysis. Biochimica et 
Biophysica ACTA, 1779, 780–788.

Zhu, J., Jeong, J. C., Zhu, Y., Sokolchik, I., 
Miyazaki, S., & Zhu, J. K., et al. (2008). 
Involvement of Arabidopsis HOS15 in 
histone deacetylation and cold tolerance. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
105, 4945–4950.

Zhu, J., Shi, H., Lee, B. H., Damsz, B., Cheng, 
S., & Stirm, V., et al. (2004). An Arabidopsis 
homeodomain transcription factor gene, 
HOS9, mediates cold tolerance through 
a CBF-independent pathway. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 101, 9873–9878.

Zou, J., Liu, A. L., Chen, X. B., Zhou, X. Y., 
Gao, G. F., & Wang, W. F., et al. (2009). 
Expression analysis of nine rice heat shock 
protein genes under abiotic stresses and 
ABA treatment. Journal of Plant Physiology, 
166, 851–861.

307

Male sterility and hybrid seed production

12

Sally Mackenzie 
Center for Plant Science Innovation, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 185
Male Gametogenesis  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 185
Pollen mitosis I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  186
Pollen mitosis II  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  186
Male Sterility Mutants Elucidate Anther Development  .  .  . 187
Hormonal Influences on Male Reproduction in Plants  .  .  . 187
Gibberellic acid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  187
GA regulates jasmonic acid biosynthesis  . . . . . . . . .  188
Brassinosteroids  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  188
Auxins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
Cytoplasmic Male Sterility Systems in Agriculture  .  .  .  .  .  . 189
Plant mitochondrial mutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
Fertility restoration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  189
Stability of the CMS trait  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  190
Male Sterility: Metabolic and Evolutionary Implications .  . 190
CMS is a naturally found condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  190
Organelle metabolism influences pollen  
development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  190
Genetic Engineering of Male Sterility   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 191
Implementation of Male Sterility in Agricultural Systems  . 191

functional organ (Ursin et al., 1989). One of the most stun-
ning  features  of  the  higher  plant  reproductive  structure  is 
the  seemingly  near-autonomy  of  its  individual  components, 
permitting  interconversion  of  numerous  mating  strategies. 
Dioecy,  gynodioecy,  self-incompatibility,  cleistogamy,  insect, 
and wind or animal pollination capabilities all derive from var-
iations on this set of developmental programs.

Because  so  much  of  agricultural  production  depends  on 
the  success  of  plant  reproduction,  extensive  research  has 
been  carried  out  to  understand  the  developmental  process. 
Identifying  the  genes  that  participate  in  stamen  develop-
ment  has  provided  targets  for  gene  manipulation  and  tools 
for  precisely  controlling  gene  expression  during  male  game-
togenesis.  This,  in  turn,  has  allowed  the  genetic  engineering 
of male sterility by a variety of strategies. In this chapter, pol-
len development and some of the most recent advances in the 
understanding  of  male  reproductive  biology  as  it  pertains  to 
the natural and artificial induction of male sterility for agricul-
tural hybrid seed production are reviewed.

Male Gametogenesis

Pollen mitosis I

Introduction

Plant  reproduction  represents  one  of  the  most  highly  coor-
dinated  and  complex  developmental  processes  to  be  eluci-
dated biologically. Over the past several years, the angiosperm 
flower  has  been  resolved  to  a  multicellular  integration  of 
genetically  definable  whorls  (Bowman  et  al.,  1989)  pro-
grammed  metabolically  to  present  volatile  and  pigment 
attractants  (Dudareva  et  al.,  2004),  synchronously  modulat-
ing  cellular  behaviors  in  response  to  environmental  cues,  to 
genetically coordinate two distinct generations within a single 

In the process of male gamete formation, a pollen mother cell 
undergoes meiosis to form a tetrad of microspores enclosed in 
callose (1,3-β glucan; Figure 12.1). Dissolution of the callose 
occurs  by  enzymes  released  from  the  tapetal  cells,  dispers-
ing the individual 1N microspores. The microspores increase 
their  size  and  undergo  a  programmed  pattern  of  division  to 
produce  a  three-celled  gametophyte  that  comprises  the  pol-
len grain. The first of these divisions is necessarily asymmet-
ric, giving rise to a larger vegetative cell that provides essential 
products to the pollen grain and gives rise to the pollen tube, 
and a smaller generative cell contained within the cytoplasm 
of  the  vegetative  cell.  The  generative  cell  divides  again  to 
produce two sperm cells. Without this divisional asymmetry, 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00012-2

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Callose wall

2N

Microsporogenesis

Callose wall

1N

1N

1N

1N

microsporocyte

meiosis

Microspore 
formation

Sperm cells

microspores

1N 1N
1N

1N

tetrad

Vegetative 
nucleus

Released 
microspore

Pollen   
mitosis I

Generative 
cell

Tricellular 
pollen

bicellular 

pollen

Vegetative nucleus

microgametogenesis

Figure 12.1 l The process of microgametogenesis l 

both daughter cells would exhibit features of vegetative cells 
(Eady et al., 1994). The first gametophyte mutant identified, 
SIDECAR POLLEN (SDP) showed alterations in this division 
pattern  (Chen  and  McCormick,  1996),  undergoing  a  sym-
metrical  division,  followed  by  asymmetric  division  of  one  of 
the  daughter  cells.  What  are  shed  are  pollen  grains  with  an 
additional  vegetative  cell  attached.  Other  genes  have  since 
been  identified  to  influence  this  gametophytic  cell  division 
pattern, including GEMINI POLLEN 1 (GEM1), a MAP 215 
microtubule-associated  protein  that  influences  microspore 
polarity  and  cytokinesis  by  acting  on  the  interphase  spindle 
and  phragmoplast  microtubules  (Twell  et  al.,  2002)  and  the 
TWO-IN-ONE gene, a member of the FUSED Ser/Thr pro-
tein  kinase  family,  which  associates  with  the  phragmoplast 
ring and is essential for proper cytokinesis (Oh et al., 2005). 
Mutations at these loci and several others that influence cell 
division  have  served  to  underscore  the  importance  of  asym-
metric division to the proper determination of cell fate in the 
male gametophyte.

Pollen mitosis II

Following  asymmetric  division  for  the  first  pollen  mitosis  
(PM I), the vegetative cell exits the cell cycle at G1 while the 
generative  cell  continues  through  a  second  round  of  mitosis 
(PM II). This differential control of the cell cycle is essential 
for the production of identical sperm cells that will carry out 
double  fertilization.  In  eukaryotes,  the  protein  kinase  cdc2 
acts  as  a  key  cell  cycle  regulator.  In  Arabidopsis,  a  homolog 
of cdc2, A-type cyclin-dependent kinase (CDKA), is present 

as a single gene. A cdka;1 mutant produces mature bicellular 
pollen  grains,  with  a  single  sperm-like  cell  and  a  vegetative 
cell,  due  to  failure  of  PM  II  (Iwakawa  et  al.,  2006).  During 
fertilization,  the  sperm-like  cell  fuses  with  the  egg  cell  to 
initiate  embryogenesis,  but  the  central  cell  nucleus  remains 
unfertilized, resulting in arrest of embryo development at the 
globular  stage  because  of  the  lack  of  developed  endosperm. 
A  second  mutant,  F-BOX-LIKE  17  (FBL17),  produces  a 
strikingly  similar  phenotype  to  the  cdka;1  mutant  (Kim 
et al., 2008; Gusti et al., 2009). FBL17 is a substrate-specific 
component of an E3 ubiquitin protein ligase complex, target-
ing  KRP6  and  KRP7  for  proteasome-dependent  degradation. 
KRP6  and  KRP7  are  inhibitors  of  CDKA.  The  expression  of 
FBL17 specifically in the pollen germ cell following asymmet-
ric microspore division retains CDKA activity and allows pro-
gression through PM II, while KRP6 and KRP7 stability in the 
vegetative  cell  maintains  the  cell  in  G1  phase.  Interestingly, 
both  the  cdka;1  and  fbl17  mutant  phenotypes,  associated 
with  incomplete  endosperm  development,  can  be  partially 
suppressed  by  a  mutation  in  any  of  the  FIS-class  polycomb 
group  chromatin  modifying  genes  that  participate  in  genome 
imprinting  (Nowack  et  al.,  2007);  thus  releasing  embryo 
development  from  the  requirement  of  double  fertilization. 
With  this  second  mutation,  seeds  are  able  to  develop,  albeit 
smaller in size, without differentiation of an endosperm.

More  recent  integration  of  genetic  mutation  data  with 
transcript  profiling  analysis  targeting  male  gametogenesis  has 
allowed  elucidation  of  intricate  genetic  networks  that  direct 
pollen  formation,  germination,  and  fertilization  (Borg  et  al., 
2009).  These  studies  have  provided  a  wealth  of  promoter 

186

Male sterility and hybrid seed production

C H A P T E R   1 2

and  regulatory  sequence  information  that  allows  the  target-
ing  of  transgene  expression  specifically  to  tapetal  or  gamete 
cells (McCormick et al., 1991), as well as the opportunity to 
manipulate  naturally  occurring  events  during  gametogenesis 
for  precise  disruption.  The  influences  of  the  epigenome  and 
organelle metabolic functions on these pollen processes have 
not been fully explored.

Male Sterility Mutants Elucidate 
Anther Development

The  floral  reproductive  structure  is  organized  into  four 
genetically  distinguishable  whorls  (Smyth  et  al.,  1990).  The 
outermost  third  whorl  gives  rise  to  the  male  reproductive 
structures of the plant, with the stamen comprised of several 
tissues types. Stamen development must be coordinated with 
the  pistil  to  allow  for  successful  reproduction.  Genetic  vari-
ation  in  this  coordination  has  been  associated  with  enhance-
ment  of  out-crossing  and,  ultimately,  speciation,  while  other 
mutations render the plant male sterile. These mutations can 
include  alterations  in  filament  elongation,  pollen  maturation, 
or anther dehiscence (Chaudhury, 1993; Taylor et al., 1998).

Fairly  comprehensive  genetic  screens  for  pollen  mutants 
have  been  carried  out  by  several  labs,  with  outcomes 
that  underscore 
the  complexity  of  microsporogenesis 
(McCormick, 2004). While many of the mutations arising in 
these  screens  involved  genes  that  also  function  elsewhere  in 
development, a number of male sterility mutants were iden-
tified  in  otherwise  phenotypically  normal  plants.  This  obser-
vation  implies  not  only  that  pollen  development  involves 
numerous  distinct  processes,  but  that  the  opportunity  exists 
to identify male sterility mutants that may be useful agricul-
turally with relatively few pleiotropic effects.

Several components of the cellular program for anther and 
pollen development have been elucidated by detailed mutant 
analysis  (Figure  12.2;  Ma,  2005;  Wijeratne  et  al.,  2007). 
In  the  ABC  model  for  floral  organ  identity,  Arabidopsis  B 
genes APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI) and C genes 
AGAMOUS  (AG)  and  SEPALLATA  (SEP)  are  essential  to 
stamen differentiation. Downstream to these is Sporocyteless 
(SPL,  also  known  as  NOZZLE,  NZZ),  which  is  activated 
by  AG  (Ito  et  al.,  2004)  and  participates  in  the  forma-
tion  of  archesporial  cells  and  cell  proliferation  (Yang  et  al., 
1999;  Balasubramanian  and  Schneitz,  2000).  The  number 
of  archesporial  cells  that  form  and  the  initiation  of  sur-
rounding  tapetal  cell  formation  are  controlled  by  EXCESS 
MICROSPOROCYTES  1  (EMS1)/EXS  (Canales  et  al., 
2002; Zhao et al., 2002), a leucine-rich repeat receptor pro-
tein  kinase.  Whereas  meiotic  nuclear  division  in  the  ems1/
exs mutant occurs normally, microsporocytes do not undergo 
cytokinesis,  producing  a  male  sterility  phenotype.  Acting 
downstream  to  EMS1/EXS  is  the  gene  DISFUNCTIONAL 
TAPETUM 1 (DYT1), which is essential for tapetal develop-
ment.  DYT1  encodes  a  basic  helix-loop-helix  (bHLH)  tran-
scription  factor  that  is  highly  expressed  in  the  tapetum  and, 
to  a  lesser  extent,  in  meiocytes,  and  which  appears  to  be 
important  to  controlling  expression  of  tapetum-preferential 
genes (Zhang et al., 2006).

Another key component to tapetal function, acting down-
stream  to  DYT1,  is  Defective  in  Tapetal  Development  and 
Function 1 (TDF1). TDF1 encodes an R2R3 MYB transcrip-
tion factor, and expresses in tapetum, meiocytes, and micro-
spore cells (Zhu et al., 2008). This gene is thought to be an 
important  component  for  controlling  callose  dissolution, 
and  may  participate  in  exine  formation  of  the  pollen  wall. 
Downstream to TDF1 are two additional genes regulating tap-
etal  development,  ABORTED  MICROSPORES  (AMS)  and 
AtMYB103.  AMS  encodes  an  MYC  transcription  factor  that 
interacts  with  two  additional  bHLH  proteins  (AtbHLH089 
and  AtbHLH091)  and  a  tapetal-specific  gene  ATA20  (Xu 
et al., 2010). These express in tapetum and microspores and 
participate  in  microspore  mitosis  (Sorensen  et  al.,  2003). 
AtMYB103  is  an  R2R3  MYB  gene  family  member  that 
expresses  in  tapetum  to  influence  tapetal  development  and 
microsporogenesis, and in the trichomes to regulate their pat-
tern of branching (Higginson et al., 2003).

Downstream  to  AtAMYB103,  the  PHD  transcriptional 
activator  MALE  STERILITY  1  (MS1)  functions  to  regulate 
postmeiotic  male  gametogenesis  by  influencing  exine  devel-
opment  and  cytosolic  features  of  developing  microspores 
(Wilson et al., 2001; Ito et al., 2007). Following this process, 
the  MALE  STERILITY  2  (MS2)  gene  appears  to  act  at  the 
point of tetrad release to influence pollen wall development, 
altering  sporopollenin  synthesis  and  exine  patterning  (Aarts 
et al., 1997).

In  parallel  with  identification  of  the  stamen  development 
regulatory  network,  efforts  have  begun  to  identify  many  of 
the downstream genes that participate coordinately in devel-
opmental processes. For example, the AMS transcription fac-
tor influences nearly 550 genes that express in the anther (Xu 
et  al.,  2010).  Identified  genes,  many  shown  to  contain  the 
6 bp  consensus  motif  CANNTG,  are  associated  with  tapetal 
functions and pollen wall formation. It was feasible to confirm 
several  of  these  genes  by  chromatin  immunoprecipitation. 
They  include  functions  involved,  for  example,  in  lipid  trans-
port, fatty acid biosynthesis, flavonol accumulation, and pec-
tin dynamics. Functional analysis of at least one by insertional 
mutation also confirms a role in pollen development and pro-
vides information that may prove useful in the engineering of 
non-pleiotropic male sterility in crops. Understanding the pre-
cise role and expression of both regulatory and functional loci 
in  pollen  development  permits  the  design  of  male-sterility-
inducing  strategies  that  involve  plant-derived  gene  informa-
tion rather than non-plant, cytotoxic sources, which are more 
likely to find disfavor in agricultural deployment.

Hormonal Influences on Male 
Reproduction in Plants

Gibberellic acid

Floral development and reproduction processes are controlled 
by  numerous  hormonal  influences.  Some  of  these  hormone 
effects  have  been  identified  by  mutations.  Gibberellic  acid 
(GA) plays an important role in plant reproduction. Mutants 

187

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Figure 12.2 l Laser scanning confocal microscopy reveals the extensive diversity and remarkable beauty of plant pollen l Mutant 
analysis in Arabidopsis has allowed the identification of several genetic components regulating the development of these structures, shown 
here in their predicted functional order relative to the developmental stages at which they act. Mutation at many of these loci results in a male-
sterile plant phenotype. 

such  as  gal-3  in  Arabidopsis  have  allowed  the  elucidation  of 
GA  influence,  displaying  the  arrest  of  stamen  filament  and 
petal elongation (Cheng et al., 2004; Tyler et al., 2004). GA 
regulates cell elongation during stamen development, as well 
as  the  developmental  pathway  from  microspore  to  mature 
pollen  grain.  DELLA  is  a  transcriptional  regulator  that  oper-
ates to negatively control GA response in plants. DELLA pro-
teins RGA, RGA1, and RGL2 together repress petal, stamen, 
and  anther  development.  Transcript  levels  of  floral  homeotic 
genes APETALA3 (AP3), PISTILLATA (PI), and AGAMOUS 
(AG)  are  detectably  upregulated  in  young  flowers  of  ga1-3 
when  treated  with  GA  (Yu  et  al.,  2004).  Application  of  GA 
reverses  the  effects  of  DELLA  in  suppressing  floral  develop-
ment to restore pollen fertility.

Gibberellins  also  impact  pollen  viability  and  pollen  tube 
elongation (Singh et al., 2002). In rice, mutations influencing 
GA biosynthesis are reduced in their transmission to the sub-
sequent  generation  as  a  consequence  of  reduced  pollen  tube 
growth.  These  genes  are  generally  expressed  postmeiotically 
and,  therefore,  mutants  display  gametophytic  transmission 
patterns (Chhun et al., 2007).

GA regulates jasmonic acid biosynthesis

Research  has  begun  to  clarify  the  mode  of  GA  regula-
tion.  GAMYB  is  a  class  of  GA-regulated  transcription  fac-
tors  (Woodger  et  al.,  2003).  Two  closely  related  genes  in 

Arabidopsis,  MYB33  and  MYB65,  result  in  defective  tapetal 
development  and  premeiotic  pollen  abortion  when  dually 
mutated  (Millar  and  Gubler,  2005).  Likewise,  GA  upregu-
lates the expression of jasmonic acid (JA) biosynthesis genes 
DAD1  and  LOX1  to  promote  JA  production.  This  activ-
ity  by  GA  to  regulate  JA  promotes  expression  of  three  fac-
tors,  MYB21,  MYB24,  and  MYB57,  which  are  necessary  for 
stamen  development  (Cheng  et  al.,  2009).  The  JA-deficient 
mutant  opr3  and  JA  signaling  mutant  coiI  (Xie  et  al.,  1998) 
also  show  evidence  of  incomplete  stamen  development  and 
male  sterility.  Exogenous  application  of  JA,  but  not  its  pre-
cursor,  restores  fertility  to  the  opr3  mutant,  demonstrat-
ing  that  JA  is  the  active  signaling  molecule  required  for 
male  gametophyte  development  (Stintzi  and  Browse,  2000). 
Consequently,  the  process  of  normal  stamen  development 
appears to involve a complex interplay between GA, DELLA 
proteins, JA, and several MYB factors.

Brassinosteroids

Brassinosteroids  (BR)  have  been  shown  to  regulate  anther 
and  pollen  development.  For  example,  the  exogenous  appli-
cation  of  BRs  in  some  crops  can  induce  pollen  tube  elonga-
tion  (Hewitt  et  al.,  1985).  Likewise,  BR  mutants  such  as 
the  BR-deficient  mutant  cpd  (Szekeres  et  al.,  1996),  the 
brassinosteroid-insensitive mutant bin2 (Li et al., 2001), and 
the  BR  receptor  mutant  bri1-201  (Bouquin  et  al.,  2001)  in 

188

Male sterility and hybrid seed production

C H A P T E R   1 2

Arabidopsis  all  show  evidence  of  male  sterility.  Interestingly, 
the  bri1-201  allele  also  reveals  cross-talk  between  GA  and 
BR  pathways,  with  bri1-201  demonstrating  altered  expres-
sion of GA5, a GA biosynthesis gene, and the GA-responsive 
locus GASA1 (Bouquin et al., 2001). Perhaps the most direct 
evidence  of  BR  influence  on  anther  and  pollen  development 
comes from recent ChIP analysis demonstrating that the tran-
scription factor BES1, important for BR signaling, can directly 
bind to the promoter regions of microsporogenesis regulators 
SPL/NZZ, TDF1, AMS, MS1, and MS2 (Ye et al., 2010; see 
Figure 12.2). Consequently, BRs appear to have the capacity 
to  regulate  male  fertility  both  indirectly,  by  an  intersection 
with GA processes, and directly by controlling expression of 
key genes involved in multiple steps of stamen development.

Auxins

Evidence  indicates  that  auxins  also  influence  plant  male 
reproductive  development.  The  auxin  biosynthetic  double 
mutant  yuc2  yuc6  and  the  quadruple  mutant  tir1  afb1  afb2 
afb3, involving auxin signaling genes, demonstrate loss in male 
fertility  (Dharmasiri  et  al.,  2005;  Cheng  et  al.,  2006).  Use 
of  auxin-sensitive  reporter  genes  allows  detection  of  auxin 
effects  in  microspores  and  in  anther  somatic  tissues  during 
dehiscence  and  in  the  anther/filament  junction  (Cecchetti 
et  al.,  2008).  Auxin  synthesis  occurs  in  anthers,  and  TIR1, 
AFB1, AFB2, and AFB3 auxin receptor genes are transcribed 
in  late  stages  of  anther  development  following  meiosis. 
Combined mutations at three and four of the auxin receptor 
loci  result  in  premature  anther  dehiscence  and  pollen  matu-
ration, with pollen release occurring prior to filament elonga-
tion, suggesting that auxins are essential to coordinating pollen 
maturation with their release.

Cytoplasmic Male Sterility Systems in 
Agriculture

Cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS) is the maternally inherited 
inability  of  a  plant  to  produce  or  shed  viable  pollen.  CMS 
is  conditioned  by  gain-of-function  mitochondrial  genome 
mutations,  giving  rise  to  novel  mitochondrial  proteins  and 
facilitating  the  use  of  CMS  in  hybrid  crop  seed  production. 
A  mitochondrial  mutation  is  transmitted  to  all  progeny  of  a 
cross,  which  allows  the  breeder  to  maintain  the  male  steril-
ity  trait  without  the  inconvenience  of  gene  segregation  each 
generation. Implementation of a CMS system for hybrid seed 
production  requires  the  breeder  to  identify  not  only  a  sta-
ble  CMS  mutation,  and  a  crossing  strategy  to  maintain  the 
male  sterile  trait,  but  also  nuclear  suppressor  gene(s)  that 
will  restore  pollen  fertility.  Hybrid  seed  production  involves 
crossing  an  inbred,  maintained  on  the  CMS  cytoplasm,  with 
complementary inbred lines that contain the nuclear fertility 
restorer  gene(s)  to  produce  a  fertile  hybrid.  Such  a  genetic 
system,  when  properly  implemented,  can  greatly  reduce  the 
cost  of  seed  production  by  eliminating  the  need  for  manual 
emasculation,  and  provide  incentive  for  seed  purchase  each 
season to avoid segregation of male sterile plants.

Plant mitochondrial mutations

Plant  and  animal  mitochondrial  genomes  differ  in  their  large 
and variable sizes and in their tendency to undergo recombi-
nation (Arrieta-Montiel and Mackenzie, 2010). In plants, this 
recombination  activity  can  subdivide  the  genome  to  a  highly 
redundant,  multi-partite  structure,  with  different  submole-
cules  maintained  at  varying  levels.  Sites  with  the  potential 
to undergo recombination can be numerous within the mito-
chondrial genome, with 47 repeat pairs functionally identified 
in  the  Arabidopsis  mitochondrial  genome  (Arrieta-Montiel 
et al., 2009; Davila et al., 2011 ). This type of recombination 
provides an opportunity for accelerated genome evolution and 
capacity for extensive genomic variation. Two forms of varia-
tion  are  particularly  prevalent  in  the  mitochondrial  genomes 
of plants, sequence chimeras from non-homologous end join-
ing,  and  rapid  intermolecular  genomic  copy  number  changes 
within the mitochondrial population, produced by recombina-
tion and termed substoichiometric shifting (SSS). Both phe-
nomena are key components of CMS systems.

All  CMS  mitochondrial  mutations  identified  to  date 
have  been  comprised  of  sequence  chimeras,  generally  fus-
ing  identifiable  mitochondrial  gene  sequences  with  segments 
of  unknown  origin  (Schnable  and  Wise,  1998;  Hanson  and 
Bentolila, 2004). Yet, no two CMS mutations have been the 
same. These rearranged sequences give rise to new gene prod-
ucts that generally display some degree of hydrophobicity and 
likely interact with the mitochondrial membrane. Many CMS 
sequences  contain  segments  of  genes  involved  in  the  ATPase 
complex,  implying  that  energy-associated  alterations  might 
participate in the CMS phenotype.

CMS  mutations  differ  not  only  in  their  sequence  origins, 
but  often  in  their  phenotype,  from  alterations  in  microspore 
development  (Datta  et  al.,  2002),  to  callose  dissolution 
(Abad et al., 1995), to premature tapetal breakdown patterns 
(González-Melendi  et  al.,  2008).  Whether  these  phenotypic 
differences  are  the  consequence  of  distinct  mechanisms  of 
action or simply a reflection of variation in spatial and tempo-
ral expression patterns of the sterility lesion is not known.

Fertility restoration

The  male  sterile  phenotype  is  reversibly  suppressed  by  nuclear 
fertility restorer genes. Identification and cloning of these genes 
has  provided  valuable  insight  into  the  nature  of  mitochondrial 
gene regulation (Schmitz-Linneweber and Small, 2008). Several 
fertility  restorer  genes  have  been  cloned,  the  vast  majority  of 
them  have  been  found  to  contain  pentatricopeptide  repeats 
(PPR) within the protein. PPR proteins are known to participate 
in  mRNA  splicing,  editing,  and  translation  initiation  processes 
(Delannoy  et  al.,  2007).  In  plants,  this  family  of  genes  func-
tions  in  both  mitochondria  and  plastids  and  is  unusually  large, 
numbering  over  400  in  Arabidopsis  (Small  and  Peeters,  2000). 
Although  essential  for  the  proper  processing  and  translation  of 
native organellar transcripts, PPR-mediated processing can serve 
to  inactivate  a  rearranged,  CMS-associated  gene  transcript. 
Interestingly, regions of a genome may find PPR protein-coding 
genes  organized  in  large  duplicated  gene  clusters,  representing 

189

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

fertility restorer loci (Barr and Fishman, 2010). Organization of 
these genes within plant genomes suggests that they are subject 
to  intense  evolutionary  selection,  somewhat  similar  in  pattern 
to disease-resistance genes (Geddy and Brown, 2007). In natu-
rally occurring CMS hybrid incompatibility systems, where the 
male  sterility  phenotype  can  arise  by  particular  hybridizations, 
evidence  from  PPR  protein  gene  organization  and  conservation 
across  angiosperms  suggest  co-evolution  of  these  nuclear  and 
cytoplasmic factors to influence cross compatibility.

Two  other  types  of  nuclear  fertility  restorers  have  also 
been reported. The first is the Rf2 restorer of maize CMS-T 
cytoplasm, which encodes an aldehyde dehydrogenase that is 
suggested  to  play  a  detoxification  role  (Cui  et  al.,  1996;  Liu 
et al., 2001). Another type of nuclear restorer was reported in 
the common bean Fr gene, which effects specific stoichiomet-
ric changes in mitochondrial genome organization and results 
in  dramatic  reduction  of  the  mitochondrial  male  sterility 
sequence, pvs-orf239, to near undetectable levels (Mackenzie 
and Chase, 1990). This latter fertility restoring mechanism is 
non-reversible  in  subsequent  generations;  therefore,  it  does 
not  fall  under  the  formal  definition  of  a  fertility  restorer 
gene.  However,  such  nuclear-directed  influences  on  mito-
chondrial  genome  organization  likely  play  an  important  role 
in controlling mitochondrial genetic variation in natural plant 
populations.

Stability of the CMS trait

An  essential  feature  of  the  CMS  mutation  for  use  in  crop 
breeding is its stability, with little or no spontaneous reversion 
to fertility. Reversion to fertility is associated with SSS activ-
ity  (Arrieta-Montiel  and  Mackenzie,  2010).  Recombination-
mediated  genomic  shifting  can  result  in  rapid  copy  number 
reduction of the DNA molecule on which the CMS mutation 
resides,  leaving  the  remainder  of  the  mitochondrial  genome 
essentially  unchanged  (Janska  et  al.,  1998;  Bellaoui  et  al., 
1998). In this manner, the CMS mutation is silenced and the 
plant  displays  a  male  fertile  phenotype.  Reversion  frequency 
in  most  CMS  systems  that  have  been  studied  appears  to  be 
influenced  by  nuclear  genetic  background  (Mackenzie  and 
McIntosh, 1999). Therefore, a breeder wishing to implement 
a CMS system must test the stability of the system on a range 
of germplasm in the program.

Male Sterility: Metabolic and 
Evolutionary Implications

CMS is a naturally found condition

CMS is observed in over 150 plant species (Kaul, 1988), sug-
gesting that the capacity to convert to male sterility is preva-
lent in plants. In CMS common bean (Arrieta-Montiel et al., 
2001)  and  Brassica  spp.  (Murayama  et  al.,  2004;  Giancola 
et  al.,  2007),  fertile  plants  from  wild  populations  have  been 
shown  to  contain  the  male  sterility  gene  at  substoichio-
metric  levels.  These  observations  imply  that  it  is  feasible  to 
interconvert  male  fertile  and  sterile  types  under  particular, 

190

not  yet  defined  conditions.  At  least  two  nuclear  genes  have 
been  identified  that  control  the  mitochondrial  SSS  proc-
ess,  MSH1  (Abdelnoor  et  al.,  2003)  and  RECA3  (Shedge 
et al., 2007). Disruption or RNAi suppression of the nuclear 
gene  MSH1  results  in  a  marked  increase  in  the  frequency 
of  mitochondrial  recombination  (Sandhu  et  al.,  2007)  and, 
interestingly,  results  in  a  CMS  phenotype  in  six  different 
plant species tested to date (Shedge et al., 2010; Sandhu and 
Mackenzie,  unpublished).  This  raises  the  intriguing  possibil-
ity that CMS induction in nature can occur under conditions 
that  suppress  MSH1  expression.  Interestingly,  transcrip-
tion  of  MSH1  is  markedly  downregulated  under  environ-
mental  stresses,  including  heat,  drought,  cold,  and  high  light 
(Zimmermann et al., 2004; Shedge et al., 2010).

While male sterility occurs by numerous distinct mecha-
nisms  in  plants,  the  phenotype  is  presumably  adaptive 
within  a  plant  population  under  certain  conditions.  Male 
sterility  has  been  associated  with  increases  in  seed  pro-
duction  and  vigor  as  the  consequences  of  out-crossing 
(Charlesworth, 2002). The frequency of gynodioecy, or the 
mixture  within  a  plant  population  of  both  hermaphrodites 
and  females  (male  steriles),  has  been  estimated  to  occur  in 
over  7%  of  all  plant  species  (McCauley  and  Olson,  2008). 
In many of these cases, the male sterility appears to be cyto-
plasmic,  likely  a  consequence  of  the  dynamic  nature  of  the 
mitochondrial  genome.  Important  questions  remaining  in 
this field revolve around the nature of environmental and/or 
cellular cues that trigger interconversion of male fertile and 
male  sterile  phenotypes  in  natural  populations  and  under 
agricultural field conditions.

Organelle metabolism influences pollen 
development

Aside  from  the  CMS  trait,  there  is  other  evidence  to  sug-
gest  that  organelle  metabolism,  and  overall  cellular  meta-
bolic  state,  influences  pollen  development.  Mutation  of  the 
plastidial  glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate  dehydrogenase,  in  the 
form  of  a  gapcp1  gapcp2  double  mutant,  renders  the  plant 
male  sterile  (Muñoz-Bertomeu  et  al.,  2010).  Pollen  from 
this  mutant  displays  unusual  collapsed  shapes  due  to  altera-
tions  in  the  tapetum  and  perhaps  changes  in  carbohydrate 
pools and/or trehalose levels. Likewise, disruption of cytosolic 
phosphoglucomutase  prevents  both  male  and  female  game-
togenesis,  suggesting  that  proper  carbohydrate  distribution  is 
critical at these stages (Egli et al., 2010). Temperature has a 
major impact on pollen development and viability. Cold tem-
perature  stress  can  impede  pollen  development,  and  male-
gametophyte-specific classes of transcription factors appear to 
influence pollen response to adverse temperature effects (Zou 
et al., 2010).

The  tapetum  is  naturally  programmed  for  an  apoptosis-
like process (Wang et al., 1999; Wu and Cheung, 2000; Love 
et al., 2008). The timing of this programmed tapetal degener-
ation is critical for proper pollen development (Parish and Li, 
2010).  It  remains  largely  speculation  whether  mitochondrial 
cues signal this PCD response, but there appears to be indica-
tion  in  some  CMS  systems  that  mitochondria  influence  this 

Male sterility and hybrid seed production

C H A P T E R   1 2

process (Chase, 2007). Likewise, interference with the proc-
ess can provide a means of engineering male sterility.

Genetic Engineering of Male Sterility

Agricultural  systems  can  benefit  from  the  availability  of  reli-
able  male  sterility,  useful  in  hybrid  seed  production,  trans-
gene containment, and reduction of overall airborne allergens. 
The  deployment  of  transgenic  crops  that  are  male  ster-
ile  provides  greater  assurance  that  the  transgenic  genotype 
will  remain  confined  to  the  area  in  which  it  is  planted,  with-
out  concern  for  transport  of  pollen  to  neighboring  fields.  The 
abundance  of  biological  detail  now  available  for  pollen  path-
ways  facilitates  the  engineering  of  transgenic  approaches  for 
male  sterility  induction,  albeit  with  mixed  success  to  date. 
A  number  of  anther-specific  promoters  are  readily  obtained 
from  genes  identified  to  specifically  express  during  anther 
and  pollen  stages.  As  a  recent  example  of  this  approach,  five 
anther-specific  promoters  were  isolated  from  Brassica  olera-
cea  and  B.  rapa  and  shown  to  express  in  tapetal  cells  dur-
ing  meiocyte  development.  Fusion  of  these  promoters  to 
candidate  male  sterility  genes  such  as  cysteine  proteases 
BoCysP1  and  BoCP3,  and  Gibberellin-insensitive  (gai)  genes 
for  introduction  to  Arabidopsis  (Konagaya  et  al.,  2008)  pro-
duced  mixed  results.  Expression  of  BoCysP1  controlled  by 
two  specific  promoters  produced  plants  with  complete  male 
sterility.  Tapetal  and  middle  layer  cells  of  anthers  express-
ing  BoCysP1  showed  swelling  and  vacuolation,  perhaps  inter-
ference  with  the  normal  pattern  of  programmed  cell  death. 
Similar  approaches  have  been  taken  expressing  the  barnase 
gene  for  cell  ablation  during  pollen  development  (Mariani 
et  al.,  1990;  Gardner  et  al.,  2009),  DNA  adenine  methy-
lase  (Cigan  and  Albertsen,  2000),  phosphonate  monoeste-
rase  (Dotson  et  al.  1996),  ribosome  inactivating  protein  (Cho 
et  al.,  2001),  Avadin  (Albertsen  et  al.,  1999),  Stilbene  syn-
thase (Hofig et al., 2006), and endo-β-1,3,glucanase (Tsuchiya 
et al., 1995). It has also been feasible to capitalize on the dis-
covery  of  genes  known  to  function  distinctly  during  pollen 
development  to  manipulate  expression  and  alter  pollen  proc-
esses.  The  BECLIN  I  gene  is  an  ortholog  of  the  yeast  ATG6 
gene  involved  in  autophagy,  and  disruption  of  this  locus  in 
Arabidopsis results in male sterility. Transgenic over-expression 
of  the  gene  in  tobacco  tapetum  during  early  stages  of  anther 
development  can  also  alter  the  timing  of  programmed  cell 
death and tapetal degeneration (Singh et al., 2010).

Some  of  the  limitations  existing  in  engineering  male  ste-
rility  systems  have  been  the  occurrence  of  an  incomplete 
sterility  phenotype,  difficulties  with  restoring  fertility,  or 
complications associated with segregation of fertile progeny in 
subsequent generations. Some challenges have been addressed 
by fusion of the male sterility gene to an inducible promoter, 
and  some  by  the  design  of  a  fertility  restoration  strategy. 
Transgenic repression of the anther-specific cell wall invertase 
or  interference  with  its  activity  blocks  early  stages  of  pollen 
development, causing male sterility without having additional 
pleiotropic  effects  (Engelke  et  al.,  2010).  Restoration  of  fer-
tility  occurs  by  substituting  the  downregulated  endogenous 
plant  invertase  activity  by  a  yeast  invertase  fused  to  the 

N-terminus  of  a  potato  vacuolar  proteinase  II  (PiII-ScSuc2), 
under control of an anther-specific invertase promoter Nin88 
from  tobacco.  The  chimeric  PiII-ScSuc2  is  N-glycosylated 
and efficiently secreted to the apoplast, a necessary property 
of the native form. In addition, the Nin88::PiII-ScSuc2 fusion 
does  not  affect  pollen  development  in  a  normal  background, 
allowing this genotype to be used as a fertile restorer line.

Implementation of Male Sterility in 
Agricultural Systems

Attempts at genetic engineering of male sterility, while often 
effective in suppressing or disrupting normal pollen develop-
ment  patterns,  have  generally  suffered  from  their  infeasibil-
ity to scale up for agricultural implementation. An important 
motivation  for  identifying  an  effective  genetic  system  for 
male  sterility  is  the  opportunity  to  cultivate  hybrids.  An  F1 
hybrid  provides  more  uniform  crop  performance  in  the  field 
and,  more  importantly,  the  significant  advantage  of  hetero-
sis.  Heterosis,  or  hybrid  vigor,  refers  to  the  ability  of  the  F1 
hybrid to outperform either of the parents used in the cross. 
Consequently,  development  of  hybrids  has,  in  the  case  of 
many  crops,  accounted  for  significant  gains  in  overall  crop 
yield. For example, hybrid rice in China can be credited with 
reducing the total amount of land planted to rice from 36 Mha 
in  1975  to  30 Mha  in  2000,  and  increasing  total  production 
from  128  to  189  million  tons,  a  yield  increase  of  up  to  6.2 
tons/ha (http://www.fao.org/rice2004).

There have been several different genetic models proposed 
to  account  for  heterosis,  including  dominance,  overdomi-
nance, and pseudo-overdominance, all appearing to have some 
merit (Chen, 2010). It has also been suggested that epigenetic 
factors,  influenced  by  circadian-controlled  regulatory  mecha-
nisms,  may  underlie  much  of  the  heterosis  phenomenon. 
However,  what  has  not  been  investigated  sufficiently  is  the 
influence  of  maternal  effects  on  hybrid  vigor.  Often  recipro-
cal differences in cross-compatibility and vigor outcomes will 
be  observed  in  a  cross.  In  some  cases  a  CMS  plant  crossed 
to  its  sterility  maintainer  line  will  produce  a  more  vigor-
ous progeny than self-pollination of the same maintainer line  
(S.  Mackenzie,  unpublished).  In  these  crosses,  the  two 
hybridizing  plants  are  nearly  identical  in  nuclear  genotype, 
implying  that  the  vigor  may  result  from  cytoplasmic  factors. 
In fact, very little research has been conducted to investigate 
the  possible  influence  of  mitochondria  or  plastids,  the  two 
essential  generators  of  ATP,  on  heterosis.  It  is  intriguing  to 
speculate that organellar metabolic factors, together with epi-
genetic signals, may integrate to enhance vigor in the hybrid. 
Organellar  changes  arising  as  a  consequence  of  mutation  or 
suppression  of  MSH1  in  Arabidopsis  and  other  crop  species 
give  rise  to  dramatic  changes  in  growth  patterns  and  tran-
script profiles, suggesting that organellar functions can directly 
influence  several  developmental  pathways  in  plants  (Shedge 
et  al.,  2007,  2010;  Sandhu  et  al.,  2007;  Sandhu  and 
Mackenzie, unpublished).

The  natural  system  of  cytoplasmic  male  sterility  remains 
the  most  broadly  utilized  agriculturally.  CMS  has  been  suc-
cessfully  implemented  in  a  number  of  crops,  including  rice, 

191

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

sorghum,  millet,  onion,  sugar  beet,  and  carrot,  but  limita-
tions  exist  with  this  genetic  system  as  well.  Following  the 
Southern  Corn  Leaf  Blight  of  1970,  when  a  vast  area  of  the 
Midwestern  United  States  was  planted  with  CMS-T  type 
maize  that  proved  susceptible  to  the  T-toxin  of  Bipolaris 
maydis (Ullstrup, 1970), CMS in maize is no longer used to 
such a great extent. What was learned from that episode was 
the need for multiple distinct, stable sources of CMS for any 
given  crop  to  avoid  overplanting  to  a  single  cytoplasm  type. 
Furthermore, a useful source of CMS has not yet been identi-
fied in many crops in which hybrid vigor is well documented. 
With  the  recent  demonstration  that  CMS  can  be  transgeni-
cally induced (Sandhu et al., 2007), the opportunity may now 

exist  for  identification  of  additional  CMS  lines.  Presumably, 
this  type  of  cytoplasmic  genetic  manipulation  can  be  carried 
out  in  multiple  species  and  in  several  distinct  genotypes.  If 
MSH1 modulation occurs naturally in plant populations, and 
the CMS arising in these manipulations also occurs in nature, 
we  can  assume  that  fertility  restoration  mechanisms  are  also 
relatively prevalent.

The  wealth  of  fundamental  information  available  on  the 
genetic  and  physiological  pathways  regulating  stamen  devel-
opment provides well-documented opportunities to influence 
these  processes  transgenically.  More  practical  strategies  for 
introduction  of  male  sterility  traits  to  large-scale  agricultural 
production are needed now.

References

Aarts, M. G., Aarts, M. G., Hodge, R., 

Kalantidis, K., Florack, D., & Wilson, Z. 
A., et al. (1997). The Arabidopsis MALE 
STERILITY 2 protein shares similarity 
with reductases in elongation/condensation 
complexes. Plant Journal, 12, 615–623.

Abad, A., Mehrtens, B., & Mackenzie, S. 
(1995). Specific expression and fate 
of a mitochondrial sterility-associated 
mitochondrial protein in cms common bean. 
Plant Cell, 7, 271–28557.

Abdelnoor, R. V., Yule, R., Elo, A., Christensen, 

A., Meyer-Gauen, G., & Mackenzie, S. 
(2003). Substoichiometric shifting in the 
plant mitochondrial genome is influenced 
by a gene homologous to MutS. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 100, 5968–5973.
Albertsen, M. C., Howard, J. A., & Maddock, 

S. (1999). Induction of male sterility in 
plants by expression of high levels of avidin.
US Patent 5962769.

Arrieta-Montiel, M., Lyznik, A., Woloszynska, 

M., Janska, H., Tohme, J., & Mackenzie, 
S. (2001). Tracing evolutionary and 
developmental implications of mitochondrial 
stoichiometric shifting in the common bean. 
Genetics, 158, 851–864.

Arrieta-Montiel, M., & Mackenzie, S. A. 

(2010). Plant Mitochondrial Genomes 
and Recombination. In F. Kempken 
(Ed.), Advances in plant biology: Plant 
mitochondria (pp. 65–84). Springer Publ.

Arrieta-Montiel, M. P., Shedge, V., Davila, 
J., Christensen, A. C., & Mackenzie, S. 
A. (2009). Diversity of the Arabidopsis 
mitochondrial genome occurs via nuclear-
controlled recombination activity. Genetics, 
183, 1261–1268.

Balasubramanian, S., & Schneitz, K. (2000). 

NOZZLE regulates proximal-distal pattern 
formation, cell proliferation and early 
sporogenesis during ovule development in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Development, 127, 
4227–4238.

Barr, C. M., & Fishman, L. (2010). The 

nuclear component of a cytonuclear hybrid 
incompatibility in Mimulus maps to a cluster 
of pentatricopeptide repeat genes. Genetics, 
184, 455–465.

Bellaoui, M., Martin-Canadell, A., Pelletier, 

G., & Budar, F. (1998). Low-copy-number 

192

molecules are produced by recombination, 
actively maintained and can be amplified in 
the mitochondrial genome of Brassicaceae: 
Relationship to reversion of the male sterile 
phenotype in some cybrids. Molecular & 
General Genetics, 257, 177–185.
Borg, M., Brownfield, L., & Twell, D. 

(2009). Male gametophyte development: 
A molecular perspective. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 60, 1465–1478.

Bouquin, T., Meier, C., Foster, R., Nielsen, 

M., & Mundy, J. (2001). Control of 
specific gene expression by gibberellin and 
brassinosteroid. Plant Physiology, 127, 
450–458.

Bowman, J. L., Smyth, D. R., & Meyerowitz, 

E. M. (1989). Genes directing flower 
development in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 1, 
37–52.

Canales, C., Bhatt, A. M., Scott, R., & 

Dickinson, H. (2002). EXS, a putative LRR 
receptor kinase, regulates male germline cell 
number and tapetal identity and promotes 
seed development in Arabidopsis. Current 
Biology, 12, 1718–1727.

Cecchetti, V., Altamura, M., Falasca, G., 

Costantino, P., & Cardarelli, M. (2008). 
Auxin regulates Arabidopsis anther 
dehiscence, pollen maturation, and filament 
elongation. Plant Cell, 20, 1760–1774.
Charlesworth, D. (2002). What maintains 

male-sterility factors in plant populations? 
Heredity, 89, 408–409.

Chase, C. D. (2007). Cytoplasmic male 

sterility: A window to the world of plant 
mitochondrial–nuclear interactions. Trends 
in Genetics, 23, 81–90.

Chaudhury, A. M. (1993). Nuclear genes 
controlling male fertility. Plant Cell, 5, 
1277–1283.

Chen, Y. C., & McCormick, S. (1996). 

sidecar pollen, an Arabidopsis thaliana 
male gametophytic mutant with aberrant 
cell divisions during pollen development. 
Development, 122, 3243–3253.

Chen, Z. J. (2010). Molecular mechanisms of 
polyploidy and hybrid vigor. Trends in Plant 
Science, 15, 57–71.

Cheng, H., Qin, L., Lee, S., Fu, X., Richards, 

D. E., & Cao, D., et al. (2004). Gibberellin 
regulates Arabidopsis floral development 

via suppression of DELLA protein function. 
Development, 131, 1055–1064.

Cheng, H., Song, S., Xiao, L., Soo, H. M., 

Cheng, Z., & Xie, D., et al. (2009). 
Gibberellin acts through jasmonate to 
control the expression of MYB21, MYB24, 
and MYB57 to promote stamen filament 
growth in Arabidopsis. PLoS Genetics, 5, 
e1000440.

Cheng, Y., Dai, X., & Zhao, Y. (2006). 

Auxin biosynthesis by the YUCCA flavin 
monooxygenases controls the formation 
of floral organs and vascular tissues in 
Arabidopsis. Genes & Development, 20, 
1790–1799.

Chhun, T., Aya, K., Asano, K., Yamamoto, E., 

Morinaka, Y., & Watanabe, M., et al. (2007). 
Gibberellin regulates pollen viability and 
pollen tube growth in rice. Plant Cell, 19, 
3876–3888.

Cho, H. J., Kim, S., Kim, M., & Kim, B. D. 

(2001). Production of transgenic male sterile 
tobacco plants with the cDNA encoding a 
ribosome inactivating protein in Dianthus 
sinensis L. Molecules and Cells, 11, 326–
333.

Cigan, A. M., & Albertsen, M. C. (2000). Reversible 

nuclear genetic system for male sterility in 
transgenic plants. US Patent 6072102.

Cui, X., Wise, R. P., & Schnable, P. S. (1996). 

The rf2 nuclear restorer gene of male-
sterile T-cytoplasm maize. Science, 272, 
1334–1336.

Datta, R., Chamusco, K. C., & Chourey, P. S. 
(2002). Starch biosynthesis during pollen 
maturation is associated with altered 
patterns of gene expression in maize. Plant 
Physiology, 130, 1645–1656.

Davila, J. I., Arrieta-Montiel M. P., Wamboldt 

Y., Shedge,V., Xu Y.-Z., Mackenzie S. A. 
(2011) Double-strand break repair processes 
drive evolution of the mitochondrial genome 
in Arabidopsis. Submitted.

Delannoy, E., Stanley, W. A., Bond, C. S., & 

Small, I. D. (2007). Pentatricopeptide 
repeat (PPR) proteins as sequence-
specificity factors in post-transcriptional 
processes in organelles. Biochemical Society 
Transactions, 35, 1643–1647.

Dharmasiri, N., Dharmasiri, S., Weijers, D., 
Lechner, E., Yamada, M., & Hobbie, L.,  

Male sterility and hybrid seed production

C H A P T E R   1 2

et al. (2005). Plant development is regulated 
by a family of auxin receptor F box proteins. 
Developmental Cell, 9, 109–119.

Dotson, S. B., Lanahan, M. B., Smith, A. G., 
& Kishore, G. M. (1996). A phosphonate 
monoester hydrolase from Burkholderia 
caryophilli PG2982 is useful as a conditional 
lethal gene in plants. Plant Journal, 10, 
383–392.

Dudareva, N., Pichersky, E., & Gershenzon, 
J. (2004). Biochemistry of plant volatiles. 
Plant Physiology, 135, 1893–1902.

Eady, C., Lindsey, K., & Twell, D. (1994). 
Differential activation and conserved 
vegetative cell-specific activity of a late 
pollen promoter in species with bicellular 
and tricellular pollen. Plant Journal, 5, 
543–550.

Egli, B., Kolling, K., Köhler, C., Zeeman, S. 
C., & Streb, S. (2010). Loss of cytosolic 
phosphoglucomutase is compromises for 
gametophyte development in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Physiology, 154, 1659–1671.

Engelke, T., Hirsche, J., & Roitsch, T. (2010). 

Anther-specific carbohydrate supply and 
restoration of metabolically engineered male 
sterility. Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 
2693–2706.

Gardner, N., Felsheim, R., & Smith, A. G. 
(2009). Production of male- and female-
sterile plants through reproductive tissue 
ablation. Journal of Plant Physiology, 166, 
871–881.

Geddy, R., & Brown, G. G. (2007). Genes 

encoding pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) 
proteins are not conserved in location 
in plant genomes and may be subject to 
diversifying selection. BMC Genomics, 8, 
130.

Giancola, S., Rao, Y., Chaillou, S., Hiard, 

S., Martin-Canadell, A., & Pelletier, G., 
et al. (2007). Cytoplasmic suppression 
of Ogura cytoplasmic male sterility in 
European natural populations of Raphanus 
raphanistrum. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 114, 1333–1343.

González-Melendi, P., Uyttewaal, M., 

Morcillo, C. N., Hernández Mora, J. R., 
Fajardo, S., & Budar, F., et al. (2008). A 
light and electron microscopy analysis 
of the events leading to male sterility in 
Ogu-INRA CMS of rapeseed (Brassica 
napus). Journal of Experimental Botany, 59, 
827–838.

Gusti, A., Baumberger, N., Nowack, M., 

Pusch, S., Eisler, H., & Potuschak, T., et al. 
(2009). The Arabidopsis thaliana F-box 
protein FBL17 is essential for progression 
through the second mitosis during pollen 
development. PLoS ONE, 4, e4780.

Hanson, M., & Bentolila, S. (2004). Interactions 

of mitochondrial and nuclear genes that 
affect male gametophyte development. 
Plant Cell, 16(suppl), S154–S169.

Hewitt, F. R., Hough, T., O’Neill, P., Sasse, J. 

M., Williams, E. G., & Rowan, K. S. (1985). 
Effect of brassinolide and other growth 
regulators on the germination and growth 
of pollen tubes of Prunus avium using a 
multiple hangingdrop assay. Australian 
Journal of Plant Physiology, 1, 201–211.

Higginson, T., Li, S. F., & Parish, R. W. (2003). 
AtMYB103 regulates tapetum and trichome 

development in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant 
Journal, 35, 177–192.

Hofig, K. P., Moller, R., Donaldson, L., Putterill, 

J., & Walter, C. (2006). Towards male 
sterility in Pinus radiata, a stilbene synthase 
approach to genetically engineer nuclear 
male sterility. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 4, 
333–343.

http://www.fao.org/rice2004/
Ito, T., Nagata, N., Yoshiba, Y., Ohme-Takagi, 

M., Ma, H., & Shinozaki, K. (2007). 
Arabidopsis MALE STERILITY1 encodes a 
PHD-Type transcription factor and regulates 
pollen and tapetum development. Plant 
Cell, 19, 3549–3562.

Ito, T., Wellmer, F., Yu, H., Das, P., Ito, N., 
& Alves-Ferreira, M., et al. (2004). The 
homeotic protein AGAMOUS controls 
microsporogenesis by regulation of 
SPOROCYTELESS. Nature, 430, 356–360.

Iwakawa, H., Shinmyo, A., & Sekine, M. 
(2006). Arabidopsis CDKA;1, a cdc2 
homologue, controls proliferation of 
generative cells in male gametogenesis. Plant 
Journal, 45, 819–831.

Janska, H., Sarria, R., Woloszynska, M., Arrieta-

Montiel, M., & Mackenzie, S. A. (1998). 
Stoichiometric shifts in the common bean 
mitochondrial genome leading to male 
sterility and spontaneous reversion to 
fertility. The Plant Cell, 10, 1163–1180.

Kaul, M. (1988). Male sterility in higher plants. 

In R. Frankel, M. Grossman, & P. Maliga 
(Eds.), Monographs on theoretical and 
applied genetics (Vol. 10, pp. 775–795). 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Kim, H. J., Oh, S. -A., Brownfield, L., Hong, 
S. H., Ryu, H., & Hwang, I., et al. (2008). 
Control of plant germline proliferation 
by SCF (FBL17) degradation of cell cycle 
inhibitors. Nature, 455, 1134–1137.

Konagaya, K., Ando, S., Kamachi, S., Tsuda, 

M., & Tabei, Y. (2008). Efficient production 
of genetically engineered, male-sterile 
Arabidopsis thaliana using anther-specific 
promoters and genes derived from Brassica 
oleracea and B. rapa. Plant Cell Reports, 27, 
1741–1754.

Li, J., Nam, K., Vafeados, D., & Chory, J. 
(2001). BIN2, a new brassinosteroid-
insensitive locus in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiology, 127, 14–22.

Liu, F., Cui, X., Horner, H. T., Weiner, H., 
& Schnable, P. S. (2001). Mitochondrial 
aldehyde dehydrogenase activity is required 
for male fertility in maize. Plant Cell, 13, 
1063–1078.

Love, A. J., Milner, J. J., & Sadanandom, A. 
(2008). Timing is everything: Regulatory 
overlap in plant cell death. Trends in Plant 
Science, 13, 589–595.

Ma, H. (2005). Molecular genetic analyses of 
microsporogenesis and microgametogenesis 
in flowering plants. Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 56, 393–434.

Mackenzie, S., & McIntosh, L. (1999). Higher 
plant mitochondria. Plant Cell, 11, 571–585.

Mackenzie, S. A., & Chase, C. D. (1990). 

Fertility restoration is associated with loss 
of a portion of the mitochondrial genome 
in cytoplasmic male-sterile common bean. 
Plant Cell, 2, 905–912.

Mariani, C., Beuckeleer, M. D., Truettner, J., 

Leemans, J., & Goldberg, R. B. (1990). 
Induction of male sterility in plants by a 
chimeric ribonuclease gene. Nature, 347, 
737–741.

McCauley, D. E., & Olson, M. S. (2008). 

Do recent findings in plant mitochondrial 
molecular and population genetics have 
implications for the study of gynodioecy  
and cytonuclear conflict? Evolution; 
International Journal of Organic Evolution, 
62, 1013–1025.

McCormick, S. (2004). Control of male 

gametophyte development. Plant Cell, 16, 
S142–S153.

McCormick, S., Twell, D., Vancanneyt, G., & 
Yamaguchi, J. (1991). Molecular analysis of 
gene regulation and function during male 
gametophyte development. Symposia of 
the Society for Experimental Biology, 45, 
229–244.

Millar, A. A., & Gubler, F. (2005). The 

Arabidopsis GAMYB-like genes, MYB33 and 
MYB65, are microRNA-regulated genes that 
redundantly facilitate anther development. 
Plant Cell, 17, 705–721.

Muñoz-Bertomeu, J., Cascales-Miñana, B., 

Irles-Segura, A., Mateu, I., Nunes-Nesi, A., 
& Fernie, A. R., et al. (2010). The plastidial 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
is critical for viable pollen development 
in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 152, 
1830–1841.

Murayama, K., Yahara, T., & Terachi, T. 

(2004). Variation of female frequency and 
cytoplasmic male-sterility gene frequency 
among natural gynodioecious populations of 
wild radish (Raphanus sativus L.). Molecular 
Ecology, 13, 2459–2464.

Nowack, M. K., Shirzadi, R., Dissmeyer, N., 

Dolf, A., Endl, E., & Grini, P. E., et al. 
(2007). Bypassing genomic imprinting allows 
seed development. Nature, 447, 312–315.

Oh, S. A., Johnson, A., Smertenko, A., Rahman, 

D., Park, S. K., & Hussey, P. J.,  
et al. (2005). A divergent cellular role for 
the FUSED kinase family in the plant-
specific cytokinetic phragmoplast. Current 
Biology, 15, 2107–2111.

Parish, R. W., & Li, S. F. (2010). Death of a 
tapetum: A programme of developmental 
altruism. Plant Science, 178, 73–89.

Sandhu, A. S., Abdelnoor, R. V., & Mackenzie, 

S. A. (2007). Transgenic induction 
of mitochondrial rearrangements for 
cytoplasmic male sterility in crop plants. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
104, 1766–1770.

Schmitz-Linneweber, C., & Small, I. (2008). 

Pentatricopeptide repeat proteins: A socket 
set for organelle gene expression. Trends in 
Plant Science, 13, 663–670.

Schnable, P., & Wise, R. (1998). The molecular 

basis of cytoplasmic male sterility and 
fertility restoration. Trends in Plant Science, 
3, 175–180.

Shedge, V., Arrieta-Montiel, M., Christensen, 

A. C., & Mackenzie, S. A. (2007). Plant 
mitochondrial recombination surveillance 
requires novel RecA and MutS homologs. 
Plant Cell, 19, 1251–1264.

193

S E C T I O N   B

Breeding biotechnologies

Twell, D., Park, S. K., Hawkins, T. J., Schubert, 

D., Schmidt, R., & Smertenko, A., et al. 
(2002). Mor1/Gem1 has an essential role in 
the plant-specific cytokinetic phragmoplast. 
Nature Cell Biology, 4, 711–714.

Tyler, L., Thomas, S. G., Hu, J., Dill, A., 

Alonso, J. M., & Ecker, J. R., et al. (2004). 
Della proteins and gibberellin-regulated 
seed germination and floral development 
in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 135, 
1008–1019.

Ullstrup, A. J. (1970). The impacts of the 

Southern Corn Leaf Blight epidemics 
of 1970–1971. Annual Review of 
Phytopathology, 10, 37–50.

Ursin, V. M., Yamaguchi, J., & McCormick, 

S. (1989). Gametophytic and sporophytic 
expression of anther-specific genes in 
developing tomato anthers. Plant Cell, 1, 
727–736.

Wang, M., Hoekstra, S., van Bergen, S., Lamers, 
G. E. M., Oppedijk, B. J., & van der Heiden, 
M. W., et al. (1999). Apoptosis in developing 
anthers and the role of ABA in this process 
during androgenesis in Hordeum vulgare L. 
Plant Molecular Biology, 39, 489–501.

Wijeratne, A. J., Zhang, W., Sun, Y., Liu, W., 

Albert, R., & Zheng, Z., et al. (2007). 
Differential gene expression in Arabidopsis 
wild-type and mutant anther: Insights into 
anther cell differentiation and regulatory 
networks. Plant Journal, 52, 14–29.

Wilson, Z., Morroll, S., Dawson, J., Swarup, R., 
& Tighe, P. (2001). The Arabidopsis MALE 
STERILITY1 (MS1) gene is a transcriptional 
regulator of male gametogenesis, with 
homology to the PHD-finger family of 
transcription factors. Plant Journal, 28, 
27–39.

Woodger, F. J., Millar, A., Murray, F., Jacobsen, 

J. V., & Gubler, F. (2003). The role of 
GAMYB transcription factors in GA-
regulated gene expression. Journal of Plant 
Growth Regulation, 22, 176–184.
Wu, H. -M., & Cheung, A. Y. (2000). 

Programmed cell death in plant 
reproduction. Plant Molecular Biology, 44, 
267–281.

Xie, D. X., Feys, B. F., James, S., Nieto-Rostro, 

M., & Turner, J. G. (1998). COI1: An 
Arabidopsis gene required for jasmonate-
regulated defense and fertility. Science, 280, 
1091–1094.

Xu, J., Yang, C., Yuan, Z., Zhang, D., Gondwe, 

M. Y., & Ding, Z., et al. (2010). The 

ABORTED MICROSPORES regulatory 
network is required for postmeiotic male 
reproductive development in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Plant Cell, 22, 91–107.

Yang, W. C., Ye, D., Xu, J., & Sundaresan, V. 
(1999). The SPOROCYTELESS gene of 
Arabidopsis is required for initiation of 
sporogenesis and encodes a novel nuclear 
protein. Genes & Development, 13, 2108–
2117.

Ye, Q., Zhu, W., Li, L., Zhang, S., Yin, Y., & Ma, 

H., et al. (2010). Brassinosteroids control 
male fertility by regulating the expression 
of key genes involved in Arabidopsis anther 
and pollen development. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 107, 6100–6105.

Yu, H., Ito, T., Zhao, Y., Peng, J., Kumar, P., & 
Meyerowitz, E. M. (2004). Floral homeotic 
genes are targets of gibberellin signaling 
in flower development. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 101, 7827–7832.

Zhang, W., Sun, Y., Timofejeva, L., 

Chen, C., Grossniklaus, U., & Ma, 
H. (2006). Regulation of Arabidopsis 
tapetum development and function by 
DYSFUNCTIONAL TAPETUM1 (DYT1) 
encoding a putative bHLH transcription 
factor. Development, 133, 3085–3095.

Zhao, D. Z., Wang, G. F., Speal, B., 
& Ma, H. (2002). The EXCESS 
MICROSPOROCYTES1 gene encodes 
a putative leucine-rich repeat receptor 
protein kinase that controls somatic and 
reproductive cell fates in the Arabidopsis 
anther. Genes & Development, 16, 2021–
2031.

Zhu, J., Chen, H., Li, H., Gao, J. F., Jiang, 
H., & Wang, C., et al. (2008). Defective 
in Tapetal Development and Function 1 is 
essential for anther development and tapetal 
function for microspore maturation in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 55, 266–277.

Zimmermann, P., Hirsch-Hoffmann, M., 
Hennig, L., & Gruissem, W. (2004). 
GENEVESTIGATOR. Arabidopsis 
Microarray Database and Analysis Toolbox. 
Plant Physiology, 136, 2621–2632.

Zou, C., Jiang, W., & Yu, D. (2010). Male 

gametophyte-specific WRKY34 transcription 
factor mediates cold sensitivity of 
mature pollen in Arabidopsis. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 61, 3901–3914. (Epub 
2010 Jul 19).

Shedge, V., Davila, J., Arrieta-Montiel, M. P., 

Mohammed, S., & Mackenzie, S. A. (2010). 
Extensive rearrangement of the Arabidopsis 
mitochondrial genome elicits cellular 
conditions for thermotolerance. Plant 
Physiology, 152, 1960–1970.

Singh, D., Jermakow, A., & Swain, S. 

(2002). Gibberellins are required for seed 
development and pollen tube growth in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 14, 3133–3147.

Singh, S. P., Pandey, T., Srivastava, R., Verma, 
P. C., Singh, P. K., & Tuli, R., et al. (2010). 
BECLIN1 from Arabidopsis thaliana under 
the generic control of regulated expression 
systems, a strategy for developing male 
sterile plants. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 
8(9), 1005–1022.

Small, I. D., & Peeters, N. (2000). The PPR 

motif – a TPR-related motif prevalent 
in plant organellar proteins. Trends in 
Biochemical Sciences, 25, 46–47.

Smyth, D. R., Bowman, J. L., & Meyerowitz, 
E. M. (1990). Early flower development in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 2, 755–767.

Sorensen, A., Kröber, S., Unte, U. S., Huijser, 

P., Dekker, K., & Saedler, H. (2003). The 
Arabidopsis ABORTED MICROSPORES 
(AMS) gene encodes an MYC class 
transcription factor. Plant Journal, 33, 
413–423.

Stintzi, A., & Browse, J. (2000). The 

Arabidopsis male-sterile mutant, opr3, 
lacks the 12-oxophytodienoic acid 
reductase required for jasmonate synthesis. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 97, 
10625–10630.

Szekeres, M., Németh, K., Koncz-Kálmán, Z., 

Mathur, J., Kauschmann, A., & Altmann, 
T., et al. (1996). Brassinosteroids rescue the 
deficiency of CYP90, a cytochrome P450, 
controlling cell elongation and de-etiolation 
in Arabidopsis. Cell, 85, 171–182.

Taylor, P. E., Glover, J. A., Lavithis, M., Craig, 

S., & Singh, M. B., et al. (1998). Genetic 
control of male fertility in Arabidopsis 
thaliana: Structural analyses of postmeiotic 
developmental mutants. Planta, 205, 
492–505.

Tsuchiya, T., Toriyama, K., Yoshikawa, M., Ejiri, 

S., & Hinata, K. (1995). Tapetum-specific 
expression of the gene for an endobeta-1,3-
glucanase causes male sterility in transgenic 
tobacco. Plant and Cell Physiology, 36, 
487–494.

194

Germplasm collection, storage, and 
conservation

17

Florent Engelmann
IRD, UMR DIADE Montpellier, France

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 255
Strategies for conserving plant biodiversity . . . . . . . .255
Ex situ conservation technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .256
Applications of Biotechnologies for Conservation  .  .  .  .  . 257
In vitro collecting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .257
Slow growth storage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .258
Cryopreservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .259
Conclusions   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 264

Introduction

Strategies for conserving plant biodiversity

Two  basic  conservation  strategies,  in  situ  and  ex  situ,  each 
composed  of  various  techniques,  are  employed  for  conser-
vation  of  plant  biodiversity.  The  Convention  on  Biological 
Diversity provides the following definitions for these catego-
ries  (UNCED,  1992).  Ex  situ  conservation  means  the  con-
servation  of  components  of  biological  diversity  outside  their 
natural  habitat.  In  situ  conservation  means  the  conservation 
of  ecosystems  and  natural  habitats  and  the  maintenance  and 
recovery  of  viable  populations  of  species  and,  in  the  case  of 
domesticated or cultivated species, in the surroundings where 
they have developed their distinctive properties. Ex situ con-
servation  is  appropriate  for  conserving  crops  and  their  wild 
relatives, whereas in situ conservation is especially appropriate 
for wild species and for landrace material on farms.

Until  recently,  most  conservation  efforts,  apart  from 
work  on  forest  genetic  resources,  have  concentrated  on 
ex  situ  conservation,  particularly  seed  genebanks.  In  the 
1950s  and  1960s,  major  advances  in  plant  breeding  brought 
about  the  Green  Revolution,  which  resulted  in  the  wide-
scale  adoption  of  high-yielding  varieties  and  genetically  uni-
form  cultivars  of  staple  crops,  particularly  wheat  and  rice. 

Consequently,  global  concern  about  the  loss  of  genetic 
diversity  in  these  crops  increased,  as  farmers  abandoned 
their  locally  adapted  landraces  and  traditional  varieties  and 
replaced  them  with  improved,  yet  genetically  uniform, 
modern  ones.  In  response  to  this  concern,  the  International 
Agricultural  Research  Centers  (IARC)  of  the  Consultative 
Group  on  International  Agricultural  Research  (CGIAR) 
started  to  assemble  germplasm  collections  of  the  major  crop 
species  within  their  respective  mandates.  It  is  in  this  con-
text that the International Board for Plant Genetic Resources 
(IBPGR,  today  Bioversity  International)  was  established  in 
1974 to coordinate the global effort to systematically collect 
and  conserve  the  world’s  threatened  plant  genetic  diversity 
(Engelmann and Engels, 2002).

Today, as a result of this global effort, there are over 1750 
genebanks  worldwide,  about  130  of  which  hold  more  than 
10,000  accessions  each.  It  is  estimated  that  around  7.4  mil-
lion  accessions  are  maintained  ex  situ  globally  (FAO,  2009). 
It should be mentioned that these collecting and conservation 
activities  focused  largely  on  the  major  food  crops,  including 
cereals  and  some  legumes,  that  is,  species  that  can  be  con-
served  easily  as  seed.  This  has  resulted  in  overrepresenta-
tion of those species in the world’s major genebanks, as well 
as  in  the  fact  that  conservation  strategies  and  concepts  are 
biased toward such material. It is only more recently that the 
establishment  of  field  genebanks,  allowing  the  conservation 
of  species  for  which  seed  conservation  is  not  appropriate  or 
impossible,  as  well  as  the  development  of  new  storage  tech-
nologies,  including  in  vitro  conservation  and  cryopreserva-
tion, was given due attention by the international community 
(Engelmann and Engels, 2002).

Until now, most activities on ex situ conservation of plant 
biodiversity  have  focused  on  crop  species.  However,  con-
servation  of  wild,  rare,  and  endangered  plant  species  has 
also  become  an  issue  of  concern.  Indeed,  as  highlighted  by 
Sarasan  et  al.  (2006),  the  world’s  biodiversity  is  declining  at 
an unprecedented rate. During 1996 to 2004, a total of 8321 
plant species have been added to the Red List of Threatened 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00017-1

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

Species (IUCN, 2004), and the number of plants recorded as 
critically endangered has increased by 60%. For wild species, 
the  traditional  conservation  approach  is  in  situ  conservation. 
However,  it  is  now  recognized  that  ex  situ  techniques  can 
be efficiently used to complement in situ methods, and they 
may  represent  the  only  option  for  conserving  certain  highly 
endangered and rare species (Ramsay et al., 2000). It is there-
fore  of  paramount  importance  to  develop  techniques  ensur-
ing  optimal  storage  and  rapid  multiplication  of  such  species. 
Botanical gardens play a very important role in ex situ conser-
vation  of  plant  biodiversity.  UNEP  (UNEP,  United  Nations 
Environment  Programme,  1995)  estimated  that  botani-
cal gardens, of which there are over 2500 around the world, 
conserve over 80,000 species (one-third of the world’s flow-
ering  plants),  among  which  Botanic  Gardens  Conservation 
International 
identified  over  15,000  threatened  species 
(http://www.bgci.org/ourwork/1977/).  Botanical  gardens  and 
agricultural  genebanks  should  be  seen  as  playing  a  comple-
mentary role for the conservation of plant biodiversity (Engels 
and Engelmann, 1998).

Ex situ conservation technologies

Many  of  the  world’s  major  food  plants  produce  seeds  that 
undergo  maturation  drying,  and  are  thus  tolerant  to  exten-
sive  desiccation  and  can  be  stored  dry  at  low  temperatures. 
Such seeds are termed orthodox (Roberts, 1973). Storage of 
orthodox seeds is the most widely practiced method of ex situ 
conservation of plant genetic resources, since 90% of the 7.3 
million accessions stored in genebanks are maintained as seed.
In  contrast  to  orthodox  seeds,  a  considerable  number  of 
species,  predominantly  tropical  or  subtropical  in  origin,  such 
as coconut, cacao, and many forest and fruit tree species, pro-
duce seeds that do not undergo maturation drying and are shed 
at  relatively  high  moisture  content  (Chin,  1988).  Such  seeds 
are unable to withstand desiccation and are often sensitive to 
chilling. Therefore, they cannot be maintained under the con-
ventional seed storage conditions previously described, such as 
storage at low moisture content and low temperature. Seeds of 
this type are called recalcitrant and have to be kept in moist, 
relatively  warm  conditions  to  maintain  viability  (Roberts, 
1973; Chin and Roberts, 1980). Even when recalcitrant seeds 
are  stored  in  an  optimal  manner,  their  life  span  is  limited  to 
weeks,  and  occasionally  months.  Of  more  than  7000  species 
for which information on seed storage behavior has been pub-
lished (Hong et al., 1996), approximately 3% are recorded as 
recalcitrant, and an additional 4% as possibly recalcitrant.

More  recent  investigations  have  identified  species  exhib-
iting  intermediate  storage  behavior.  While  such  seeds  can 
tolerate  desiccation  to  fairly  low  moisture  contents,  once 
dried,  they  become  particularly  susceptible  to  injury  caused 
by  low  temperatures  (Ellis  et  al.,  1990,  1991).  Even  though 
a  continuum  in  desiccation  sensitivity  is  observed  within  the 
intermediate  seed  storage  category,  from  highly  desicca-
tion  sensitive  to  relatively  tolerant  (Berjak  and  Pammenter, 
1994), the storage life of intermediate seeds can be prolonged 
by  further  drying,  but  it  remains  impossible  to  achieve  the 
long-term  conservation  of  orthodox  seeds.  About  1%  of  the 

256

aforementioned  7000  species  studied  and  included  in  the 
Compendium on Seed Storage Behaviour are reported as pro-
ducing intermediate seeds, and another 1% have been charac-
terized as possibly intermediate (Hong et al., 1996). Included 
in this category are some economically important species such 
as  coffee,  citrus,  rubber,  oil  palm,  and  many  tropical  forest 
tree species.

It  should  be  noted  that  the  percentages  of  intermediate 
and  recalcitrant  seed-producing  species  previously  cited  are 
likely  to  be  largely  underestimated  (Engelmann  and  Engels, 
2002). These figures are based on scientific and technical pub-
lications,  which,  by  default,  concern  mainly  temperate  spe-
cies.  In  addition,  it  can  be  expected  that  a  large  proportion 
of the species for which no information is available, which are 
predominantly of tropical or subtropical origin, exhibit recal-
citrant, or to a lesser extent, intermediate seed storage behav-
ior. As an example, it has been estimated that more than 70% 
of tree species in humid tropical forest ecosystems have recal-
citrant seeds (Ouédraogo et al., 1999).

There  are  other  species  for  which  conservation  as  seed  is 
problematic. First, there are those that do not produce seeds 
at  all  and,  consequently,  are  propagated  vegetatively  (i.e., 
banana  and  plantain;  Musa  spp.).  Secondly,  there  are  crops 
such  as  potato  (Solanum  tuberosum),  other  root  and  tuber 
crops  such  as  yams  (Dioscorea  spp.),  cassava  (Manihot  escu-
lenta)  and  sweet  potato  (Ipomoea  batatas),  and  sugarcane 
(Saccharum  spp.)  that  have  either  some  sterile  genotypes 
and/or  some  that  produce  orthodox  seed.  However,  these 
seeds are highly heterozygous and, therefore, of limited util-
ity  for  the  conservation  of  particular  genotypes.  These  crops 
are  usually  propagated  vegetatively  to  maintain  genotypes  as 
clones (Simmonds, 1982).

Traditionally, the field genebank has been the ex situ stor-
age method of choice for the aforementioned problem mate-
rials  (Engelmann  and  Engels,  2002).  According  to  the  First 
Report on the State of the World’s Plant Genetic Resources for 
Food  and  Agriculture  (FAO,  1996),  around  527,000  acces-
sions were maintained in field genebanks at that time. There 
are  no  updated  data  in  the  second  report  (FAO,  2009),  but 
this  number  can  only  have  increased  during  this  period.  In 
some  ways,  this  method  offers  a  satisfactory  approach  to 
conservation.  The  genetic  resources  under  conservation  can 
be  readily  accessed  and  observed,  thus  permitting  detailed 
evaluation.  However,  there  are  certain  drawbacks  that 
limit  its  efficiency  and  threaten  its  security  (Withers  and 
Engels,  1990;  Engelmann,  1997a).  The  genetic  resources  are 
exposed to pests, diseases, and other natural hazards such as 
drought, weather damage, human error, and vandalism. They 
are also not in a condition that is readily conducive to germ-
plasm exchange because of the great risks of disease transfer 
through the exchange of vegetative material. Field genebanks 
are  costly  to  maintain  and  are  thus  prone  to  economic  deci-
sions that may limit the level of replication of accessions, the 
quality of maintenance, and even their very survival in times 
of  economic  stringency.  Even  under  the  best  circumstances, 
field  genebanks  require  considerable  inputs  in  the  form  of 
land (often needing multiple sites to allow for rotation), labor, 
management,  and  materials,  and  as  well  their  capacity  to 
ensure the maintenance of much diversity is limited.

Germplasm collection, storage, and conservation

C H A P T E R   1 7

There are other categories of plant material that require the 
availability of improved storage technologies. The development 
of biotechnology has led to the production of a new category 
of germplasm including clones obtained from elite genotypes, 
cell  lines  with  special  attributes,  and  genetically  transformed 
material (Engelmann, 1991). This new germplasm is often of 
high added value and very difficult to produce. The develop-
ment  of  efficient  techniques  to  ensure  its  safe  conservation 
is  therefore  of  great  importance.  Finally,  it  is  of  paramount 
importance  to  have  efficient  technologies  to  ensure  the  long-
term  conservation  of  rare  and  endangered  plant  species,  the 
number of which is increasing rapidly.

In the light of the difficulties outlined earlier, efforts have 
been made to improve the quality and security of conservation 
offered  by  field  genebanks,  and  to  understand  and  overcome 
seed  recalcitrance  to  make  seed  storage  more  widely  avail-
able. It has also been recognized that alternative approaches to 
genetic conservation were needed for these problem materials 
and,  since  the  early  1970s,  attention  has  turned  to  the  pos-
sibilities offered by biotechnology, specifically in vitro or tissue 
cultures.

Tissue-culture  techniques  are  of  great  interest  for  the 
collecting,  multiplication,  and  storage  of  plant  germplasm 
(Engelmann,  1991;  Bunn  et  al.,  2007).  Tissue-culture  sys-
tems  allow  propagating  of  plant  material  with  high  multipli-
cation  rates  in  an  aseptic  environment.  Virus-free  plants  can 
be  obtained  through  meristem  culture  in  combination  with 
thermotherapy,  thus  ensuring  the  production  of  disease-free 
stocks and simplifying quarantine procedures for the interna-
tional exchange of germplasm. The miniaturization of explants 
reduces space requirements and consequently labor costs for 
the  maintenance  of  germplasm  collections.  In  vitro  propaga-
tion protocols have been established for several thousands of 
plant species (George, 1996).

Different  in  vitro  conservation  methods  are  employed, 
depending  on  the  storage  duration  requested.  For  short-  and 
medium-term  storage,  the  aim  is  to  reduce  growth  and  to 
increase  the  intervals  between  subcultures.  For  long-term 
storage,  cryopreservation  (i.e.,  storage  at  ultra-low  tempera-
ture, usually with liquid nitrogen at 196ºC), is the only cur-
rent  method.  At  this  temperature,  all  cellular  divisions  and 
metabolic processes are stopped. The plant material can thus 
be stored without alteration or modification for a theoretically 
unlimited  period  of  time.  Moreover,  cultures  are  stored  in  a 
small  volume,  protected  from  contamination,  requiring  very 
limited  maintenance.  In  vitro  collecting,  slow  growth,  and 
cryopreservation techniques are described and analyzed in the 
following sections.

Applications of Biotechnologies for 
Conservation

In vitro collecting

Collectors  are  faced  with  various  problems  when  collecting 
germplasm  of  recalcitrant  seed  and  vegetatively  propagated 
plant  species  (Engelmann,  2009).  Collecting  missions  often 

require traveling for relatively long periods in remote areas. It 
is thus necessary to keep the material collected in a good state 
for some days and/or weeks before it can be placed in optimal 
growth  or  storage  conditions.  Because  of  this,  there  are  great 
risks that recalcitrant seeds will either germinate or deteriorate 
before they are brought back to the genebank (Allen and Lass, 
1983). In addition, many recalcitrant seeds have a sheer weight 
and bulk, which can be a problem in terms of volume of mate-
rial to handle and its additional cost, if an adequate sample of 
the population is to be collected. With vegetatively propagated 
species, the material collected will consist of stakes, pieces of 
budwood, tubers, corms, or suckers. Most of these explants will 
not be adapted to survival once excised from the parent plant, 
and they also present health risks due to their vegetative nature 
and contamination with soil-borne pathogens (Withers, 1987). 
Difficulties can also be encountered when collecting germplasm 
of  orthodox  seed-producing  species.  Even  with  careful  plan-
ning  during  the  collecting  mission,  there  may  be  little  or  no 
seed available for all or part of the germplasm to be collected, 
or seeds might not be at the optimal developmental stage, shed 
from  the  plant,  or  eaten  by  grazing  animals  (Guarino  et  al., 
1995). The problems described previously can be overcome if 
it is realized that the seed is not the only material that can be 
collected: zygotic embryos or vegetative tissues such as pieces 
of budwood, shoots, or apices can be sampled, transported, and 
grown successfully if placed under adequate conditions.

Following an expert meeting organized by IBPGR in 1984 
and sponsorship of various research programs, in vitro collect-
ing  techniques  have  been  developed  for  different  materials 
including  embryos  of  coconut,  cacao,  avocado,  Citrus,  veg-
etative tissues of cacao, Musa, coffee, Prunus, grape, cotton, 
and  several  forage  grasses  (Pence  et  al.,  2002)).  The  critical 
points  to  consider  for  the  development  of in  vitro  collecting 
techniques  have  been  synthesized  and  analyzed  by  Withers 
(1995).  The  techniques  developed  are  very  simple  and  flex-
ible, as illustrated next with coconut and cacao.

With coconut, the in vitro field-collecting technique devel-
oped by Assy-Bah et al. (1987) consists of extracting a plug of 
endosperm  containing  the  embryo  from  the  nut  with  a  cork 
borer.  After  surface  sterilization  with  calcium  hypochlorite 
or commercial bleach, the embryos are dissected on the spot 
under the shelter of a wooden box and inoculated onto semi-
solid medium, or the endosperm plugs are transported to the 
laboratory  where  the  embryos  are  dissected  and  inoculated 
onto semi-solid medium in aseptic conditions. This technique 
is very efficient. After approximately 6 to 9 months in culture 
in  the  laboratory  under  standard  conditions,  an  average  of 
75% of the embryos collected developed into plantlets, which 
could  be  successfully  transferred  to  the  nursery  and  then  to 
the field. In addition, embryos inoculated in vitro in the field 
could be kept in the open for two months before being grown 
in the laboratory without incidence for further development. 
This protocol is now used on a large scale for the international 
exchange  of  coconut  germplasm  between  Côte  d’Ivoire,  the 
Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Papua New Guinea in the frame-
work of a project funded by the Global Crop Diversity Trust 
(Rome, Italy; http://www.croptrust.org/main/).

With  cacao,  an  in  vitro  collecting  method  was  developed 
for budwood (Yidana et al., 1987). Considering that absolute 

257

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

sterility  would  be  difficult  to  achieve  in  the  field  and  would 
not  necessarily  be  essential  for  robust,  woody  material,  the 
aim  was  to  place  the  samples  collected  in  conditions  that 
would allow suppressing or delaying deterioration. Stem nodal 
cuttings  were  disinfected  with  boiled  water  that  contained 
drinking  water  sterilizing  tablets  and  fungicides,  then  they 
were inoculated onto semi-solid medium supplemented with 
fungicide  and  antibiotics.  Explants  could  be  maintained  in  a 
relatively  clean  (although  not  necessarily  completely  sterile) 
condition for up to 6 weeks.

These  examples  illustrate  the  flexibility  of  in  vitro  collect-
ing. There is no one formula to be followed, nor should there 
be. The approach should be based upon prior knowledge of the 
requirements of the species and explant in question, combined 
with  the  collective  experience  gained  with  diverse  species  in 
different collecting environments. As in any germplasm transfer 
operation, particular attention should be given to phytosanitary 
considerations.  In  vitro  collected  explants  should  be  treated 
with the same care and observance of regulations as any other 
type of collected material (Withers and Engelmann, 1998).

increases  the  storage  capacities,  as  observed  by  Kartha  et  al. 
(1981) with coffee plantlets. Microtubers can be successfully 
employed as storage propagules, as demonstrated with potato 
(Kwiatowski et al., 1988; Gopal et al., 2005). Preconditioning 
the  explants  by  exposing  them  briefly  to  temperature  and 
light  conditions  intermediate  between  standard  and  storage 
conditions  was  favorable  for  Nephrolepis  and  Cordyline  cul-
tures  (Hvoslef-Heide,  1992).  The  type  of  culture  vessel,  its 
volume, and the volume as well as the type of closure of the 
culture vessel can greatly influence the survival of stored cul-
tures  (Engelmann,  1991).  Roca  et  al.  (1984)  indicated  that 
cassava  shoot  cultures  could  be  stored  for  longer  periods  in 
better condition by increasing the size of the storage contain-
ers.  The  use  of  heat-sealable  polypropylene  bags  instead  of 
glass test tubes or plastic boxes was beneficial for the storage 
of several strawberry varieties (Reed, 1991).

At  the  end  of  a  storage  period,  cultures  are  transferred 
onto  fresh  medium  and  usually  placed  for  a  short  period  in 
optimal conditions to stimulate regrowth before entering the 
next storage cycle.

Slow growth storage

Classical techniques
Standard  culture  conditions  can  be  used  for  medium-term 
storage  with  species  which  have  a  naturally  slow  grow-
ing  habit.  However,  for  most  species,  growth  reduction  is 
achieved  by  modifying  the  environmental  conditions  and/
or  the  culture  medium.  The  most  widely  applied  tech-
nique  is  temperature  reduction,  which  can  be  combined 
with  a  decrease  in  light  intensity  or  culture  in  the  dark. 
Temperatures ranging from 0 to 5°C are employed with cold-
tolerant  species.  Strawberry  (Fragaria    ananassa)  plant-
lets  have  been  stored  at  4°C  in  the  dark  and  kept  viable  for 
6  years  with  the  regular  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  liquid 
medium  (Mullin  and  Schlegel,  1976).  Apple  (Malus  domes-
tica)  and  Prunus  shoots  survived  52  weeks  at  2°C  (Druart, 
1985).  Tropical  species  are  often  cold-sensitive  and  have 
to  be  stored  at  higher  temperatures.  Musa  in  vitro  plantlets 
can be stored at 15°C without transfer for up to 15 months 
(Banerjee and De Langhe, 1985). Other tropical species such 
as  cassava  are  much  more  cold-sensitive,  and  cassava  shoot 
cultures  have  to  be  conserved  at  temperatures  higher  than 
20°C (Roca et al., 1984).

Various modifications can be made to the culture medium 
to  reduce  growth.  Embryogenic  cultures  of  carrot  could  be 
conserved  on  a  medium  without  sucrose  for  two  years,  and 
reproliferate if a sucrose solution was supplied (Jones, 1974). 
Kartha et al. (1981) conserved coffee plantlets on a medium 
devoid  of  sugar  and  with  only  half  of  the  mineral  elements 
of  the  standard  medium.  The  addition  of  osmotic  growth 
inhibitors (e.g., mannitol) or hormonal growth inhibitors (e.g., 
absicic  acid)  is  also  employed  successfully  to  reduce  growth 
(Ng and Ng, 1991). The type of explant, as well as its physi-
ological  state  when  entering  storage,  can  influence  the  dura-
tion  of  storage  achieved.  Roxas  et  al.  (1985)  indicated  that 
with chrysanthemum, nodal segments showed higher survival 
than  apical  buds.  The  presence  of  a  root  system  generally 

Alternative techniques
Various  alternative  techniques  have  been  tried  for  medium-
term  storage  of  plant  in  vitro  cultures  (Engelmann,  1997a; 
Withers and Engelmann, 1998). They include modification of 
the  gaseous  environment  of  cultures,  and  desiccation  and/or 
encapsulation of explants. Growth reduction can be achieved 
by  reducing  the  quantity  of  oxygen  available  to  the  cultures. 
The simplest method consisted of covering the explants with 
paraffin or mineral oil or liquid medium. As an example, shoot 
cultures  of  several  ginger  species  could  be  conserved  for  up 
to  two  years  under  mineral  oil  with  high  viability  (Dekkers 
et al., 1991). Reduction of the quantity of oxygen could also 
be achieved by decreasing the atmospheric pressure of the cul-
ture chamber or by using a controlled atmosphere. Desiccation 
of  cultures  as  a  means  of  achieving  medium-term  conserva-
tion  was  also  employed.  Alfalfa  somatic  embryos  desiccated 
to  10–15%  moisture  content  could  be  stored  for  one  year, 
showing only a 5% decrease in their conversion rate at the end 
of the storage period (Senaratna et al., 1990). Finally, encap-
sulated  explants  can  be  successfully  conserved  for  extended 
durations. Encapsulated Valeriana wallichii shoot tips could be 
conserved for over 6 months at 4–6°C (Mathur et al., 1989), 
grape shoot tips were stored for 9 months at 23°C (Guanino 
et  al.,  2009),  and  encapsulated  date  palm  somatic  embryos 
were conserved for 6 months at 4°C (Hamed et al., 2003).

Current development and use of in vitro slow 
growth storage
In vitro slow growth storage techniques are routinely used for 
medium-term  conservation  of  numerous  species,  both  from 
temperate  and  tropical  origin,  including  crops,  forest  trees, 
endangered  species,  and  medicinal  plants  (Ashmore,  1997; 
Razdan and Cocking, 1997; Engelmann, 1999; Lambardi et al.,  
2006;  Sarasan  et  al.,  2006;  Keshavachandran  et  al.,  2007). 
In  1996,  the  FAO’s  Report  on  the  State  of  the  World’s  Plant 
Genetic  Resources  for  Food  and  Agriculture  (FAO,  1996) 

258

Germplasm collection, storage, and conservation

C H A P T E R   1 7

estimated  that  around  38,000  accessions  were  conserved  in 
vitro.  Again,  there  are  no  updated  data  available  in  the  new 
FAO  report  (FAO,  2009),  but  this  number  has  certainly 
increased  significantly  since  that  time.  However,  if  in  vitro 
conservation appears as a simple and practical option for long-
term conservation of numerous species, and has obvious wide 
medium-term applications, its implementation still needs cus-
tomizing to any new material, continuous inputs are required, 
and  long-term  questions  remain  regarding  the  genetic  stabil-
ity of the stored material. Moreover, it is not always possible 
to apply one single protocol for conserving genetically diverse 
material. As an example, a storage experiment performed with 
an in vitro collection of African coffee germplasm including 21 
diversity groups revealed a large variability in the response of 
the diversity groups to the storage conditions (Dussert et al., 
1997). Some groups showed high genetic erosion during stor-
age, whereas others did not show any erosion.

During the workshop Consultation on the Management of 
Field  and  In  vitro  Genebanks  held  at  CIAT,  Cali,  Colombia 
on January 15–20, 1996, a panel of experts of in vitro conser-
vation  identified  the  gaps  in  the  development  of  techniques 
as  well  as  limitations  in  basic  scientific  knowledge,  which 
are  listed  thereafter  (Ashmore,  1997).  Further  informa-
tion is needed on the nature, as well as the underlying causes 
and  consequences  of  somaclonal  variation.  More  studies  are 
needed  on  genetic  stability  after  prolonged  storage  in  cul-
ture to establish the relative safety of these forms of storage 
when  compared  with  other  methods  such  as  storage  in  field 
genebanks. There is a need for the development and applica-
tion  of  characterization  systems,  including  molecular  genetic 
markers for initial identification, as well as monitoring of the 
genetic  stability  of  stored  accessions.  Reproducible,  simple, 
and  more  generally  applicable  techniques  for  slow  growth 
storage  are  needed. In  vitro  conservation  techniques  need  to 
be developed for additional species, particularly species with 
recalcitrant  seed  and  minor  crop  species.  There  is  a  need  to 
both test and optimize available in vitro conservation technol-
ogy  on  a  range  of  species  and  genotypes  in  genebank  facili-
ties. Technical guidelines have been published recently (Reed 
et  al.,  2004)  that  provide  guidance  to  researchers  and 
genebank managers for the establishment and management of 
in vitro germplasm collections.

Cryopreservation

Cryopreservation is the only technique currently available to 
ensure  the  safe  and  cost-efficient  long-term  conservation  of 
the germplasm of problem species. In this section, we briefly 
describe  the  various  cryopreservation  techniques  available, 
summarize  the  achievements  made  and  problems  faced  with 
vegetatively  propagated  and  recalcitrant  species,  and  present 
the  current  and  future  utilizations  of  cryopreservation  for 
plant biodiversity conservation.

Cryopreservation techniques
Some materials, such as orthodox seeds or dormant buds, dis-
play natural dehydration processes and can be cryopreserved 

without any pre-treatment. However, most biological materi-
als  employed  in  cryopreservation  (cell  suspensions,  calluses, 
shoot  tips,  embryos)  contain  high  amounts  of  cellular  water, 
and are thus extremely sensitive to freezing injury, since most 
of  them  are  not  inherently  tolerant  to  freezing.  Thus,  cells 
have  to  be  dehydrated  artificially  to  protect  them  from  the 
damage  caused  by  the  crystallization  of  intracellular  water 
into  ice  (Mazur,  1984).  The  techniques  employed  and  the 
physical mechanisms upon which they are based are different 
for  classical  and  new  cryopreservation  techniques  (Withers 
and Engelmann, 1997). In classical techniques, dehydration of 
samples  takes  place  both  before  and  during  freezing  (freeze-
induced  dehydration),  whereas  in  new  techniques  dehydra-
tion  takes  place  only  before  freezing.  In  optimal  conditions, 
all freezable water is removed from the cells during dehydra-
tion and the highly concentrated internal solutes vitrify upon 
immersion  in  liquid  nitrogen.  Vitrification  can  be  defined  as 
the transition of water directly from the liquid phase into an 
amorphous  phase  or  glass,  while  avoiding  the  formation  of 
crystalline ice (Fahy et al., 1984).

Classical cryopreservation techniques
Classical  cryopreservation  techniques 
involve  slow  cool-
ing down to a defined pre-freezing temperature, followed by 
rapid immersion in liquid nitrogen. With temperature reduc-
tion  during  slow  cooling,  the  cells  and  the  external  medium 
initially supercool, followed by ice formation in the medium 
(Mazur, 1984). The cell membrane acts as a physical barrier 
and  prevents  the  ice  from  seeding  the  cell  interior,  and  the 
cells remain unfrozen but supercooled. As the temperature is 
further  decreased,  an  increasing  amount  of  the  extracellular 
solution is converted into ice, thus resulting in the concentra-
tion  of  intracellular  solutes.  Since  cells  remain  supercooled 
and  their  aqueous  vapor  pressure  exceeds  that  of  the  fro-
zen  external  compartment,  cells  equilibrate  by  loss  of  water 
to  external  ice.  Depending  upon  the  rate  of  cooling  and  the 
pre-freezing  temperature,  different  amounts  of  water  will 
leave  the  cell  before  the  intracellular  contents  solidify.  In 
optimal  conditions,  most  or  all  intracellular  freezable  water 
is  removed,  thus  reducing  or  avoiding  detrimental  intracel-
lular ice formation upon subsequent immersion of the speci-
men  in  liquid  nitrogen,  during  which  vitrification  of  internal 
solutes  occurs.  However,  freeze-induced  dehydration  that  is 
too  intense  can  incur  different  damaging  events  due  to  con-
centration of intracellular salts and changes in the cell mem-
brane (Meryman et al., 1977). Re-warming should be as rapid 
as  possible  to  avoid  the  phenomenon  of  recrystallization  in 
which  ice  melts  and  reforms  at  a  thermodynamically  favora-
ble, larger, and more damaging crystal size (Mazur, 1984).

Classical  freezing  procedures  include  the  following  succes-
sive  steps:  pre-growth  of  samples,  cryoprotection,  slow  cool-
ing (0.5–2.0°C/min) to a determined pre-freezing temperature 
(usually  around  40°C),  rapid  immersion  of  samples  in  liq-
uid  nitrogen,  storage,  rapid  thawing,  and  recovery.  Classical 
techniques  are  generally  operationally  complex,  because  they 
require the use of sophisticated and expensive programmable 
freezers. In some cases, their use can be avoided by perform-
ing the slow freezing step with a domestic or laboratory freezer 
(Kartha  and  Engelmann,  1994).  Classical  cryopreservation 

259

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

techniques have been successfully applied to undifferentiated 
culture  systems  such  as  cell  suspensions  and  calluses  (Kartha 
and Engelmann, 1994; Withers and Engelmann, 1998) and api-
ces of cold-tolerant species (Reed and Uchendu, 2008).

New cryopreservation techniques
In  vitrification-based  procedures,  cell  dehydration  is  per-
formed  prior  to  freezing  by  exposure  of  samples  to  concen-
trated  cryoprotective  media  and/or  air  desiccation.  This  is 
followed  by  rapid  cooling.  As  a  result,  all  factors  that  affect 
intracellular  ice  formation  are  avoided.  Glass  transitions 
(changes  in  the  structural  conformation  of  the  glass)  dur-
ing  cooling  and  re-warming  have  been  recorded  with  vari-
ous  materials  using  thermal  analysis  (Sakai  et  al.,  1990; 
Dereuddre  et  al.,  1991;  Niino  et  al.,  1992).  Vitrification-
based  procedures  offer  practical  advantages  in  comparison 
to  classical  freezing  techniques.  Like  ultra-rapid  freezing, 
they  are  more  appropriate  for  complex  organs  (shoot  tips, 
embryos),  which  contain  a  variety  of  cell  types,  each  with 
unique  requirements  under  conditions  of  freeze-induced 
dehydration.  By  precluding  ice  formation  in  the  system,  vit-
rification-based  procedures  are  operationally  less  complex 
than classical ones (e.g., they do not require the use of con-
trolled  freezers)  and  have  greater  potential  for  broad  appli-
cability,  requiring  only  minor  modifications  for  different  cell 
types (Engelmann, 1997a). A common feature of all of these 
new protocols is that the critical step to achieve survival is the 
dehydration step, not the freezing step, as in classical proto-
cols  (Engelmann,  2000).  Therefore,  if  samples  to  be  frozen 
can  be  dehydrated  down  to  sufficiently  low  water  content 
with  little  or  no  decrease  in  survival  in  comparison  to  non-
dehydrated controls, limited or no further drop in survival is 
generally observed after cryopreservation (Engelmann, 2009).
Seven  different  vitrification-based  procedures  can  be  
identified:  (1)  encapsulation-dehydration;  (2)  vitrification;  
(3)  encapsulation-vitrification;  (4)  dehydration;  (5)  pre-
growth;  (6)  pre-growth-dehydration;  and  (7)  droplet-vitri-
fication.  The  encapsulation-dehydration  procedure  is  based 
on  the  technology  developed  for  the  production  of  artificial 
seeds. Explants are encapsulated in alginate beads, pre-grown 
in liquid medium enriched with sucrose for 1 to 7 days, par-
tially  desiccated  in  the  air  current  of  a  laminar  airflow  cabi-
net  or  with  silica  gel  to  a  water  content  around  20%  (fresh 
weight  basis),  and  then  frozen  rapidly.  Survival  is  high  and 
growth  recovery  of  cryopreserved  samples  is  generally  rapid 
and direct without callus formation. This technique has been 
applied  to  apices  of  numerous  species  from  temperate  and 
tropical  origins,  as  well  as  to  cell  suspensions  and  somatic 
embryos  of  several  species  (Gonzalez-Arnao  and  Engelmann, 
2006; Engelmann et al., 2008). A simplification of this tech-
nique  has  been  recently  proposed  by  Bonnart  and  Volk 
(2010),  which  involves  encapsulation  of  samples  in  alginate 
medium  containing  2 M  glycerol    0.5 M  sucrose,  immedi-
ately followed by air-dehydration.

Vitrification involves treatment of samples with cryoprotec-
tive substances, such as exposure of samples to a loading solu-
tion  with  intermediate  concentration  (2 M  glycerol    0.4 M 
sucrose;  Matsumoto  et  al.,  1994),  then  dehydration  with 
highly  concentrated  vitrification  solutions,  rapid  freezing  and 

260

thawing,  removal  of  cryoprotectants  in  an  unloading  solution 
(containing  1.2 M  sucrose),  and  recovery.  The  most  com-
mon vitrification solutions are the so-called Plant Vitrification 
Solutions  PVS2  (Sakai  et  al.,  1990)  and  PVS3  (Nishizawa 
et  al.,  1993)  developed  by  Professor  Sakai’s  group  in  Japan. 
This procedure has been developed for apices, cell suspensions, 
and  somatic  embryos  of  numerous  different  species  (Sakai 
and  Engelmann,  2007;  Sakai  et  al.,  2008).  Encapsulation-
vitrification is a combination of encapsulation-dehydration and 
vitrification  procedures,  where  samples  are  encapsulated  in 
alginate beads, and then subjected to freezing by vitrification. 
It has been applied to apices of an increasing number of species 
(Sakai and Engelmann, 2007; Sakai et al., 2008).

Dehydration  is  the  simplest  procedure  because  it  con-
sists  of  dehydrating  explants,  then  freezing  them  rapidly  by 
direct immersion in liquid nitrogen. This technique is mainly 
used with zygotic embryos or embryonic axes extracted from 
seeds.  It  has  been  applied  to  embryos  of  a  large  number  of 
recalcitrant  and  intermediate  species  (Engelmann,  1997b). 
Desiccation is usually performed in a laminar airflow cabinet, 
but  more  precise  and  reproducible  dehydration  conditions 
are  achieved  by  using  a  flow  of  sterile  compressed  air  or  sil-
ica gel. Ultra-rapid drying in a stream of compressed dry air 
(a  process  called  flash  drying  developed  by  P.  Berjak’s  group 
in  South  Africa)  allows  freezing  samples  with  relatively  high 
water content, thus reducing desiccation injury (Berjak et al., 
1989).  Optimal  survival  is  generally  obtained  when  samples 
are  frozen  with  a  water  content  comprised  between  10  and 
20% (fresh weight basis).

The  pre-growth  technique  consists  of  cultivating  samples 
in  the  presence  of  cryoprotectants,  then  freezing  them  rap-
idly  by  direct  immersion  in  liquid  nitrogen.  The  pre-growth 
technique has been developed for Musa meristematic cultures 
(Panis  et  al.,  2002).  In  a  pre-growth  dehydration  procedure, 
explants  are  pre-grown  in  the  presence  of  cryoprotectants, 
dehydrated  under  the  laminar  airflow  cabinet  or  with  silica 
gel,  and  then  frozen  rapidly.  This  method  has  been  applied 
notably to asparagus stem segments (Uragami et al., 1990), oil 
palm somatic embryos (Dumet et al., 1993), coconut zygotic 
embryos (Assy-Bah and Engelmann, 1992), and more recently 
to coriander somatic embryos (Popova et al., 2010).

Droplet-vitrification  is  the  latest  technique  (Sakai  and 
Engelmann,  2007).  The  number  of  species  to  which  it  has 
been  successfully  applied  is  steadily  increasing.  Apices  are 
pre-treated with a loading solution, then treated with a vitrifi-
cation solution, placed on an aluminum foil in minute droplets 
of vitrification solution, and frozen rapidly in liquid nitrogen. 
Alternative loading and vitrification solutions have been devel-
oped  that  allow  successful  application  of  this  technique  to 
plant  species  sensitive  to  “classical”  loading  and  vitrification 
solutions (Kim et al., 2009a,b).

Cryopreservation of vegetatively propagated and 
recalcitrant seed species
Vegetatively propagated species
A  number  of  publications  provide  lists  of  species  that  have 
been 
(Engelmann,  1997a,b; 
Engelmann  and  Takagi,  2000;  Reed,  2008).  For  vegetatively 

successfully  cryopreserved 

Germplasm collection, storage, and conservation

C H A P T E R   1 7

propagated species, cryopreservation has a wide applicability. 
It  is  used  in  a  large  number  of  genotypes/varieties  of  many 
species,  including  roots,  and  tubers,  fruit  and  forest  trees, 
ornamentals,  and  plantation  crops,  both  from  temperate  and 
tropical  origins.  With  a  few  exceptions,  vitrification-based 
protocols have been employed in these cases. It is also inter-
esting to note that in many cases, different protocols can be 
employed for a given species, resulting in comparable results. 
Survival is generally high to very high and up to 100% survival 
could  be  achieved  in  some  cases,  for  example,  Allium,  yam, 
and potato. Regeneration is rapid and direct, and callusing is 
observed only in cases where the technique is not optimized.

Different reasons can be mentioned to explain these posi-
tive  results  (Engelmann,  2009).  The  meristematic  zone  of 
apices, from which organized growth originates, is composed 
of a relatively homogenous population of small, actively divid-
ing  cells,  with  few  vacuoles  and  a  high  nucleocytoplasmic 
ratio.  These  characteristics  make  them  more  susceptible  to 
withstand  desiccation  than  highly  vacuolated  and  differenti-
ated cells. As mentioned earlier, no ice formation takes place 
in  vitrification-based  procedures,  thus  avoiding  the  extensive 
damage  caused  by  ice  crystals  formed  during  classical  pro-
cedures.  The  whole  meristem  is  generally  preserved  when 
vitrification-based  techniques  are  employed,  thus  allowing 
direct,  organized  regrowth.  By  contrast,  classical  procedures 
often lead to destruction of large zones of the meristems, and 
callusing only or transitory callusing is often observed before 
organized regrowth starts. Other reasons for the good results 
obtained are linked with tissue-culture protocols (Engelmann, 
2009).  Many  vegetatively  propagated  species  successfully 
cryo preserved  until  now  are  cultivated  crops,  often  of  great 
commercial  importance,  for  which  cultural  practices,  includ-
ing  in  vitro  micropropagation,  are  well  established.  In  addi-
tion, in vitro material is “synchronized” by the tissue culture 
and pregrowth procedures. As a result, relatively homogenous 
samples  in  terms  of  size,  cellular  composition,  physiological 
state,  and  growth  response  are  employed  for  freezing,  thus 
increasing  the  chances  of  positive  and  uniform  response  to 
treatments. Finally, vitrification-based procedures use samples 
of a relatively large size (shoot tips of 0.5 to 2–3 mm) that can 
regrow directly without any difficulty.

Freezing  techniques  are  now  operational  for  large-scale 
experimentation  in  an  increasing  number  of  cases.  In  view 
of  the  wide  range  of  efficient  and  operationally  simple  tech-
niques  available,  any  vegetatively  propagated  species  should 
be amenable to cryopreservation, provided that the tissue cul-
ture protocol is sufficiently operational for this species.

Recalcitrant seed species
Some  publications  present  extensive  lists  of  plant  species 
whose embryos and/or embryonic axes have been successfully 
cryopreserved (e.g., Kartha and Engelmann, 1994; Engelmann 
et al., 1995; Engelmann, 1997a,b; Reed, 2008; Pence, 2008). 
However,  careful  examination  of  the  species  mentioned  in 
these papers reveals that only a limited number of truly recal-
citrant  seed  species  are  included,  because  research  in  this 
area  is  recent  and  addressed  by  very  few  teams  worldwide. 
However,  recalcitrance  is  a  dynamic  concept  that  evolves 
with  research  on  the  biology  of  species  and  improvement  in 

classical  storage  procedures.  As  a  result,  some  species  previ-
ously  classified  as  recalcitrant  have  thus  been  moved  to  the 
intermediate or even sub-orthodox categories and stored using 
classical or new storage techniques (Engelmann, 2000).

In  comparison  to  the  results  obtained  with  vegetatively 
propagated species, research is still at a very preliminary stage 
for  recalcitrant  seeds.  The  desiccation  technique  is  mainly 
employed  for  freezing  embryos  and  embryonic  axes  (Normah 
and Makeen, 2008). Survival is extremely variable, regeneration 
frequently  restricted  to  callusing  or  incomplete  development 
of  plantlets,  and  the  number  of  accessions  tested  per  species 
generally  very  low.  There  are  a  number  of  reasons  to  explain 
the current limited development of cryopreservation for recal-
citrant  seed  species  (Engelmann,  2000).  First,  there  is  a  huge 
number  of  species  with  recalcitrant  or  suspected  recalcitrant 
seeds,  and  most  of  them  are  wild  species.  As  a  consequence, 
little or nothing is known about the biology and the seed stor-
age behavior of many of these species. Where some information 
on  seed  storage  behavior  is  available,  tissue-culture  protocols, 
including inoculation in vitro, germination, and growth of plant-
lets, propagation, and acclimatization — which are needed for 
regrowth of embryos and embryonic axes after freezing — are 
often non-existent or not fully operational. Seeds and embryos 
of  recalcitrant  species  also  display  very  important  variations 
in  moisture  content  and  maturity  stage  between  provenances, 
between and among seed lots, and between successive harvests, 
which make their cryopreservation difficult.

Seeds  of  many  species  are  too  large  to  be  frozen  directly, 
and  embryos  or  embryonic  axes  are  thus  successfully 
employed  for  cryopreservation.  However,  embryos  are  often 
of  very  complex  tissue  composition,  which  displays  differ-
ential  sensitivity  to  desiccation  and  freezing,  the  root  pole 
seeming  more  resistant  than  the  shoot  pole.  In  some  spe-
cies, embryos are extremely sensitive to desiccation and even 
minor reduction in their moisture content — down to levels 
much  too  high  to  obtain  survival  after  freezing  —  leads  to 
irreparable structural damage, as observed notably with cacao 
(Chandel et al., 1995). Finally, seeds of some species do not 
contain well-defined embryos.

There  are  various  options  to  consider  for  improving  stor-
age of non-orthodox seeds. With some species, very precisely 
controlled desiccation (e.g., using saturated salt solutions) and 
cooling  conditions  may  freeze  whole  seeds,  as  demonstrated 
recently  with  various  coffee  species  (Dussert  et  al.,  1997; 
Dussert  and  Engelmann,  2006).  There  is  scope  for  technical 
improvements  in  the  current  cryopreservation  protocols  for 
embryos  and  embryonic  axes.  Pregrowth  on  media  contain-
ing  cryoprotective  substances  confers  the  tissue’s  increased 
tolerance  to  further  desiccation  and  reduces  the  heteroge-
neity  of  the  material.  Flash  drying,  followed  by  ultra-rapid 
freezing,  has  also  been  very  effective  for  cryopreservation 
of  several  species  (Berjak  et  al.,  1989;  Wesley-Smith  et  al., 
1992).  Other  cryopreservation  techniques  including  pre-
growth-desiccation,  encapsulation-dehydration,  and  vitrifi-
cation,  which  have  been  seldom  employed  with  recalcitrant 
species,  should  be  tried  (Engelmann,  2000;  Pence,  2008) 
selecting embryos at the right developmental stage is of criti-
cal importance for the success of any cryopreservation experi-
ment  (Engelmann  et  al.,  1995).  However,  in  these  cases, 

261

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

basic  protocols  for  disinfection,  inoculation  in  vitro,  germi-
nation  of  embryos  or  embryonic  axes,  plantlet  development, 
and  possibly  limited  propagation  will  have  to  be  established 
prior  to  any  cryopreservation  experiment.  With  species  for 
which  freezing  of  whole  embryos  or  embryonic  axes  have 
proven  unsuccessful,  it  has  been  suggested  to  use  alternative 
explants  such  as  shoot  apices  of  embryos  (Varghese  et  al., 
2009),  adventitious  buds,  or  somatic  embryos  induced  from 
the embryonic tissues (Pence, 2008). This might be the only 
solution  for  species  without  well-defined  embryos;  however, 
this will require more sophisticated tissue-culture procedures 
to be developed and mastered.

Finally,  analytical  tools,  which  allow  better  understanding 
of the biological and physical processes that take place during 
cryopreservation, are very useful in establishing freezing pro-
tocols,  especially  for  problem  materials  (Engelmann,  2004). 
Examples  can  be  found  with  zygotic  embryos  of  Parkia  spe-
ciosa, a tropical tree species (Nadarajan et al., 2008) and sev-
eral Australian Citrus species (Hamilton et al., 2009), where 
measuring the thermal events taking place during cooling and 
re-warming using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) has 
been  instrumental  in  establishing  efficient  cryopreservation 
protocols for these materials.

Large-scale utilization of cryopreservation for 
germplasm conservation
Even  though  its  routine  use  is  still  limited,  there  is  a  grow-
ing  number  of  genebanks  and  botanical  gardens  where  cryo-
preservation  is  employed  on  a  large  scale  for  different  types 
of  materials,  which  are  or  are  not  tolerant  to  dehydration. 
With  orthodox  seed  species,  cryopreservation  is  used  mainly 
for storing seeds with limited longevity and of rare or endan-
gered  species.  The  National  Center  for  Genetic  Resources 
Preservation  (NCGRP,  Fort  Collins,  Colorado)  conserves 
43,400  accessions  over  the  vapors  of  liquid  nitrogen  (C. 
Walters,  personal  communication).  The  National  Bureau  for 
Plant  Genetic  Resources  (NBPGR,  New  Delhi,  India)  stores 
1200  accessions  from  50  different  species,  consisting  mainly 
of  endangered  medicinal  plants  (Mandal,  2000).  This  tech-
nique  is  also  used  in  botanical  gardens  for  storing  rare  and 
endangered species (Engelmann, 2010). Over 110 accessions 
of  rare  or  threatened  species  are  stored  under  cryopreserva-
tion at the Kings Park and Botanic Garden in Perth, Australia 
(Touchell and Dixon, 1994; see also http://www.bgpa.wa.gov.
au/). In the United States, the Center for Conservation and 
Research  of  Endangered  Wildlife  (CREW)  at  the  Cincinnati 
Zoo  and  Botanical  Garden  conserves  several  cryopreserved 
collections,  including  collections  of  seeds  of  regional  endan-
gered species (Pence, 1991), of endangered plant tissues, and 
of spores and tissues of Bryophytes and pteridophytes (Pence, 
2008;  see  also  http://www.cincinnatizoo.org/conservation/
crew/crew-plant-research/cryobiobank%E2%84%A2).

It  should  be  noted  that  recent  publications  on  seed  lon-
gevity  studies  showed  that  seeds  of  several  orthodox  species 
with  limited  seed  longevity  (such  as  Brassica)  lost  viability 
more  rapidly  than  predicted  using  classical  viability  equa-
tions, and that the rate of this viability loss increased in line 
with  increasing  storage  temperature  (Walters  et  al.,  2004; 

262

2005).  These  results,  as  well  as  those  obtained  by  Caswell 
and  Kartha  (2009),  which  showed  no  change  in  viability  of 
pea  and  strawberry  meristems  stored  in  liquid  nitrogen  for 
28 years, provide compelling evidence that ultra-cold (liquid 
nitrogen) storage can and does enhance longevity considerably 
over that at 20°C (Pritchard et al., 2009). Therefore, in the 
case of orthodox seed species with limited longevity, it might 
be recommended to systematically store a seed subsample at 
196°C, in addition to storage at 20°C to ensure their long-
term  conservation.  Cryopreservation  is  also  applied  to  inter-
mediate  seeds  that  are  tolerant  to  freezing.  Cryopreserved 
collections  of  coffee  seeds  are  being  established  in  CATIE 
(Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher Education Center, 
Costa Rica) and in IRD Montpellier (France) using a protocol 
including  controlled  dehydration  and  freezing  (Dussert  and 
Engelmann, 2006). In France, in the framework of a national 
grape  genetic  resource  conservation  project,  seeds  of  several 
hundreds  of  accessions  are  being  cryopreserved  after  partial 
desiccation (Chatelet et al., 2009).

With  dormant  buds,  the  2200  accessions  of  the  U.S. 
apple  germplasm  field  collection  are  duplicated  under  cryo-
preservation  (Forsline  et  al.,  1999),  as  is  the  case  for  the 
420  accessions  of  the  mulberry  field  collection  maintained 
at the National Institute of Agrobiological Resources (NIAR, 
Yamagata,  Japan;  Niino,  1995).  Dormant  buds  of  over  440 
European  elm  accessions  are  conserved  in  liquid  nitrogen  by 
Afocel  (Nangis,  France;  Harvengt  et  al.,  2004)  and  research 
is  underway  in  France  (IRD,  Montpellier)  and  the  United 
States (NCGRP, Fort Collins) on the development of a proto-
col for cryopreservation of grape dormant buds. Breeders rou-
tinely store pollen in liquid nitrogen in the framework of their 
improvement  programs  (Towill  and  Walters,  2000).  Pollen, 
which is an interesting material for genetic resource conserva-
tion of various species, is stored by several institutes. In India, 
the NBPGR conserves cryopreserved pollen of 65 accessions 
belonging to different species (Mandal, 2000), and the Indian 
Institute  for  Horticultural  Research  (IIHR,  Bangalore)  con-
serves pollen of 600 accessions belonging to 40 species from 
15 different families, some of which have been stored for over 
15  years  (Ganeshan  and  Rajashekaran,  2000).  In  the  United 
States, the NCGRP conserves pollen of 13 pear cultivars and 
24 Pyrus species (Reed et al., 2000). In China, pollen of over 
700  accessions  of  traditional  Chinese  flower  species  is  con-
served under cryopreservation (Li et al., 2009).

Cryopreservation is also applied to biotechnology products. 
Over 1000 callus strains of species of pharmaceutical interest 
are stored at  196°C in the UK (Spencer, 1999), as well as 
several thousands of conifer embryogenic cell lines employed 
in large-scale clonal planting programs in Canada (Cyr, 2000). 
In  France,  cryopreservation  is  systematically  employed  for 
storing  all  of  the  new  embryogenic  cell  lines  of  coffee  and 
cacao  produced  by  the  Biotechnology  Laboratory  of  the 
Nestlé  Company  (Florin  et  al.,  1999).  Embryogenic  cultures 
of around 80 oil palm accessions have been cryopreserved and 
stored at IRD (Montpellier, France; Dumet, 1994).

Finally,  cryopreservation  is  being  applied  in  genebanks  for 
long-term  storage  of  genetic  resources  of  vegetatively  propa-
gated  species,  using  apices  sampled  from  in  vitro  plantlets. 
Cryopreservation  is  the  most  advanced  in  potato  genebanks; 

Germplasm collection, storage, and conservation

C H A P T E R   1 7

over  1000  old  potato  varieties  are  cryostored  in  Germany 
at  the  Leibnitz  Institute  of  Plant  Genetics  and  Crop  Plant 
Research (IPK; Keller et al., 2005, 2006) and over 200 acces-
sions  at  the  International  Potato  Center  (CIP,  Lima,  Peru; 
Golmirzaie  and  Panta,  2000).  Around  100  accessions  of  the 
Pyrus  field  collection  are  cryostored  at  the  National  Clonal 
Germplasm  Repository  (NCGR,  Corvallis,  Oregon),  and  it 
is duplicated at the NCGRP in Fort Collins, Colorado (Reed 
et  al.,  2000).  In  Korea,  two  cryopreserved  collections  of 
Allium have been established, which comprise a total of over 
800 accessions (Kim et al., 2009). Finally, cryopreserved col-
lections are under development for long-term storage of tropi-
cal  plants:  630  banana  accessions  have  been  cryopreserved  
at  the  INIBAP  International  Transit  Center  (Panis  et  al., 
2007)  and  540  cassava  accessions  at  the  CIAT  in  Cali, 
Colombia (Gonzalez-Arnao et al., 2008).

The  large-scale  utilization  of  cryopreservation  implies  a 
scaling  up  in  the  amount  of  material  to  handle  and  to  store, 
from one or a few genotypes in the laboratory to several tens, 
hundreds  or  even  thousands,  which  requires  the  establish-
ment of specific management procedures. For this aim, proba-
bilistic tools have been developed recently to assist genebank 
curators  in  the  establishment  and  management  of  cryopre-
served germplasm collections (Dussert et al., 2003). A better 
understanding  of  the  long-term  benefits  of  cryopreservation 
and its further integration into general genebank management 
is also needed (Keller et al., 2008). Recommended approaches 
include comparative validation of methods between different 
laboratories,  detailed  comparisons  of  crop-based  methods, 
economic analyses, and efficient integration strategies of cryo-
banks  by  genebanks,  including  safe  duplication  of  cryopre-
served resources for the limitation of risk of loss.

Cryopreservation  imposes  a  series  of  stresses  to  the  plant 
material,  which  can  induce  modifications  in  cryopreserved 
cultures and regenerated plants. It is thus necessary to verify 
that the genetic stability of the cryopreserved material is not 
altered  before  routinely  using  this  technique  for  the  long-
term  conservation  of  plant  genetic  resources.  There  is  no 
report so far of modifications at the phenotypical, biochemi-
cal, chromosomal, or molecular level that could be attributed 
to  cryopreservation  (Engelmann,  1997a;  Engelmann,  2004). 
Recent studies comparing the development of plants originat-
ing from control and cryopreserved material performed with 
several  species  including  sugarcane  (Gonzalez-Arnao,  1996), 
banana (Côte et al., 2000), potato (Mix-Wagner et al., 2003), 
oil  palm  (Konan  et  al.,  2007),  apple  (Liu  et  al.,  2008),  oak 
(Sanchez et al., 2008), yam (Mandal et al., 2008), and gentian 
(Mikul et al., 2008) did not reveal any differences in the char-
acters studied.

Studies  performed  on  the  cost  of  cryopreservation  con-
firm its low utilization cost. Hummer and Reed (1999) indi-
cated  that,  at  the  NCGR,  the  annual  cost  of  one  temperate 
fruit tree accession is $77 in the field, $23 under in vitro slow 
growth storage, and only $1 under cryopreservation, to which 
$50–60 should be added for the preparation and cryopreser-
vation of in vitro shoot tips of this accession. W.M. Roca (per-
sonal communication) evaluated the annual maintenance cost 
of CIAT’s cassava collection, which included 5000 accessions, 
at  around  $5000  under  cryopreservation,  as  compared  with 

$30,000 under in vitro slow growth storage. More recently, a 
detailed study compared the costs of maintaining one of the 
world’s largest coffee field collections with those of establish-
ing  a  coffee  cryo-collection  at  CATIE  in  Costa  Rica  (Dulloo 
et al., 2009). The results indicate that cryopreservation costs 
less  (in  perpetuity  per  accession)  than  conservation  in  field 
genebanks. A comparative analysis of the costs of both meth-
ods showed that the more accessions there are in cryopreser-
vation storage, the lower the per accession cost. In addition to 
costs, the study examined the advantages of cryopreservation 
over field collection and showed that for species that are diffi-
cult to conserve using seeds, and that can only be conserved as 
live plants, cryopreservation may be the method of choice for 
long-term conservation of genetic diversity.

Additional uses of cryopreservation
Recently, cryopreservation has been used for cryotherapy, i.e., 
for eliminating viruses from infected plants, as a substitute or 
a  complement  to  classical  virus  eradication  techniques  such 
as meristem culture and cryotherapy (Wang et al., 2008). In 
cryotherapy,  plant  pathogens  such  as  viruses,  phytoplasmas, 
and bacteria are eradicated from shoot tips by exposing them 
briefly  to  liquid  nitrogen.  Uneven  distribution  of  viruses  and 
obligate  vasculature-limited  microbes  in  shoot  tips  allows 
elimination  of  the  infected  cells  by  injuring  them  with  the 
cryo-treatment  and  regeneration  of  healthy  shoots  from  the 
surviving  pathogen-free  meristematic  cells.  Thermotherapy 
followed by cryotherapy of shoot tips can be used to enhance 
virus eradication. Cryotherapy of shoot tips is easy to imple-
ment;  it  allows  treatment  of  large  numbers  of  samples  and 
results  in  a  high  frequency  of  pathogen-free  regenerants. 
Difficulties related to excision and regeneration of small mer-
istems are largely circumvented. To date, severe pathogens in 
banana  (Musa  spp.),  Citrus  spp.,  grapevine  (Vitis  vinifera), 
Prunus spp., raspberry (Rubus idaeus), potato (S. tuberosum), 
and sweet potato (I. batatas) have been eradicated using cryo-
therapy. These pathogens include nine viruses (banana streak 
virus,  cucumber  mosaic  virus,  grapevine  virus  A,  plum  pox 
virus,  potato  leaf  roll  virus,  potato  virus  Y,  raspberry  bushy 
dwarf  virus,  sweet  potato  feathery  mottle  virus,  and  sweet 
potato  chlorotic  stunt  virus),  sweet  potato  little  leaf  phyto-
plasma,  and  Huanglongbing  bacterium  causing  “citrus  green-
ing” (Wang et al., 2008).

Cryopreservation: progress and prospects
Even though cryopreservation is still routinely employed in a 
limited  number  of  cases,  the  development  of  the  new  vitri-
fication-based  freezing  techniques  has  made  its  application 
to  a  broad  range  of  species  possible,  especially  vegetatively 
propagated ones (Engelmann, 2004). An important advantage 
of  these  new  techniques  is  their  operational  simplicity,  since 
they  will  be  mainly  applied  in  developing  tropical  countries 
where  the  largest  amount  of  genetic  resources  of  problem 
species  is  located.  Research  is  actively  performed  by  various 
groups  in  universities,  research  institutes,  botanical  gardens, 
and  genebanks  worldwide  to  improve  knowledge  of  biologi-
cal  mechanisms  underlying  the  tolerance  of  plant  tissues  to 

263

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

desiccation  and  cryopreservation.  It  is  hoped  that  new  find-
ings  on  critical  issues  such  as  understanding  and  control  of 
desiccation  sensitivity  will  contribute  significantly  to  the 
development  of  improved  cryopreservation  techniques  for 
recalcitrant  seed  species.  In  this  regard,  it  is  interesting  to 
mention that an EU-funded COST (European Cooperation in 
the Field of Scientific and Technical Research) Action (COST 
871:  Cryopreservation  of  Crop  Species  in  Europe)  was  per-
formed  between  2007  and  2010.  This  action,  involving  19 
European  countries,  aimed  notably  at  improving  fundamen-
tal  knowledge  about  cryoprotection  through  the  determina-
tion of physicobiochemical changes associated with tolerance 
toward cryopreservation, and at developing and applying new 
cryopreservation  protocols.  For  additional  information,  see 
http://www.biw.kuleuven.be/dtp/tro/cost871/Home.htm. 
It can thus be realistically expected that in the coming years 
our  understanding  of  the  biological  mechanisms  involved  in 
cryopreservation  will  increase,  and  that  cryopreservation  will 
become more frequently employed for the long-term conser-
vation of plant genetic resources.

Conclusions

In  this  chapter,  we  have  presented  the  new  biotechnological 
possibilities  for  improving  ex  situ  conservation  of  plant  bio-
diversity  in  genebanks  and  botanical  gardens.  During  recent 
years,  dramatic  progress  has  been  made  with  the  develop-
ment  of  new  conservation  techniques  for  non-orthodox  and 

vegetatively propagated species, especially in the area of cryo-
preservation,  and  the  current  ex  situ  conservation  concepts 
should be modified accordingly to accommodate these techno-
logical advances. It is now well recognized that an appropriate 
conservation strategy for a particular plant gene pool requires 
a holistic approach, combining the different ex situ and in situ 
conservation techniques available in a complementary manner. 
In situ and ex situ methods, including a range of techniques for 
the latter, are options available for the different gene pool ele-
ments. Selection of the appropriate methods should be based 
on a range of criteria, including the biological nature of the spe-
cies in question and practicality and feasibility of the particu-
lar  methods  chosen  (which  depend  on  the  availability  of  the 
necessary infrastructures) as well as the cost-effectiveness and 
security  afforded  by  their  application.  As  already  mentioned 
in  this  chapter,  the  complementarity  between  genebanks  and 
botanical  gardens  should  be  fully  recognized  and  capitalized 
on to optimize plant biodiversity conservation. Considerations 
of complementarity with respect to efficiency and cost-effec-
tiveness  of  the  various  conservation  methods  chosen  are  also 
important. In many instances, the development of appropriate 
complementary conservation strategies will still require further 
research  to  define  the  criteria,  refine  the  methods,  and  test 
their  application  for  a  range  of  gene  pools  and  situations.  In 
this context, it is important to stress that the new, efficient in 
vitro conservation techniques developed over recent years are 
not seen as a replacement for conventional ex situ approaches. 
They  offer  genebank  and  botanical  garden  curators  additional 
tools to optimize the conservation of germplasm collections.

References

Allen, J. B., & Lass, R. A. (1983). London cocoa 
trade Amazon project: Final report, phase 1. 
Cocoa Growers Bulletin, 34, 1–71.

Ashmore, S. (1997). Status report on the 
development and application of in vitro 
techniques for the conservation and use of 
plant genetic resources. In F. Engelmann 
(Ed.), Rome: International Plant Genetic 
Resources Institute.

Assy-Bah, B., & Engelmann, F. (1992). 

Cryopreservation of mature embryos of 
coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) and subsequent 
regeneration of plantlets. CryoLetters, 13, 
117–126.

Assy-Bah, B., Durand-Gasselin, T., & Pannetier, 

C. (1987). Use of zygotic embryo culture 
to collect germplasm of coconut (Cocos 
nucifera L.). FAO/IBPGR Plant Genet. Res. 
Newsl., 71, 4–10.

Banerjee, N., & De Langhe, E. (1985). A 

tissue culture technique for rapid clonal 
propagation and storage under minimal 
growth conditions of Musa (banana and 
plantain). Plant Cell Reports, 4, 351–354.

Berjak, P., Farrant, J. M., Mycock, D. J., & 

Pammenter, N. W. (1989). Homoiohydrous 
(recalcitrant) seeds: The enigma of their 
desiccation sensitivity and the state of water 

in axes of Landolphia kirkii Dyer. Planta, 
186, 249–261.

Berjak, P., & Pammenter, N. W. (1994). 
Recalcitrance is not an all-or-nothing 
situation. Seed Science Research, 4, 263–264.

Bonnart, R., & Volk, G. M. (2010). Increased 

efficiency using the encapsulation-
dehydration cryopreservation technique 
for Arabidopsis thaliana. CryoLetters, 31, 
95–100.

Bunn, E., Turner, S. R., Panaia, M., & Dixon, 

K. W. (2007). The contribution of in 
vitro technology and cryogenic storage to 
conservation of indigenous plants. Australian 
Journal of Botany, 55, 345–355.

Caswell, K. L., & Kartha, K. K. (2009). 

Recovery of plants from pea and strawberry 
meristems cryopreserved for 28 years. 
CryoLetters, 30, 41–46.

Chandel, K. P. S., Chaudhury, R., Radhamani, 
J., & Malik, S. K. (1995). Desiccation and 
freezing sensitivity in recalcitrant seeds of 
tea, cocoa and jackfruit. Annals of Botany, 
76, 443–450.

Chatelet P., Chabrillange, N., Peros, J.P., 

Ortigosa, P., Peyrière, A., Lacombe, T., et al. 
(2009). Cryopreservation in the Vitaceae: 
Seed cryopreservation is effective for 

264

wild species accessions. In Abststract first 
international symposium on cryopreservation 
in horticultural species, KULeuven, Belgium, 
5–8 April 2009, p. 34.

Chin, H. F. (1988). Recalcitrant seeds: A status 

report. Rome: International Plant Genetic 
Resources Institute.

Chin, H. F., & Roberts, E. H. (1980). 

Recalcitrant Crop Seeds. Kuala Lumpur: 
Tropical Press Sdn. Bhd.

Côte, F. X., Goue, O., Domergue, R., Panis, 

B., & Jenny, C. (2000). In-field behavior of 
banana plants (Musa AA sp.) obtained after 
regeneration of cryopreserved embryogenic 
cell suspensions. CryoLetters, 21, 19–24.
Cyr, D. R. (2000). Cryopreservation: Roles 

in clonal propagation and germplasm 
conservation of conifers. In F. Engelmann 
& H. Takagi (Eds.), Cryopreservation 
of Tropical Plant Germplasm – Current 
Research Progress and Applications (pp. 
265–268). Rome: JIRCAS, Tsukuba/IPGRI.

Dekkers, A. J., Rao, A. N., & Goh, C. J. (1991). 

In vitro storage of multiple shoot cultures 
of gingers at ambient temperature. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 47, 157–167.

Dereuddre, J., Hassen, M., Blandin, S., & 

Kaminski, M. (1991). Resistance of  

alginate-coated somatic embryos of carrot 
(Daucus carota L.) to desiccation and 
freezing in liquid nitrogen: 2. Thermal 
analysis. CryoLetters, 12, 135–148.

Druart, P. (1985). In vitro germplasm 

preservation techniques for fruit trees. In A. 
Schäfer-Menuhr (Ed.), In Vitro Techniques – 
Propagation and Long-Term Storage (pp. 167–
171). Dordrecht: Nijhoff/Junk for CEC.

Dulloo, M. E., Ebert, A. W., Dussert, S., Gotor, 

E., Astorga, C., Vasquez, N., et al. (2009). 
Cost efficiency of cryopreservation as a long 
term conservation method for coffee genetic 
resources. Crop Science, 49, 2123–2138.

Dumet, D. (1994). Cryoconservation des 

massifs d’embryons somatiques de palmier 
à huile (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) par 
déshydratation-vitrification. Etude du rôle 
du saccharose pendant le prétraitement. 
PhD Thesis, Université Paris 6, France.

Dumet, D., Engelmann, F., Chabrillange, N., 
& Duval, Y. (1993). Cryopreservation of 
oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) somatic 
embryos involving a desiccation step. Plant 
Cell Reports, 12, 352–355.

Dussert, S., & Engelmann, F. (2006). New 

determinants of coffee (Coffea arabica L.) 
seed tolerance to liquid nitrogen exposure. 
CryoLetters, 27, 169–178.

Dussert, S., Chabrillange, N., Anthony, F., 
Engelmann, F., Recalt, C., & Hamon, S. 
(1997). Variability in storage response within 
a coffee (Coffea spp.) core collection under 
slow growth conditions. Plant Cell Reports, 
16, 344–348.

Dussert, S., Chabrillange, N., Engelmann, 

F., Anthony, F., & Hamon, S. (1997). 
Cryopreservation of coffee (Coffea arabica 
L.) seeds: Importance of the precooling 
temperature. CryoLetters, 18, 269–276.

Dussert, S., Engelmann, F., & Noirot, M. 

(2003). Development of probalistic tools to 
assist in the establishment and management 
of cryopreserved plant germplasm 
collections. CryoLetters, 24, 149–160.

Ellis, R. E., Hong, T., & Roberts, E. H. 

(1990). An intermediate category of seed 
storage behaviour? I. Coffee. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 41, 1167–1174.
Ellis, R. H., Hong, T., Roberts, E. H., & 

Soetisna, U. (1991). Seed storage behaviour 
in Elaeis guineensis. Seed Science Research, 
1, 99–104.

Engelmann, F. (1991). In vitro conservation 

of tropical plant germplasm – a review. 
Euphytica, 57, 227–243.

Engelmann, F. (1997). In vitro conservation 

methods. In B. V Ford-Lloyd, J. H. 
Newburry & J. A. Callow (Eds.), 
Biotechnology and plant genetic resources: 
Conservation and use (pp. 119–162). 
Wellingford: CABI.

Engelmann, F. (1997). Importance of 

desiccation for the cryopreservation of 
recalcitrant seed and vegetatively propagated 
species. Plant Genetic Resources Newsletter, 
112, 9–18.

Engelmann, F. (1999). Management of Field 

and In Vitro Germplasm Collections, 
Proceedings of a Consultation Meeting, 
15–20 January, 1996, CIAT, Cali, Colombia. 
International Plant Genetic Resources 
Institute, Rome.

Germplasm collection, storage, and conservation

C H A P T E R   1 7

Engelmann, F. (2000). Importance of 

cryopreservation for the conservation of 
plant genetic resources. In F. Engelmann 
& H. Takagi (Eds.), Cryopreservation of 
tropical plant germplasm–Current research 
progress and applications (pp. 8–20). Rome: 
JIRCAS, Tsukuba/IPGRI.

Engelmann, F. (2004). Plant cryopreservation: 

Progress and prospects. In Vitro Cellular and 
Developmental Biology–Plant, 40, 427–433.
Engelmann, F. (2009). Use of biotechnologies 

for conserving plant biodiversity. Acta 
Horticulturae, 812, 63–82.

Engelmann, F. (2010). Use of biotechnologies 
for the conservation of plant biodiversity. In 
Vitro Cellular and Developmental Biology–
Plant, in press.

Engelmann, F., & Engels, J. M. M. (2002). 
Technologies and strategies for ex situ 
conservation. In J. M. M. Engels, V. R. Rao, 
A. H. D. Brown & M. T. Jackson (Eds.), 
Managing plant genetic diversity (pp. 89–
104). Wallingford and IPGRI, Rome: CABI.

Engelmann, F., & Takagi, H. (2000). 

Cryopreservation of tropical plant germplasm – 
Current research progress and applications. 
Rome: JIRCAS, Tsukuba/IPGRI.

Engelmann, F., Dumet, D., Chabrillange, N., 

Abdelnour-Esquivel, A., Assy-Bah, B.,  
Dereuddre, J., et al. (1995). Factors 
affecting the cryopreservation of coffee, 
coconut and oil palm embryos. Plant Genetic 
Resources Newsletter, 103, 27–31.

Engelmann, F., Gonzalez-Arnao, M. T., Wu, W. 
J., & Escobar, R. E. (2008). Development of 
encapsulation-dehydration. In B. M. Reed 
(Ed.), Plant cryopreservation: A practical 
guide (pp. 59–76). Berlin: Springer Verlag.

Engels, J.M.M. & Engelmann, F. (1998). 

Botanic gardens and agricultural genebanks: 
Building on complementary strengths for 
more effective global conservation of plant 
genetic resources. In Proceedings of fifth 
international botanic gardens conservation 
Congress, Kirstenbosch, South Africa, 14–18 
Sept. 1998.

Fahy, G. M., MacFarlane, D. R., Angell, C. A., 

& Meryman, H. T. (1984). Vitrification as an 
approach to cryopreservation. Cryobiology, 
21, 407–426.

FAO. (1996).  Report on the state of the 

World’s plant genetic resources for food and 
agriculture. Rome: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations.

FAO. (2009).  Draft second report on the 

World’s plant genetic resources for food and 
agriculture. Rome: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations.

Florin, B., Brulard, E. & Lepage, B. (1999). 

Establishment of a cryopreserved 
coffee germplasm bank. In: Abststract 
CRYO’09. annual meeting of the society for 
Cryobiology, Tsukuba, Japan, 21–26 July 
2009, p. 167.

Forsline, P. L., McFerson, J. R., Lamboy, W. F., 

& Towill, L. E. (1999). Development of base 
and active collections of Malus germplasm 
with cryopreserved dormant buds. Acta 
Horticulturae, 484, 75–78.

Ganeshan, S., & Rajashekaran, P. E. (2000). 
Current status of pollen cryopreservation 
research: Relevance to tropical agriculture. 
In F. Engelmann & H. Takagi (Eds.), 

Cryopreservation of Tropical Plant 
Germplasm – Current Research Progress and 
Applications (pp. 360–365). Rome: JIRCAS, 
Tsukuba/IPGRI.

George, E. F. (1996). Plant propagation by 

tissue culture. Part 2 – In practice (2nd ed.). 
Edington: Exegetics.

Golmirzaie, A., & Panta, A. (2000). Advances in 
potato cryopreservation at the International 
Potato Center, Peru. In F. Engelmann & H. 
Takagi (Eds.), Cryopreservation of Tropical 
Plant Germplasm – Current research 
progress and applications (pp. 250–254). 
Rome: JIRCAS, Tsukuba/IPGRI.

Gonzalez-Arnao, M.T. (1996). Desarollo de 

una tecnica para la crioconservacion de 
meristemos apicales de caña de azucar. Tesis 
presentada en opcion al grado de Doctor 
en ciencias tecnicas. Centro Nacional de 
Investigaciones Cientificas, La Habana, 
Cuba.

Gonzalez-Arnao, M. T., & Engelmann, 

F. (2006). Cryopreservation of plant 
germplasm using the encapsulation-
dehydration technique: Review and case 
study on sugarcane. CryoLetters, 27, 
155–168.

Gonzalez-Arnao, M. T., Panta, A., Roca, W. M., 

Escobar, R. H., & Engelmann, F. (2008). 
Development and large scale application of 
cryopreservation techniques for shoot and 
somatic embryo cultures of tropical crops. 
Plant Cell Tissue and Organ Culture, 92, 
1–13.

Gopal, J., Chamali, A., & Debabrata, S. (2005). 
Use of micro-tubers for slow-growth in vitro 
conservation of potato germplasm. Plant 
Genetic Resources Newsletter, 141, 56–60.
Guanino, T., Silvanini, A., Benelli, C., Beghe, 

D., & Fabbri, A. (2009). Synthetic seed 
production and conservation of Kober 5BB 
grapevine rootstock. Italian Society for 
Horticulture, 16, 267–270.

Guarino, L., Rao, R., & Reid, R. (1995). 

Collecting plant genetic diversity, technical 
guidelines. Wallingford: CAB International.
Hamed, A. M., Gomma, A. H., Aly, A. S., & 
Ibrahim, I. A. (2003). In vitro storage of 
encapsuylated somatic embryos of Phenix 
dactylifera L. Bulletin Faculty of Agriculture, 
Cairo University, 54, 585–598.

Hamilton, K. N., Ashmore, S. E., & Pritchard, 

H. W. (2009). Thermal analysis and 
cryopreservation of seeds of Australian 
wild Citrus species (Rutaceae): Citrus 
australasica, C. inodora and C. garrawayi. 
CryoLetters, 30, 268–279.

Harvengt, L., Meier-Dinkel, A., Dumas, E., 
& Collin, E. (2004). Establishment of a 
cryopreserved gene bank of European elms. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 34, 
43–55.

Hong, T.D., Linington, S. & Ellis, R.H. (1996). 

Seed storage behaviour: A compendium. 
Handbooks for Genebanks No. 4. Rome: 
International Plant Genetic Resources 
Institute.

Hummer, K.E. & Reed, B.M. (1999). 

Establishment and operation of a temperate 
clonal field genebank. In: Management of 
Field and In Vitro Germplasm Collections, 
Proceedings of a Consultation Meeting, 
15–20 January, 1996, CIAT, Cali, Colombia, 

265

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

(F. Engelmann, Ed.) pp. 29–31. International 
Plant Genetic Resources Institute, Rome.
Hvoslef-Heide, A. K. (1992). Effect of pre-
storage conditions on storage of in vitro 
cultures of Nephrolepsis exaltata (L.) 
Schoot and Cordyline fruticosa (L.) A. Chev. 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 28, 
167–174.

IUCN (2004). IUCN Red List of Threatned 

Species.  www.iucnredlist.org/.

Jones, L. H. (1974). Long term survival of 

embryos of carrot (Daucus carota L.). Plant 
Science Letters, 2, 221–224.

Kartha, K. K., & Engelmann, F. (1994). 

Cryopreservation and germplasm storage. 
In I. K. Vasil & T. A. Thorpe (Eds.), Plant 
cell and tissue culture (pp. 195–230). 
Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Kartha, K. K., Mroginski, N. L., Pahl, K., 

& Leung, N. L. (1981). Germplasm 
preservation of coffee (Coffea arabica L.) by 
in vitro culture of shoot apical meristems. 
Plant Science Letters, 22, 301–307.

Keller, E. R. J., Kaczmarczyk, A., & Senula., 

A. (2008). Cryopreservation for plant 
genebanks: A matter between high 
expectations and cautious reservation. 
CryoLetters, 29, 53–62.

Keller, E. R. J., Senula, A., Leunufna, S., & 
Grübe, M. (2006). Slow growth storage 
and cryopreservation – tools to facilitate 
germplasm maintenance of vegetatively 
propagated crops in living plant collections. 
International Journal of Refrigeration, 29, 
411–417.

Keller, E.R.J., Grübe, M. & Senula, A. (2005). 

Cryopreservation in the Gatersleben 
genebank – state of the art in potato, 
garlic and mint. In: Mem. Congr. Int. 
Biotecnología y Agricultura (Bioveg 2005), 
Centro de Bioplantas, Ciego de Avila, Cuba, 
June 2005.

Keshavachandran R., Smitha, M.K. & 
Vijayaraghavan, R. (2007). In vitro 
conservation of endangered medicinal 
plants. In Recent trends in horticultural 
biotechnology, Vol. I and II. ICAE national 
symposium on biotechnological interventions 
for improvement of horticultural crops: Issues 
and strategies, Vellanikkara, Kerala, India, 
10–12 January, 2005, pp. 439–442.

Kim, H. H., Lee, Y. G., Ko, H. C., Park,  
S. U., Gwag, J. G., Cho, E. G., et al. 
(2009). Development of alternative loading 
solutions in droplet-vitrification procedures. 
CryoLetters, 30, 291–299.

Kim, H. H., Lee, Y. G., Shin, D. J., Kim, 

T., Cho, E. G., & Engelmann, F. (2009). 
Development of alternative plant 
vitrification solutions in droplet-vitrification 
procedures. CryoLetters, 30, 320–334.

Kim, H. H., Shin, D. J., No, N. Y., Yoon, M. K.,  

Choi, H. S., Lee, J. S., et al. (2009). 
Cryopreservation of garlic germplasm 
collections using the droplet-vitrification 
technique. In: Abststract first international 
symposium on cryopreservation in 
horticultural species, Leuven, Belgium, 5–8 
April 2009. p. 39.

Konan, E. K., Durand-Gasselin, T., Koadio, Y. J., 
Niamké, A. C., Dumet, D., Duval, Y., et al.  
(2007). Field development of oil palms 
(Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) originating from 

266

cryopreserved stabilized polyembryonic 
cultures (SPCs). CryoLetters, 28, 
377–386.

Kwiatowski, S., Martin, M. W., Brown, C. R., 

& Sluis, C. J. (1988). Serial microtuber 
formation as a long-term conservation 
method for in vitro germplasm. American 
Potato Journal, 65, 369–375.

Lambardi, M., Benelli, C., & de Carlo, A. 

(2006). Technologies for the in vitro 
conservation of woody plants. Italian Society 
for Horticulture, 9, 58–60.

Li, B.L., Zhang, Y.L., Wang, H., Song, 
C.H. & Liu, Y. (2009). Pollen cryo-
bank establishment and application of 
traditional Chinese flowers. In: Abststract 
CRYO’09. Annual meeting of the society for 
Cryobiology, Tsukuba, Japan, 21–26 July 
2009, p. 108.

Liu, Y. G., Liu, L. X., Wang, L., & Gao., 

A. Y. (2008). Determination of genetic 
stability in surviving apple shoots 
following cryopreservation by vitrification. 
CryoLetters, 29, 7–14.

Mandal, B. B., Ahuja-Ghosh, S., & Srivastava, 
P. S. (2008). Cryopreservation of Dioscorea 
rotundata Poir.: A comparative study with 
two cryogenic procedures and assessment of 
true-to-type regenerants by RAPD analysis. 
CryoLetters, 29, 399–408.

Mandal, B. B. (2000). Cryopreservation 

research in India: Current status and future 
perspectives. In F. Engelmann & H. Takagi 
(Eds.), Cryopreservation of Tropical Plant 
Germplasm – Current Research Progress and 
Applications (pp. 282–286). Rome: JIRCAS, 
Tsukuba/IPGRI.

Mathur, J., Ahuja, P. S., Lal, N., & Mathur, A. 

K. (1989). Propagation of Valeriana wallichii 
DC. using encapsulated apical and axial 
shoot buds. Plant Science, 60, 111–116.

Matsumoto, T., Sakai, A., & Yamada, K. (1994). 

Cryopreservation of in vitro grown apical 
meristems of wasabi (Wasabia japonica) 
by vitrification and subsequent high plant 
regeneration. Plant Cell Reports, 13, 
442–446.

Mazur, P. (1984). Freezing of living cells: 

Mechanisms and applications. American 
Journal of Physiology, 16, C125–C142. 247 
Cell Physiol.

Meryman, H. T., Williams, R. J., & Douglas, M. 

S. J. (1977). Freezing injury from solution 
effects and its prevention by natural or 
artificial cryoprotection. Cryobiology, 14, 
287–302.

Mikul, A., Olas, M., Sliwinska, E., & 

Rybczynki, J. J. (2008). Cryopreservation 
by encapsulation of Gentiana spp. cell 
suspensions maintains regrowth, embryonic 
competence and DNA content. CryoLetters, 
29, 409–418.

Mix-Wagner, G., Schumacher, H. M., & Cross, 
R. J. (2003). Recovery of potato apices after 
several years of storage in liquid nitrogen. 
CryoLetters, 24, 33–41.

Mullin, R. H., & Schlegel, D. E. (1976). Cold 

storage maintenance of strawberry meristem 
plantlets. Horticultural Science, 11, 100–
101.

Nadarajan, J., Mansor, M., Krishnapillay, B., 

Staines, H. J., Benson, E. E., & Harding, K. 
(2008). Applications of differential scanning 

calorimetry in developing cryopreservation 
strategies for Parkia speciosa, a tropical tree 
producing recalcitrant seeds. CryoLetters, 
29, 95–110.

Ng, S., & Ng, N. Q. (1991). Reduced growth 

storage of germplasm. In J. H. Doods (Ed.), 
In Vitro Methods for Conservation of Plant 
Genetic Resources (pp. 11–39). London: 
Chapman & Hall.

Niino, T. (1995). Cryopreservation of 

germplasm of mulberry. In Y. P. S. Bajaj 
(Ed.), Biotechnology in agriculture and 
forestry Vol. 32. Cryopreservation of plant 
Germplasm I (pp. 102–113). Berlin: 
Springer Verlag.

Niino, T., Sakai, A., Yakuwa, H., & Nojiri, K. 

(1992). Cryopreservation of in vitro-grown 
shoot tips of apple and pear by vitrification. 
Plant Cell Tissue and Organ Culture, 28, 
261–266.

Nishizawa, S., Sakai, A., Amano, A. Y., & 

Matsuzawa, T. (1993). Cryopreservation 
of asparagus (Asparagus officinalis 
L.) embryogenic suspension cells and 
subsequent plant regeneration by 
vitrification. Plant Science, 91, 67–73.

Normah, M. N., & Makeen, A. M. (2008). 

Cryopreservation of excised embryos and 
embryonic axes. In B. M. Reed (Ed.), Plant 
cryopreservation: A practical guide (pp. 
211–240). Berlin: Springer Verlag.

Ouédraogo, A.S., Thomsen, K., Engels, J.M.M. 

& Engelmann, F. (1999). Challenges 
and opportunities for enhanced use of 
recalcitrant and intermediate tropical forest 
tree seeds through improved handling and 
storage. In: Proceedings of the IUFRO seed 
symposium 1998 recalcitrant seeds, 12–15 
Oct. 1998, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (M. 
Marzalina, K.C. Khoo, F.Y. Tsan and B. 
Krishnapillay, Eds.), pp. 227–234. FRIM, 
Kepong, Malaysia.

Panis, B., Strosse, H., Van den Henda, S., & 
Swennen, R. (2002). Sucrose preculture 
to simplify cryopreservation of banana 
meristem cultures. CryoLetters, 23, 375–
384.

Panis, B., Van den houwe, I., Piette, B. & 

Swennen, R. (2007). Cryopreservation of 
the banana germplasm collection at the ITC 
(INIBAP Transit centre). In: Proceedings of 
the first meeting of COST 871 working group 
2: Technology, application and validation of 
plant cryopreservation, Florence, Italy 10–13 
May 2007, pp. 34–35.

Pence, V. C. (1991). Cryopreservation of seeds 

of Ohio native plants and related species. 
Seed Science and Technology, 19, 235–251.

Pence, V. C. (2008). Cryopreservation of 

bryophytes and ferns. In B. M. Reed (Ed.), 
Plant Cryopreservation: A Practical Guide 
(pp. 117–140). Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Pence, V. C. (2008). Cryopreservation of 

recalcitrant seeds. In Y. P. S. Bajaj (Ed.), 
Biotechnology in Agriculture and Forestry 
Vol. 32, Cryopreservation of Plant 
Germplasm I (pp. 29–52). Berlin: Springer 
Verlag.

Pence, V.C., Sandoval, J., Villalobos, V. & 

Engelmann, F. (2002). In Vitro Collecting 
Techniques for Germplasm Conservation. 
IPGRI Technical Bulletin N°7. IPGRI, 
Rome.

Germplasm collection, storage, and conservation

C H A P T E R   1 7

Popova, E., Kim, H. H., & Paek, K. Y. (2010). 

Cryopreservation of coriander (Coriandrum 
sativum L.) somatic embryos using sucrose 
preculture and air desiccation. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 124, 522–528.

Pritchard H.W., Ashmore, S., Berjak, P., 

Engelmann, F., González-Benito, E., Li, 
D.Z., et al. (2009). Storage stability and the 
biophysics of preservation. In: Abststract 
plant conservation for the next decade: A 
celebration of Kew’s 250th Anniversary, 
12–16 October 2009, Royal Botanic 
Gardens Kew, UK.

Ramsay, M.M., Jackson, A.D. & Porley, R.D. 

(2000). A pilot study for the ex situ 
conservation of UK bryophytes. In Eurogard 
2000 – II European botanic garden congress, 
Canary Islands, Spain: Las Palmas de Gran 
Canaria, pp. 52–57, (BGCI, Ed.), London, 
UK.

Razdan, M. K., & Cocking, E. C. (1997). 

Conservation of plant genetic resources In 
Vitro, Vol. 1: General Aspects. Enfield: 
Science Publishers Inc.

Reed, B. M. (1991). Application of gas-

permeable bags for in vitro cold storage of 
strawberry germplasm. Plant Cell Reports, 
10, 431–434.

Reed, B. M. (2008). Plant cryopreservation: A 

practical guide. Berlin: Springer Verlag.

Reed, B. M., & Uchendu, E. (2008). Controlled 

rate cooling. In B. M. Reed (Ed.), Plant 
cryopreservation: A practical guide (pp. 
77–92). Berlin: Springer Verlag.

Reed, B. M., DeNoma, J., & Chang, Y. (2000). 

Application of cryopreservation protocols 
at a clonal genebank. In F. Engelmann & H. 
Takagi (Eds.), Cryopreservation of tropical 
plant germplasm – current research progress 
and applications (pp. 246–249). Rome: 
JIRCAS, Tsukuba/IPGRI.

Reed, B.M., Engelmann, F., Dulloo, M.E. & 

Engels, J.M.M. (2004). Technical Guidelines 
for the Management of Field and In Vitro 
Germplasm Collections. Handbook for 
Genebanks N°7. IPGRI/SGRP, Rome.

Roberts, H. F. (1973). Predicting the viability 

of seeds. Seed Science and Technology, 1, 
499–514.

Roca, W.M., Reyes, R. & Beltran, J. (1984). 

Effect of various factors on minimal 
growth in tissue culture storage of cassava 
germplasm. In Proceedings of the sixth 
symposium of the international society 
for tropical root crops, Lima, Peru, 21–26 
February 1984, pp. 441–446.

Roxas, N. J. L., Tashiro, Y., Miyasaki, S., 

Isshiki, S., & Takeshita, A. (1985). In vitro 

preservation of Higo chrysanthemum 
(Dendratema x grandiflorum (Ramat.) 
Kitam.). Journal of the Japanese Horticulture 
Society, 63, 863–870.

Sakai, A., Hirai, D., & Niino, T. (2008). 

Development of PVS-based vitrification and 
encapsulation-vitrification protocols. In B. 
M. Reed (Ed.), Plant cryopreservation: A 
practical guide (pp. 33–58). Berlin: Springer 
Verlag.

Sakai, A., & Engelmann, F. (2007). Vitrification, 

encapsulation-vitrification and droplet-
vitrification: A review. CryoLetters, 28, 
151–172.

Sakai, A., Kobayashi, S., & Oiyama, I. (1990). 
Cryopreservation of nucellar cells of navel 
orange (Citrus sinensis Osb. var. brasiliensis 
Tanaka) by vitrification. Plant Cell Reports, 
9, 30–33.

Sanchez, C., Martinez, M. T., Vidal, N., San-
José, M. C., Valladeres, S., & Vieitez, A. 
M. (2008). Preservation of Quercus robur 
germplasm by cryostorage of embryogenic 
cultures derived from mature trees 
and RAPD analysis of genetic stability. 
CryoLetters, 29, 493–504.

Sarasan, V., Cripps, R., Ramsay, M. M., 

Atherton, C., McMichen, M., Prendergast, 
G., et al. (2006). Conservation in vitro of 
threatened plants – progress in the past 
decade. In Vitro Developmental Cellullar 
Biology–Plant, 42, 206–214.

Senaratna, T., McKersie, B. D., & Bowley, S. R. 
(1990). Artificial seeds of alfalfa (Medicago 
sativa L.). Induction of desiccation 
tolerance in somatic embryos. In Vitro 
Cellular & Developmental Biology–Plant, 
26, 85–90.

Simmonds, N. W. (1982). The context of 
the workshop. In L. A. Withers & J. T. 
Williams (Eds.), Crop Genetic Resources–the 
Conservation of Difficult Material, IUBS 
Series B42 (pp. 1–3). Paris: IUBS/IBPGR/
IGF.

Spencer, M. (1999). The challenges of 

developing cryopreservation strategies to suit 
the requirements of a large industrial in vitro 
plant cell collection. In: Abststract Cryo’99, 
World Congress of Cryobiology, Marseille, 
France, 12–15 July 1999, p. 245.

Touchell, D. H., & Dixon, K. W. (1994). 
Cryopreservation for seedbanking of 
Australian species. Annals of Botany, 40, 
541–546.

Towill, L. E., & Walters, C. (2000). 

Cryopreservation of pollen. In F. Engelmann 
& H. Takagi (Eds.), Cryopreservation of 
tropical plant germplasm – Current research 

progress and applications (pp. 115–129). 
Rome: JIRCAS, Tsukuba/IPGRI.

UNCED. (1992).  Convention on biological 

diversity. Geneva: United Nations Conference 
on Environment and Development.

UNEP. (1995).  Global biodiversity assessment. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Uragami, A., Sakai, A., & Magai, M. (1990). 

Cryopreservation of dried axillary buds from 
plantlets of Asparagus officinalis L. grown in 
vitro. Plant Cell Reports, 9, 328–331.

Varghese, D., Berjak, P., & Pammenter, N. W. 
(2009). Cryopreservation of shoot tips of 
Trichilia emetica, a tropical recalcitrant-
seeded species. CryoLetters, 30, 280–290.

Walters, C., Wheeler, L., & Grotenhuis, J. 
M. (2005). Longevity of seeds stored in 
a genebank: Species characteristics. Seed 
Science Research, 15, 1–20.

Walters, C., Wheeler, L., & Stanwood, P. C. 
(2004). Longevity of cryogenically stored 
seeds. Cryobiology, 48, 229–244.

Wang, Q., Panis, B., Engelmann, F., Lambardi, 
M. and Valkonen, J.P.T. (2008). Elimination 
of plant pathogens by cryotherapy of shoot 
tips: A review. Annals of Applied Biology. 
154:   http://www3.interscience.wiley.
com/journal/119879031/issue/  .

Wesley-Smith, J., Vertucci, C. W., Berjak, P., 

Pammenter, N. W., & Crane, J. (1992). 
Cryopreservation of desiccation-sensitive 
axes of Camellia sinensis in relation to 
dehydration, freezing rate and the thermal 
properties of tissue water. Journal of Plant 
Physiology, 140, 596–604.

Withers, L. A. (1987). In vitro methods for 
germplasm collecting in the field. FAO/
IBPGR Plant Genetic Resources Newsletter, 
69, 2–6.

Withers, L. A. (1995). Collecting in vitro 

for genetic resources conservation. In L. 
Guarino, R. Rao & R. Reid (Eds.), Collecting 
plant genetic diversity (pp. 511–515). 
Wallingford: CABI.

Withers, L. A., & Engelmann, F. (1997). 
In vitro conservation of plant genetic 
resources. In A. Altman (Ed.), 
Biotechnology in Agriculture (pp. 57–88). 
New York: Marcel Dekker Inc.

Withers, L. A., & Engels, J. M. M. (1990). The 

test tube genebank – a safe alternative to 
field conservation. IBPGR Newsletter for 
Asia and the Pacific, 3, 1–2.

Yidana, J. A., Withers, L. A., & Ivins, J. D. 

(1987). Development of a simple method 
for collecting and propagating cocoa 
germplasm in vitro. Acta Horticulturae, 212, 
95–98.

267

Engineering the biosynthesis of low 
molecular weight metabolites for  
quality traits (essential nutrients,  
health-promoting phytochemicals, 
volatiles, and aroma compounds)

28

Fumihiko Sato1  Kenji Matsui2
1Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto, Japan, 2Faculty of Agriculture 
and Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan

TABLE OF CONTENTS
General Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 443
Lessons from Essential Nutrients  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 444
Essential amino acids  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .444
Fatty acids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .446
Vitamins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .446
Improvement of the bioavailability of  
minerals through metabolic engineering . . . . . . . . . . .449
Multigene transfer for improved food quality . . . . . . . .449

General Strategy for the Engineering  
of Secondary Metabolites with Nutritional Value  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 449
Identification of biosynthetic genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .449
Identification of transcription factors  
and engineering through integrated “omics” . . . . . . . .450
Modulation of organelle development . . . . . . . . . . . . .450

Quality Improvement of Plants  
as Functional or Medicinal Food  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 451
Resveratrol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .451
Anthocyanins and flavonoids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .452
Catechins and proanthocyanidins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .452
Sesamins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .452
Beloved Metabolites: Plant Volatiles  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 452

Biochemistry of plant volatile  
secondary metabolites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .453
Flavor compounds in fruits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .454
Scent/aroma of flowers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .455
Volatile organic chemicals in vegetative  
organs of plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .455
Perspectives  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 456
Conclusion  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 458
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 458

General Introduction

Plants provide staple food and feed for humans and livestock, 
and  are  also  an  important  nutritional  resource  for  essential 
nutrients, such as amino acids, fatty acids, vitamins, and min-
erals  (Hounsome  et  al.,  2008),  as  well  as  health-promoting 
phytochemicals (also called nutraceuticals or functional foods) 
and aromas that can enhance our quality of life (Figure 28.1). 
Now that the Green Revolution based on plant breeding has 
dramatically improved the yield of crops over the past several 
decades,  we  need  methods  to  improve  the  quality  traits  of 
crops, such as their production of essential nutrients, health-
promoting phytochemicals, and life-enriching chemicals, along 
with further improvements in yields without the excess use of 
fossil fuels.

While  quality  traits  based  on  low  molecular  weight  meta-
bolites are difficult to evaluate during breeding, rapid advances 
in  biochemistry  and  molecular  biology,  especially  genetic 
engineering  and  analytical  development,  have  made  these 
quality  improvements  possible.  Some  conceptual  strategies 
to  enhance  the  formation  of  desired  secondary  metabolites 
through genetic modification are outlined in Figure 28.2A–E. 
In general, metabolic flux is tightly regulated, and there is lit-
tle  room  for  modification  (Figure  28.2A).  Accumulating  evi-
dence  indicates  that  over-expression  of  the  enzyme(s)  for  a 
rate-limiting  step,  especially  enzymes  in  primary  metabolism 
that  are  insensitive  to  feedback  regulation,  can  increase  the 
production of desired metabolites such as amino acids (Figure 
28.2B). Another approach is the introduction of a new branch 
pathway  to  produce  novel  compounds  that  are  not  normally 
produced by the host plants, such as very long chain polyun-
saturated  fatty  acids  (VLC-PUFAs;  Figure  28.2C).  A  more 
attractive  approach  is  the  use  of  a  transcription  factor  (TF) 
that  controls  an  entire  enzymatic  pathway  in  metabolism.  In 
this case, even if we do not fully understand the details of a 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00028-6

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

–
NO3

Assimilation

CO2

Photosynthesis

Alkaloids

Amino acids

Acetyl-CoA

Pyruvate

MVP
pathway

MEP
pathway

Stilbene

Lignans

Flavonoids

Anthocyanin
Catechins

Phenylpropanoids

Fatty acids

Benzenoides

Oxylipin
pathway

Isothiocyanates/Nitriles

Sulfides

Green leaf volatiles

Jasmonates

IPP

GPP

FPP

Sugars

Vitamin C

Glyceraldehyde-

3-phosphate

Monoterpenes

Sesquiterpenes

Vitamine E

GGPP

Carotenoids

Vitamine A

Apocarotenoids

Figure 28.1 l An overview of plant secondary metabolism l The reactions in primary metabolism are shown with gray arrows, and those 
in secondary metabolism are shown with black arrows. The non-volatile metabolites that are important for the agronomic traits of plants are 
shown in white with gray boxes, while volatile metabolites are shown in black with white boxes. All of the secondary metabolites are formed 
from primary metabolites, and thus an unconsidered attempt to enhance the formation of secondary metabolites might disturb the primary 
metabolism, which could negatively affect important traits of crop plants.

biosynthetic  pathway,  the  introduction  of  just  one  TF  gene 
into a crop plant can promote the entire pathway and increase 
the  accumulation  of  a  metabolite  (Figure  28.2D).  Finally, 
there is a growing body of evidence that the supply of a pri-
mary  metabolite  precursor  can  limit  the  production  of  sec-
ondary  metabolites.  Thus,  the  enhanced  flow  of  a  precursor 
may  be  essential  for  the  production  of  desired  metabolites, 
although  this  should  be  achieved  without  disturbing  the  pri-
mary metabolism (Figure 28.2E).

Primary  metabolites  as  essential  nutrients  are  being  more 
intensively  studied  based  on  these  concepts,  and  their  engi-
neering  has  often  been  reviewed  (Zhu  et  al.,  2007;  Mayer 
et al., 2008; Newell-McGloughlin, 2008). Thus, in this chap-
ter  we  first  outline  the  metabolic  engineering  of  essential 
nutrients,  such  as  essential  amino  acids,  lipids,  vitamins,  and 
minerals,  and  then  summarize  the  recent  advances  in  the 
modification of a more specific secondary metabolism for the 
improvement of quality traits.

Lessons from Essential Nutrients

While  plants  provide  staple  food  and  feed,  no  crop  is  nutri-
tionally  perfect.  For  example,  cereal  grains,  such  as  rice  and 
maize, are poor sources of lysine, vitamin A, folic acid, iron, 
zinc, and selenium, which are essential for normal growth and 
metabolism,  whereas  legumes  lack  methionine  and  cysteine 
(Molvig  et  al.  1997).  Since  about  one-third  of  the  world's 
population (mostly in sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia) 
depends on cereals as their source of nutrition (FAO, 2006), 
it is important to improve the essential nutrients in cereals to 

reduce  malnutrition  in  these  areas  (Zhu  et  al.,  2007;  Mayer 
et al., 2008; Newell-McGloughlin, 2008).

While  the  modification  of  storage  protein  profiles  would 
be  useful  for  improving  desirable  amino  acid  profiles;  for 
example, elimination of 22 kDa zeins with RNAi to increase 
lysine content in maize (Segal et al., 2003), the deregulation 
of rate-limiting-step enzymes is often used to improve quality 
traits, as outlined in the next section.

Essential amino acids

Essential amino acid biosynthesis is strictly regulated by some 
key enzymes, such as dihydrodipicolinate synthase (DHDPS) 
in lysine (Lys) biosynthesis, and anthranilate synthase in tryp-
tophan  (Trp)  synthesis  (Figure  28.3A,B).  Thus,  introduction 
of a mutant enzyme gene without feedback regulation is criti-
cal to improve the content of essential amino acids.

The first successful increases in Lys content in the seeds of 
canola and soybean plants were achieved by the introduction 
of  Lys-feedback-insensitive  bacterial  DHDPS  and  aspartoki-
nase  (AK)  enzymes  encoded  by  the  Corynebacterium  dapA 
gene  and  a  mutant  Escherichia  coli  lysC  gene  (Falco  et  al., 
1995). The expression of Corynebacterium DHDPS resulted 
in more than a 100-fold increase in the accumulation of free 
Lys  in  the  seeds  of  canola,  and  the  total  seed  Lys  content 
approximately  doubled.  The  expression  of  Corynebacterium 
DHDPS plus Lys-insensitive E. coli AK in soybean transform-
ants similarly increased the free Lys level by several hundred-
fold  and  the  total  seed  Lys  content  by  as  much  as  five-fold. 
However, genes should be linked to a plastid transit peptide 

444

Engineering the biosynthesis of low molecular weight metabolites

C H A P T E R   2 8

(A)

(B)

(C)

Photoassimilates/

Intermediate of glycolysis

Photoassimilates/

Intermediate of glycolysis

Photoassimilates/

Intermediate of glycolysis

precursors

precursors

precursors

metabolite 3

metabolite 1 metabolite 2

metabolite 1

metabolite 2

metabolite 1 metabolite 2

(D)

Photoassimilates/

Intermediate of glycolysis

(E)

Photoassimilates/

Intermediate of glycolysis

precursors

precursors

TF

metabolite 1

metabolite 2

metabolite 1

metabolite 2

Figure 28.2 l Conceptual drawing of strategies for enhancing the formation of desired secondary metabolites through genetic 
modification l The existing pathway is generally tightly regulated (A). Over-expression of enzyme(s) in the rate-limiting step with insensitive 
feedback regulation increases the production of desired metabolites (B). Introduction of a new branch pathway produces novel compounds 
that are not normally produced by the host plants (C). Ectopic expression of a transcription factor (TF) that controls an entire enzymatic 
pathway in metabolism may increase the accumulation of a metabolite (D). Enhanced supply of a precursor primary metabolite(s) would be 
essential for the production of desired metabolites (E). Please refer to the text for more details.

(A)

(B)

Asp

AK

AK

Asp-4-P

Asp-4-semialdehyde

DHDPS

HSDH

Homoserine

Lys

Thr

Indole phytoalexins

Plastid

PEP + E-4-P

DAHPS

DAHP

Shikimate

Chorismate

ANS

Anthranilate

CM

p-Aminobenzoates

Trp

Phe, Tyr

Plastid

Alkaloids

Met

Indole glucosinolates

Phenylpropanoids: flavonoids, 
lignans, stilbenes

Figure 28.3 l Amino acid biosynthetic pathways and feedback regulation l Simplified pathways for lysine (Lys; A) and aromatic amino 
acids (B) such as tryptophan (Trp), phenylalanine (Phe), and tyrosine (Tyr) are shown. Red bars show the feedback inhibition of enzymes in the 
rate-limiting step by products such as Lys and Trp. A green background indicates that these reactions occur in plastids. Abbreviations: Asp, 
aspartate; AK, aspartate kinase; Asp-4-P, aspartate-4-phosphate; DHDPS, dihydrodipicolinate synthase; HSDH, homoserine dehydrogenase; 
Met, methionine; Thr, threonine; PEP, phosphoenol pyruvate; E-4-P, erythrose-4-phosphate; DAHP, 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-
phosphate; DAHPS, DAHP synthase; ANS, anthranilate synthase; and CM, chorismate mutase. 

445

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

and  expressed  from  a  seed-specific  promoter  in  transgenic 
canola  and  soybean  seeds,  since  these  biosyntheses  occur  in 
plastids in seeds.

The  first  successful  engineering  of  Lys  biosynthesis  also 
illustrated enhanced catabolism: the accumulation of α-amino 
adipic  acid  in  canola  and  saccharopine  in  soybean.  This  indi-
cates  that  engineering  can  influence  catabolism  through 
the  modification  of  biosynthesis  (Zhu  and  Galili,  2003). 
Transgenic  Arabidopsis  expressing  the  feedback-insensitive 
DHDPS  in  a  knockout  mutant  in  the  Lys  catabolism  path-
way showed a synergistic 80-fold increase in the seed-free Lys 
level  compared  to  a  single  trait  line;  a  single  DHDPS  over-
expresser  and  a  Lys  catabolism  mutant  contained,  respec-
tively, only 12- and 5-fold higher levels of seed-free Lys than 
wild-type plants.

A  feedback-insensitive  α-subunit  of  rice  anthranilate  syn-
thase is another successful application of the accumulation of 
tryptophan (Trp; Wakasa et al., 2006). The amount of free Trp 
in transgenic rice seeds was increased by about two orders of 
magnitude compared with that in wild-type, and the total Trp 
content  was  also  increased.  However,  it  is  possible  that  the 
marked overproduction of Trp might reduce spikelet fertility, 
yield,  and  seed  germination  ability,  although  agronomic  traits 
varied among lines. Interestingly, no substantial changes in the 
amounts of other phenolic compounds were detected, except 
for about a two-fold increase in indole acetic acid in the trans-
genic seeds.

Fatty acids

Fatty  acids  are  another  target  for  nutritional  improvement 
because  some  of  them  are  critical  in  metabolism,  cardiovas-
cular  health,  inflammatory  responses,  and  blood  pressure 
regulation. Many of the enzymes involved in fatty acid biosyn-
thesis and catabolism have been characterized, and transgenic 
approaches  have  been  attempted  to  modify  the  oil  content 
and composition in plants (Qi et al., 2004; Truksa et al., 2006; 
Clemente and Cahoon, 2009). Modification of the content of 
unsaturated fatty acids (e.g., linoleic acid and α-linolenic acid) 
and  the  production  of  VLC-PUFAs  (e.g.,  arachidonic  acid, 
ARA; eicosapentaenoic acid,  EPA; and  docosahexaenoic  acid, 
DHA),  which  are  usually  obtained  from  fish  oils,  have  been 
intensively  studied  (Truksa  et  al.,  2006).  One  of  the  most 
promising applications of metabolic engineering in the area of 
nutritional fatty acids is the production of two VLC-PUFAs, 
AA  and  EPA,  in  a  higher  plant  using  genes  in  the  Ω3/6  Δ8-
desaturation  biosynthetic  pathway  for  the  formation  of  C20 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (Qi et al., 2004).

The sequential introduction of genes encoding a Δ9-specific 
elongating  activity  from  Isochrysis  galbana,  a  Δ8-desaturase 
from  Euglena  gracilis,  and  a  Δ5-desaturase  from  Mortierella 
alpina  reconstituted  a  bacterial  pathway  that  is  not  present 
in  plants  (Clemente  and  Cahoon,  2009).  The  constitutive 
expression  of  three  transgenes  in  Arabidopsis  produced  EPA 
and  ARA  in  vegetative  tissues  at  3.0  and  6.6%  of  total  fatty 
acids. I. galbana C18-Δ9-elongating activity may bypass rate-
limiting  steps  present  in  the  conventional  Δ6-desaturase/
elongase  pathways.  No  deleterious  effect  on  plant  growth 

was detected with the elevated accumulation of VLC-PUFAs, 
whereas  some  growth  defect  was  reported  for  the  modifica-
tion  of  natural  unsaturated  fatty  acids  to  increase  the  oleic 
and stearic acid contents (Clemente and Cahoon, 2009).

In  addition  to  the  introduction  of  novel  genes  from  other 
organisms,  such  as  microbes,  to  improve  the  lipid  composi-
tion,  gene  knockdown  is  commonly  used  to  modify  the  oil 
composition, especially to improve the oxidative stability and 
nutritional quality through the reduction of unsaturated fatty 
acids. The silencing or knocking out of Δ12 desaturase (FAD2) 
and prevention of the formation of Δ9 desaturase successfully 
increased the contents of oleic (18:1) and stearic (18:0) acids 
(read Clemente and Cahoon, 2009, for details on soybean oil 
metabolic engineering).

Vitamins

Plants  are  rich  resources  of  vitamins.  While  the  biosynthesis 
of vitamins A and E has been most extensively studied, exten-
sive work has also been done on other vitamins such as vita-
min  C  and  folate  (Van  Eenennaam  et  al.,  2003;  Zhu  et  al., 
2007; Mayer et al., 2008; Newell-McGloughlin, 2008). These 
biosynthetic pathways have been studied in both higher plants 
and  microorganisms,  and  some  microbial  genes  are  used  to 
generate  vitamin  overproducing  plants  such  as  “golden  rice” 
by bypassing the limiting step for plant enzymes.

Vitamin A
The  carotenoid  biosynthesis  pathway  provides  not  only  an 
important  photosynthetic  pigment,  but  also  a  precursor  for 
vitamin  A  (Figure  28.4).  Humans  can  synthesize  vitamin  A 
from  β-carotene  (known  as  pro-vitamin  A).  Vitamin  A  defi-
ciency is still a serious problem in the developing world, and 
contributes  to  the  deaths  of  two  million  children  annually, 
and  to  blindness  in  many  of  the  survivors  (WHO  Report, 
1995).  Golden  rice  has  been  created  to  produce  β-carotene 
in  rice.  The  biosynthetic  pathway  for  β-carotene  was  recon-
stituted  in  rice  endosperm  using  a  daffodil  (Narcissus 
pseudonarcissus) phytoene synthase (psy) and carotene desat-
urase (ctri) from Erwinia uredovora. More recently, Paine et 
al. (2005) replaced the rate-limiting psy with more efficient 
maize  psy  through  systematic  testing.  The  new  “golden  rice 
II” variety had up to 23-fold (maximum 37 µg/g) more total 
carotenoids  than  the  original  golden  rice,  and  preferentially 
accumulated  β-carotene.  This  approach  has  been  applied  to 
other  crops  such  as  “golden  potato”  (Diretto  et  al.  2007), 
“orange  cauliflower,”  carrots  with  enhanced  β-carotene  in 
the  taproot  and  tomatoes  have  been  established.  In  potato, 
Diretto  et  al.  (2007)  reconstituted  the  β-carotene  bio-
synthetic  pathway  from  geranylgeranyl  diphosphate  with 
three  genes,  encoding  phytoene  synthase  (CrtB),  phytoene 
desaturase  (CrtI),  and  lycopene  β-cyclase  (CrtY),  from 
Erwinia,  under  tuber-specific  or  constitutive  promoter  con-
trol. Interestingly, constitutive expression of the CrtY and/or 
CrtI  genes  was  harmful  for  the  establishment  of  transgenic 
plants,  whereas  the  expression  of  all  three  genes  under  a 
tuber-specific promoter resulted in tubers with a deep yellow 
(“golden2”) phenotype without any adverse leaf phenotypes. 

446

Engineering the biosynthesis of low molecular weight metabolites

C H A P T E R   2 8

2x

OPP

GGDP

phytoene synthase

phytoene desaturase (PDS)

Phytoene

ζ−carotene desaturase (ZDS)

ζ−Carotene

CRTI

lycopene β-cyclase 

Lycopene

β-Carotene

Figure 28.4 l Carotenoid biosynthetic pathway and engineering with a microbial gene (CRTI) l Bacterial CRTI is a bifunctional 
enzyme that catalyzes both phytoene desaturase and ζ-carotene desaturase reactions.

The  carotenoid  contents  in  tubers  were  increased  approxi-
mately 20-fold (to 114 µg/g dry weight) and β-carotene was 
increased  3600-fold  (to  47 µg/g  dry  weight).  Based  on  the 
conversion  rate  of  β-carotene  to  retinol  (6:1),  250 g  (fresh 
weight) of “golden” potatoes should provide 50% of the rec-
ommended daily allowance of Vitamin A.

Attempts  have  been  made  to  produce  derivatives  of 
β-carotene,  such  as  astaxanthin,  in  transgenic  plants,  since 
astaxanthin  contributes  to  the  red  pigmentation  of  fish  and 
crustacean and is important for human health. The introduc-
tion of CrtO from the alga Haematococcus pluvialis, encoding 
β-carotene  ketolase,  under  regulation  of  the  tomato  phy-
toene  desaturase  gene  promoter  with  the  transit  peptide  of 
phytoene  desaturase  resulted  in  the  successful  accumulation 
of  (3S,  3S)  astaxanthin  and  other  ketocarotenoids  in  plants 
(Mann et al., 2000).

Vitamin E
Vitamin E is actually a group of eight hydrophobic compounds 
(known as vitamers) that prevent the oxidation and polymer-
ization  of  unsaturated  fatty  acids;  vitamin  E  deficiency  leads 
to lipid peroxidation, neurological dysfunction, and infertility 
(Brigelius-Flohe and Traber, 1999). Plant oils typically contain 

the most potent α-tocopherol as a minor component, and high 
levels of its biosynthetic precursor, γ-tocopherol. Since many 
biosynthetic  genes  including  homogentisic  acid  dioxygenase 
(HPPD),  homogentisic  acid  prenyltransferase  (HPT,  VTE2 
in  Arabidopsis),  2-methyl-6-phytylbenzoquinol 
(MPBQ) 
methyltransferase (VTE3 in Arabidopsis), tocopherol cyclase 
(VTE1  in  Arabidopsis),  and  γ-tocopherol  methyltransferase 
(γ-TMT, VTE4 in Arabidopsis) have been isolated, the quan-
tity  and  quality  of  tocopherols  has  been  intensively  engi-
neered after the pioneering work by Shintani and Della-Penna 
(1998;  Van  Eenennaam,  2003;  Figure  28.5A).  In  particular, 
γ-tocopherol methyltransferase is crucial for the improvement 
of tocopherol activity; for example, the simultaneous expres-
sion of MPBQ methyltransferase and γ-TMT in soybean signif-
icantly increased the total vitamin E activity (five-fold greater 
than  that  of  wild-type  plants)  through  an  eight-fold  increase 
in the level of α-tocopherol (10% of total vitamin E in wild-
type to over 95% in transgenic seeds).

Folate
Folate  has  received  considerable  attention,  since  its  defi-
ciency  induces  neural  tube  defects  during  early  pregnancy 
(Laurence et al., 1981). However, the biosynthesis of folates 

447

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

(A)

(B)

Shikimate Pathway

MEP Pathway

O

N

HN

H2N

H
N

N
H

H2
C

N
H

H
N

C
O

CH2CH2COOH

COOH
C
H

Monoglutamyl-tetrahydrofolate

HMDHP

HMDHP

p-Aminobenzoate

HMDHP-PP

DHN

DHM

Dihydropteroate

Dihydrofolate

ADC

ADCS

Chorismate

Poly-Glu-tetrahydrofolate

Plastid

Mitochondria

DHN-P

DHN-PPP

GCHI

GTP
Cytosol

Homogentisic acid

Phytyldiphosphate

HO

HPT (VTE2)

OH 

CH3

MPBQ

3

MPBQ methyltransferase

OH

CH3

3

2,3-dimethyl-5-phytylbenzoquinol

Tocopherol cyclase (VTE1)

HO

H3C

HO

H3C

O

CH3

γ-Tocopherol 

3

γ-TMT

HO

H3C

CH3

O

CH3

α-Tocopherol

3

Figure 28.5 l Biosynthetic pathways of vitamin E (A) and folate (B) l Vitamin E (tocopherols and tocotrienols) is a group of eight 
hydrophobic compounds. Vitamin E biosynthesis involves homogentisic acid dioxygenase (HPPD), homogentisic acid prenyltransferase 
(HPT, VTE2 in Arabidopsis), 2-methyl-6- phytylbenzoquinol (MPBQ) methyltransferase (VTE3 in Arabidopsis), tocopherol cyclase (VTE1 in 
Arabidopsis), and γ-tocopherol methyltransferase (γ-TMT, VTE4 in Arabidopsis). (B) Folate is synthesized from three moieties of pteridine, 
p-aminobenzoate (PABA), and glutamate. Pteridines synthesized in the cytosol and PABA synthesized in the plastids are transported to the 
mitochondria to form dihydropteroate and conjugated to glutamate. Abbreviations: ADC, aminodeoxychorismate; ADCS, ADC synthase; 
DHM, dihydromonopterin; DHN, dihydronopterin; GCHI, GTP cyclohydrolase I; and HMDHP, hydroxymethyldihydropterin.

is complicated, since not only are they synthesized from pteri-
dine, p-aminobenzoate (PABA), and glutamate, but because it 
also requires three subcellular compartments (Figure 28.5B). 
Pteridines  synthesized  in  the  cytosol  and  PABA  synthesized 
in  the  plastids  are  transported  to  the  mitochondria  to  form 
dihydropteroate  and  conjugated  to  glutamate.  The  initial 
attempts to increase folate levels through the over-expression 
of  GTP  cyclohydrolase  I  (GCHI)  in  the  pteridine  branch  of 
the  pathway  led  to  partial  success  with  an  overall  two-fold 
increase  in  the  folate  level  due  to  the  limitation  of  the  free 
PABA  pool  in  the  plastids,  whereas  the  amount  of  pteridine 
increased  140-fold  (Diaz  de  la  Garza  et  al.,  2004;  Hossain 
et  al.,  2004).  Further  over-expression  of  aminodeoxychoris-
mate  synthase  (ADCS),  a  key  enzyme  in  the  PABA  branch, 
with  GCHI  increased  the  levels  of  both  precursors,  and  the 
folate content in tomato fruits increased up to 20 times that 
in the wild type (Diaz de la Garza et al., 2007). The resulting 
fruit (100 g) contains the full adult recommended daily allow-
ance (400 µg) of folate.

The  attempt  by  Diaz  de  la  Garza  et  al.  (2007)  to  maxi-
mize  the  production  of  folate  through  the  expression  of 
both  ADCS  and  GCHI  from  strong  fruit-specific  promoters 
gave  high  levels  of  expression  but  also  elevated  the  levels  of 

pathway  intermediates.  Free  pteridines  (0.36 mg  per  por-
tion)  that  accumulated  in  transgenic  tomato  would  repre-
sent  10% of the pteridines that humans excrete in the urine 
per day, and more studies are needed to assess the safety of 
pteridine  accumulation  and  to  control  the  accumulation  of 
intermediates.

Vitamin C
Ascorbate  (vitamin  C)  is  an  essential  metabolic  substrate, 
electron  donor  enzyme  co-factor,  and  antioxidant,  and  its 
absence  leads  to  scurvy  (Peterkofsky,  1991).  At  least  three 
separate metabolic pathways converge on ascorbate in plants, 
which  means  that  several  strategies  can  be  used  to  enhance 
its  synthesis.  The  most  successful  experiments  include  over-
expression of the rat L-gulonolactone oxidase gene in tobacco, 
which resulted in a seven-fold increase in the ascorbate pool 
(Jain  and  Nessler,  2000),  and  the  expression  of  myo-inosi-
tol  oxidase  in  Arabidopsis,  which  resulted  in  a  three-fold 
enhancement (Lorence et al., 2004). Encouraging results have 
also  been  achieved  by  reducing  the  rate  at  which  ascorbate 
is  recycled,  which  can  be  up  to  40%  per  day  in  some  plants 
(Chen et al., 2003).

448

Engineering the biosynthesis of low molecular weight metabolites

C H A P T E R   2 8

Improvement of the bioavailability of 
minerals through metabolic engineering

Minerals,  such  as  Zn,  I,  and  Fe  are  also  essential  for  health. 
In particular, Fe is critical for blood cell formation (Panel on 
Micronutrients, 2001). Some metal-binding proteins are used 
to  improve  the  uptake/bioavailability  of  metals,  for  exam-
ple,  ferritin  for  Fe  (Goto  et  al.,  1999).  In  addition  to  such 
metal-binding  proteins,  transporters,  reductase  (e.g.,  Fe(III) 
reductases,  which  convert  Fe(III)  to  Fe(II)  in  many  plants 
except  grasses  and  cereals),  and  some  low  molecular  weight 
metal-chelating compounds in grasses and cereals, called phy-
tosiderophores,  are  important  for  the  uptake  of  metals  into 
plants. Phytosiderophores are critical for the growth of plants 
under alkaline salt conditions, but they also improve the nutri-
tional quality of plants. To date, the barley naat-A and naat-B 
genes, which encode nicotianamine aminotransferases in phy-
tosiderophore  biosynthesis,  have  been  successfully  expressed 
in rice to increase iron uptake and enhance tolerance to alka-
line  soils  (Takahashi  et  al.,  2001).  On  the  other  hand,  nico-
tianamine  has  also  been  shown  to  be  a  key  component  for 
mineral  nutrition  in  plants.  Thus,  transgenic  rice  plants  that 
over-express  nicotianamine  synthase  (OsNAS3)  have  been 
produced  through  activation  tagging  with  cauliflower  mosaic 
virus 35S enhancer elements or through expression of the bar-
ley  NAS  gene  under  an  endosperm-specific  promoter.  These 
transgenic  rice  seeds  have  been  shown  to  contain  increased 
nicotianamine  and  elevated  amounts  of  Fe,  Zn,  and  Cu 
(Usuda et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2009). A feeding experiment 
in  anemic  mice  with  engineered  rice  seeds  showed  that  Fe 
was  more  bioavailable,  which  led  to  normal  levels  of  hemo-
globin (Lee et al., 2009). Interestingly, nicotianamine has also 
been shown to have an antihypertensive effect in humans.

On  the  other  hand,  plants  also  contain  anti-nutritional 
chemicals, such as phytic acid (also known as phytate), which 
reduce the bioavailability of minerals. Phytate not only chelates 
minerals,  but  also  reduces  the  bioavailability  of  phosphate, 
since its complex is difficult to digest and absorb. Whereas the 
addition  or  expression  of  phytase,  which  is  used  for  phytate 
digestion,  from  a  microbe  in  cereal  feed  has  often  been  used 
to  promote  the  digestion  of  phytate,  modification  of  a  key 
synthetic gene for phytate such as IP synthase, should help to 
increase the bioavailability of iron and phosphate (Raboy, 2002)

Multigene transfer for improved food 
quality

Based  on  the  accumulation  of  information  regarding  metabo-
lism, an interesting challenge is to increase the levels of three 
vitamins  in  a  single  crop,  such  as  corn.  The  enhancement  of 
multiple  aspects  of  the  nutritional  value  of  crops  through 
the modification of multiple genes should be a new trend for 
future crop breeding. Naqvi et al. (2009) created elite inbred 
South  African  transgenic  corn  plants  in  which  the  levels  of 
three  vitamins  were  increased  specifically  in  the  endosperm 
through the simultaneous modification of three separate meta-
bolic pathways. In their combinatorial transformation strategy, 

they  randomly  introduced  multiple  transgenes  by  bombard-
ment  and  selected  plants  that  contained  and  expressed  all  of 
the  input  genes,  and  recapitulated  the  entire  pathway.  The 
transgenic  kernels  contained  169-fold  of  the  normal  amount 
of  β-carotene,  six-fold  of  the  normal  amount  of  ascorbate, 
and  double  the  normal  amount  of  folate.  These  high  vita-
min  contents  were  reported  to  be  stable  through  to  the  T3 
homozygous  generation,  but  a  limited  substrate  supply  often 
hinders the improvement of multiple quality traits, as exempli-
fied by competition for the substrate in phenylpropanoid engi-
neering (see the section Resveratrol).

General Strategy for the Engineering 
of Secondary Metabolites with 
Nutritional Value

As  illustrated  by  our  experience  with  the  enhancement  of 
primary metabolites, metabolic engineering is a powerful tool 
for improving the quantity and quality of a metabolic profile, 
even though primary metabolism is highly tuned, for example, 
through feedback regulation, and difficult to modify. It is evi-
dent  that  progress  in  the  engineering  of  primary  metabolism 
is strongly stimulated by knowledge regarding microbial cells. 
On the other hand, specific plant metabolites are more com-
plicated  and  the  characterization  of  secondary  metabolism 
lags due to the low abundance of biosynthetic enzymes and a 
lack of experimental materials such as chemicals (substrates). 
However, recent progress in molecular biology and instrumen-
tal developments, such as genome sequencing, transcriptome 
analysis  using  a  microarray,  and  highly  sensitive  instrumental 
analysis  such  as  with  LC-MS,  TOF-MS,  and  LC-NMR,  ena-
bles  the  comprehensive  analysis  of  metabolites  and  genes, 
and  lets  us  integrate  them  into  systems  biology.  There  are 
now several good reviews on the progress regarding the iden-
tification  of  biosynthetic  genes  and  metabolic  engineering 
(Verpoorte  and  Memelink,  2002;  Hashimoto  and  Yamada, 
2003; Sato et al., 2007a,b). We highlight some breakthrough 
topics in the following sections.

Identification of biosynthetic genes

Since  microbial  information  cannot  be  used  to  identify  bio-
synthetic  genes  in  secondary  metabolism  in  plants,  such 
identification is largely dependent on the preparation of high-
metabolite-producing  materials  (Hashimoto  and  Yamada, 
2003).  For  example,  the  isolation  of  a  metabolite-producing 
organ  such  as  a  root  culture  of  tropane-alkaloid  producing 
plants,  or  even  specific  cells  such  as  oil-gland  cells  in  herbs, 
has  been  shown  to  be  very  useful  for  isolating  biosynthetic 
genes  (Lange  et  al.,  2000;  Hashimoto  and  Yamada,  2003). 
Additionally,  mutant  cells  and/or  plant  species  with  dif-
ferences  in  metabolite  productivity,  and/or  some  chemi-
cal-treated  materials  (e.g.,  elicitors  or  methyljasmonate), 
would  be  useful  for  the  identification  of  gene(s)  (Verpoorte 
and  Memelink,  2002;  Ziegler  et  al.,  2005;  Takemura  et  al., 
2010)  when  these  chemicals  activate  target  metabolism. 
Alternatively,  when  a  general  transcriptional  factor  in  the 

449

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

target metabolism is available, transgenic cells with enhanced 
gene  expression  might  be  a  suitable  material;  for  example, 
Arabidopsis  thaliana  that  over-expressed  the  PAP1  gene  (an 
MYB transcriptional factor) was used to identify novel genes 
in flavonoid biosynthesis (Tohge et al., 2005).

In either case, the molecular characterization of transcripts 
by  EST  sequencing  (Lange  et  al.,  2000),  microarray  (Ziegler 
et  al.,  2005;  Tohge  et  al.,  2005),  reverse-transcription  PCR 
(Takemura  et  al.,  2010),  or  the  cDNA-amplified  fragment 
length polymorphism (AFLP) method (Goossens et al., 2003) 
is  commonly  used  to  identify  the  desired  biosynthetic  genes 
in  combination  with  a  target  metabolite  analysis.  Further 
advances  in  genomic  sequencing  methods,  as  well  as  pro-
teomics and metabolomics, can stimulate the identification of 
genes.  Especially,  a  comparative  genomic  approach  based  on 
genome  sequences  would  be  a  powerful  method,  for  identi-
fying  a  gene,  when  metabolism,  is  restricted  to  certain  plant 
species (Ziegler et al., 2005; Takabayashi et al., 2009).

Once a candidate enzyme in biosynthesis is identified by a 
combination of bioinformatic analysis, a recombinant protein 
can  be  produced  in  either  E.  coli,  yeast,  or  insect  cells,  and 
its  enzyme  activity  can  be  determined.  On  the  other  hand, 
gene function might be directly evaluated by a reverse-genet-
ics approach in either homologous or heterologous host plant 
cells.  The  latter  approach,  especially  heterologous  expres-
sion,  should  be  able  to  overcome  the  limitation  of  substrate 
in  an  enzyme  assay,  as  well  as  the  difficulties  of  transforma-
tion  in  some  plant  species  such  as  medicinal  plants.  Protein 
engineering  of  biosynthetic  enzymes  is  another  resource  for 
the  future  engineering  of  compounds  involved  in  metabo-
lism  (Runguphan  and  O’Connor,  2009;  Morishige  et  al., 
2010).  Molecular  engineering  of  protein  structure  based  on 
the crystal structure or random mutagenesis has enabled the 
creation  of  enzyme  mutants  with  broadened  substrate  spe-
cificities  or  enzyme  reactivities  (Runguphan  and  O’Connor, 
2009; Morishige et al., 2010).

Identification of transcription factors and 
engineering through integrated “omics”

As mentioned previously, the identification of a transcription 
factor  is  very  useful  for  the  isolation  of  biosynthetic  genes 
and  for  metabolic  engineering  (see  Figure  28.2);  that  is,  the 
introduction  of  transcriptional  regulator-R  and  C1  of  maize-
induced  anthocyanin  biosynthesis  in  a  heterologous  system 
(Lloyd  et  al.,  1992).  However,  it  is  more  difficult  to  isolate 
a  transcription  factor  than  a  biosynthetic  gene  since  isola-
tion of the latter is based on the characterization of the pro-
moter sequence of biosynthetic genes. Thus, many researchers 
have tried to overcome this difficulty with novel approaches. 
Whereas the activation-tagging method (Borevitz et al., 2000) 
has shown high potential for the isolation of candidate gene(s) 
in  signal  transduction,  its  application  is  still  limited  due  to 
the  complexity  of  the  transcriptional  regulation  system  (i.e., 
biosynthetic genes in secondary metabolism are controlled by 
multiple transcriptional regulators; Kato et al., 2007). In this 
sense, RNAi of a transcription factor could be a more effec-
tive  approach  than  activation  tagging  for  isolating  candidate 

genes for a general regulator (Kato et al., 2007), since knock-
down of a single transcriptional regulator in a complex affects 
whole  transcriptional  activity.  However,  an  increased  oppor-
tunity  to  isolate  a  transcriptional  regulator  does  not  neces-
sarily mean the isolation of a potential general regulator of an 
entire  biosynthetic  pathway,  since  transcriptional  regulation 
is  complicated,  even  in  secondary  metabolism  (Kato  et  al., 
2007). Thus, we need a more comprehensive approach to iso-
late whole sets of transcriptional regulators to understand the 
metabolic network and control it.

Recently,  Yokota-Hirai  et  al.  (2007)  reported  a  more 
sophisticated  approach  to  understanding  plant  metabolism 
as  an  integrated  system  for  the  engineering  of  compounds 
involved  in  secondary  metabolism.  They  used  the  “omics” 
approach  and 
integrated  transcriptome  and  metabolome 
data  into  a  single  dataset  to  identify  the  regulatory  network 
of  poorly  described  metabolic  pathways  of  glucosinolates 
(GSLs).  GSLs  are  metabolites  produced  by  the  family 
Brassicaceae  (i.e.,  broccoli  and  cabbage),  that  have  received 
considerable  attention  due  to  their  anticarcinogenic,  antioxi-
dative,  and  antimicrobial  activity.  They  assumed  that  if  a  set 
of  genes  co-expressed  under  a  given  experimental  regimen 
would be involved in the same or related metabolic pathway, 
then  candidate  genes  involved  in  the  regulation  or  synthesis 
steps of a particular metabolic pathway could be comprehen-
sively  identified,  or  at  least  predicted  with  some  confidence. 
Furthermore, they compared a co-expression profile for a spe-
cific condition (i.e., sulfur-deficiency stress) with a “condition-
independent” profile derived from public datasets, along with 
metabolic profiling, and increased the reliability and feasibility 
of predicting a gene function. These combined transcriptome 
co-expression  analyses  and  analyses  of  knockout  mutant  and 
ectopic expression of the gene identified Myb28 as a positive 
regulator for the basal-level production of aliphatic GSLs.

Modulation of organelle development

While  recent  advances  in  the  characterization  of  transcrip-
tional factors have provided a powerful approach to increase 
metabolite  biosynthesis,  the  control  of  plastid  development 
would  be  another  option  for  modifying  the  metabolite  con-
tent, since several metabolites are produced and accumulated 
in plastids (see Figures 28.1, 28.3, and 28.5; Davuluri et al., 
2005; Enfissi et al., 2010). While both carotenoids and flavo-
noids are highly beneficial for human health, the simultaneous 
improvement  of  both  is  difficult  since  these  metabolites  are 
generated through independent pathways. While the manipu-
lation of light signal transduction components or photorecep-
tors  would  facilitate  the  enhancement  of  these  biosynthetic 
pathways simultaneously, such manipulation has been accom-
panied  by  a  reduction  of  yield  and  plant  vigor.  Interestingly, 
Davuluri  et  al.  (2005)  reported  the  successful  increase  of 
both  carotenoid  and  flavonoid  contents  in  tomato  fruit  by 
suppressing  an  endogenous  photomorphogenesis  regulatory 
gene,  DET1,  using  fruit-specific  promoters  combined  with 
RNA  interference  (RNAi)  technology  without  the  develop-
ment  of  detrimental  agronomic  traits.  Recent  metabolomic 
and  transcriptomic  analyses  further  revealed  that  high  levels 

450

Engineering the biosynthesis of low molecular weight metabolites

C H A P T E R   2 8

of carotenoids are more likely to be related to increased plas-
tid volume per cell, whereas the increased transcription of key 
biosynthetic  genes  is  a  likely  mechanism  for  producing  ele-
vated  phenolic-based  metabolites,  such  as  flavonoids  (Enfissi 
et al., 2010), which highlights how important it can be to con-
trol organelle biogenesis.

Quality Improvement of Plants as 
Functional or Medicinal Food

A  functional  or  medicinal  food  is  any  food  that  is  claimed 
to  have  a  health-promoting  or  disease-preventing  property 
beyond the basic function of supplying nutrients (Wikipedia). 
The  market  for  functional  foods  is  rapidly  growing.  Many 
functional foods contain plant secondary metabolites derived 
from  a  phenylpropanoid  pathway  such  as  resveratrol  (stil-
bene), anthocyanins, catechin (polyphenol), sesamin (lignan), 
and so on. The phenylpropanoid pathway has been extensively 
investigated  and  many  biosynthetic  genes  and  transcriptional 
factors  have  been  isolated.  We  list  here  some  metabolites  in 
the  phenylpropanoid  pathway  as  examples  of  quality  trait 
improvement in functional foods (Figure 28.6).

Resveratrol

Resveratrol 
is  a  non-
flavonoid phenolic compound produced by a limited number 

(3,5,4-trihydroxy-trans-stilbene) 

of plant species. Grape (Vitis sp.), peanut (Arachis hypogaea), 
and  several  berry  varieties  are  the  major  dietary  sources  of 
resveratrol.  The  health  benefits  of  resveratrol  have  been 
intensively  studied,  and  its  ability  to  prevent  cardiovascular 
diseases and cancers, and to promote longevity in several ani-
mal  systems  has  recently  been  reported  (Baur  and  Sinclair, 
2006).  The  pathway  and  enzymes  in  resveratrol  biosynthesis 
have been well characterized and considerable work has been 
performed  on  metabolic  engineering  (Figure  28.6;  see  Hall 
and  Yu,  2008).  The  resveratrol  pathway  is  branched  from 
4-coumaroyl-CoA,  which  is  generated  through  the  common 
phenylpropanoid  pathway  from  phenylalanine  by  phenyla-
lanine  ammonia  lyase  (PAL),  cinnamic  acid  4-hydroxylase 
(C4H), and 4-coumarate:CoA ligase (4CL). Stilbene synthase 
(STS),  a  type  III  polyketide  synthase,  catalyzes  the  conden-
sation of resveratrol from one molecule of 4-coumaroyl-CoA 
and three molecules of malonyl-CoA.

Resveratrol  has  long  been  known  to  be  a  defense  com-
pound  (phytoalexin)  in  plant  species,  and  the  accumula-
tion  of  resveratrol  in  tobacco  by  the  expression  of  grape 
STS  increased  its  resistance  to  the  tobacco  fungal  pathogen 
Botrytis cinerea (Hain et al., 1993). Interestingly, resveratrol 
engineering not only increased disease resistance in transgenic 
plants,  but  also  extended  the  postharvest  shelf  life  of  the 
fruit.  Most  of  the  resveratrol  produced  in  transgenic  plants 
is conjugated with a glucose moiety. When other endogenous 
flavonoid compounds were analyzed, in some cases the over-
expression of STS led to reduced levels of ferrulic acid, rutin, 

O

OH

NH2

Phenylalanine

PAL

C4H
4CL

O

S-CoA

O

O

O

H

H

O

–O

S-CoA

O

O

O

O

Sesamin
(a lignan)

HO

4-Coumaroyl  CoA

+  3 x  

Malonyl CoA

Stilbene synthase

Chalcone synthase

OH

HO

HO

O

Flavonoids,
Anthocyanins 

OH

OH

Resveratrol

OH

O

naringenin

HO

HO

O

OH

OH

O

dihydrokaempferol (a flavonol)

Figure 28.6 l Some phytochemicals in the phenylpropanoid pathway l Abbreviations: PAL, phenylalanine ammonia lyase; C4H, 
cinnamate 4-hydroxylase; and 4CL, coumarate; CoA ligase.

451

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

quercetin, and naringenin, suggesting that under a strong pro-
moter,  STS  might  redirect  the  metabolic  flux  and  alter  the 
total flavonoid profile of the transgenic plant (Nicoletti et al., 
2007).

Anthocyanins and flavonoids

Anthocyanins  and  flavonoids  are  popular  flower  pigments 
and  their  biosynthesis  has  been  studied  intensively  at  both 
enzymological  and  molecular-regulation  levels  (Tanaka  et  al., 
2008).  Genes  for  biosynthetic  enzymes  and  transcriptional 
regulators  have  been  isolated  and  used  for  metabolic  engi-
neering.  Blue  carnation  and  rose  are  successful  examples  of 
metabolic engineering in ornamental plants, and similar engi-
neering has also been attempted in vegetables and fruits since 
anthocyanins  help  protect  against  certain  cancers,  cardiovas-
cular disease, and age-related degenerative diseases, while the 
levels  achieved  through  dietary  consumption  may  be  inad-
equate  to  confer  optimal  benefits  (http://www.fruitsandveg-
giesmatter.gov).

Since  quantity  improvement  is  essential,  enhancement 
of  the  overall  biosynthetic  activity  of  anthocyanin  has  been 
attempted  using  transcription  factors  after  the  pioneering 
work  by  Lloyd  et  al.  (1992)  using  maize  R  and  C1.  When 
maize  transcription  factor  genes  LC  and  C1  were  expressed 
in  tomato,  the  expression  of  both  genes  sufficiently  upregu-
lated  the  flavonoid  pathway  and  fruit  accumulated  high  lev-
els  of  the  flavonol  kaempferol,  but  anthocyanins  could  not 
be  detected  in  ripe  LC/C1  fruit  (Bovy  et  al.,  2002).  When 
AtMYB12,  which  was  originally  identified  as  a  flavonol-spe-
cific transcriptional activator in A. thaliana, was expressed in 
a  tissue-specific  manner  in  tomato,  it  activated  the  caffeoyl 
quinic  acid  biosynthetic  pathway  in  addition  to  the  flavonol 
biosynthetic  pathway  (Luo  et  al.,  2008).  These  results  indi-
cated  that  transcription  factors  may  have  different  specifici-
ties  for  target  genes  in  different  plants,  although  the  basic 
regulatory  systems  would  be  common  among  plant  species. 
Butelli  et  al.  (2008)  clearly  indicated  that  two  transcription 
factors  selected  from  snapdragon  were  functional  in  tomato 
and  increased  anthocyanin  contents  comparable  to  those  in 
blackberries  and  blueberries.  Furthermore,  they  proved  that 
transgenic  tomato  fruits  with  increased  anthocyanins  have 
enhanced  hydrophilic  antioxidant  capacity  and  extended  the 
life span of cancer-susceptible Trp53–/– mice in a pilot test.

Catechins and proanthocyanidins

Proanthocyanidins (PAs, also known as condensed tannins) are 
plant-derived  flavonoid  polymers  with  a  wide  range  of  bene-
fits for human health (Xie et al., 2006). They are present in 
many foods and drinks, such as barley, tea, and wine, and are 
strong antioxidants. PAs from various plant species block the 
growth of human cancer cells in vitro and protect cells against 
UV-light-induced damage. Many commercial PA products are 
widely  used  as  dietary  supplements.  PAs  are  formed  by  the 
polymerization  of  monomeric  flavan-3-ols;  that  is,  catechins 
and epicatechins and their derivatives, which also have poten-
tial health-promoting activity against Alzheimer’s disease, oral 

and stomach cancer, and cardiovascular disease. The presence 
of  PAs  is  also  important  in  forage  crops  to  protect  ruminant 
animals  from  potentially  lethal  pasture  bloat  associated  with 
the consumption of forage, such as alfalfa (Medicago sativa). 
However, much of the forage consumed by domestic animals 
lacks PAs. Since pathway engineering of catechin biosynthesis 
is  still  difficult,  Xie  et  al.  (2006)  used  an  MYB  family  tran-
scription  factor  for  anthocyanidin  synthesis  and  anthocyani-
din reductase to convert anthocyanidin into (epi)-flavan-3-ol. 
Transgenes  successfully  induced  the  accumulation  of  epi-
catechin and gallocatechin monomers, and a series of dimers 
and oligomers consisting primarily of epicatechin units at the 
level  of  PAs  to  confer  bloat-reduction  in  forage  species.  The 
expression  of  anthocyanidin  reductase  in  anthocyanin-con-
taining leaves of the forage legume M. truncatula resulted in 
the production of a specific subset of PA oligomers (Xie et al., 
2006).

Sesamins

Lignans  are  a  large  class  of  secondary  metabolites  in  plants 
that  have  numerous  biological  effects  in  mammals,  includ-
ing  antitumor  and  antioxidant  activities.  Some  plant  lignans, 
such as sesamin, can be converted by intestinal microbiota to 
the  mammalian  lignans  (i.e.,  enterodiol  and  enterolactone), 
which  may  have  protective  effects  against  hormone-related 
diseases such as breast cancer (Liu et al., 2006). Sesamin, the 
most  abundant  lignan  in  sesame  seeds  (Sesamum  plants),  is 
produced  by  the  cytochrome  P450  enzyme  CYP81Q1  from 
the  precursor  lignan  pinoresinol.  Recently,  the  CYP81Q1 
gene was isolated (Ono et al., 2006), and some attempts have 
been  made  to  increase  the  sesamin  content  in  plants.  When 
a  model  plant,  Forsythia,  was  transformed  with  pinoresinol/
lariciresinol  reductase  RNAi  construct  to  inhibit  the  conver-
sion of pinoresinol to matairesinol and further co-transformed 
with  CYP81Q1  over-expression  construct,  transgenic  cells 
produced  sesamin  and  accumulated  pinoresinol  glucoside 
(Kim  et  al.,  2009).  These  data  suggested  that  the  metabolic 
engineering of lignan production may be possible.

Beloved Metabolites: Plant Volatiles

Most  biological  organisms  use  volatile  compounds  to  find 
food  resources,  to  avoid  potentially  toxic  food  materials, 
or  to  avoid  detrimental  conditions.  In  the  animal  kingdom, 
primitive  lampreys  first  acquired  an  olfactory  system  to  find 
carrion for food (Watson, 2000). After a long period of evo-
lution,  higher  animals  developed  the  ability  to  use  volatile 
compounds  to  find  mating  partners,  detect  enemies,  and 
establish social communications, as well as to find preferable 
or  distasteful  foods.  Volatile  compounds,  when  perceived  by 
humans,  are  called  flavor,  aroma,  odor,  or  scent.  They  reach 
the olfactory receptors located at the top of the nasal cavity 
either directly through the nose during breathing or indirectly 
through  the  mouth  during  mastication.  In  the  latter  case, 
the  volatile  compounds  reach  the  receptors  in  a  retronasal 
manner, and in this case the sensation is called flavor, which 
is  a  cooperative  sensation  that  includes  both  gustatory  and 

452

Engineering the biosynthesis of low molecular weight metabolites

C H A P T E R   2 8

olfactory components. Humans have 347 olfactory receptors, 
and can sense more than 7000 flavor volatiles (Goff and Klee, 
2006).  This  can  be  explained  by  many-to-many  interactions 
between  the  receptors  and  volatiles.  Additionally,  other  sen-
sory  inputs,  such  as  the  color  or  texture  of  foods,  and  even 
the past experience of an individual, can affect the olfactory 
sensation  (Taylor  and  Roberts,  2004).  After  these  inputs  are 
integrated together in the brain, the overall sensation is estab-
lished.  Some  volatile  compounds  have  physiological,  psycho-
logical,  and  pharmacological  effects  on  humans.  Plants  are 
the most important sources of volatile secondary metabolites. 
Thousands  of  plant  volatiles  have  been  described  (Pichersky 
et al., 2006). Some are common among plants, but others are 
unique to a peculiar genus or species, and thus there is a wide 
variety  of  biosynthetic  pathways  that  essentially  branch  out 
from the following major biosynthetic pathways.

Biochemistry of plant volatile secondary 
metabolites

The biochemistry of plant volatile secondary metabolites has 
been largely clarified through extensive studies (Figure 28.1). 
Aromatic amino acids, such as phenylalanine and tyrosine, are 
the  precursors  of  benzenoids  and  phenylpropanoids  (Figure 
28.7). The deamination of amino acids by ammonia lyases to 
give  precursors  (cinnamic  acid  or  4-coumaric  acid)  for  phe-
nylpropanoids  lies  at  the  branch  point  between  primary  and 

secondary  metabolism  (Vogt,  2010).  Benzenoids  are  also 
formed  from  the  same  amino  acid  substrates,  but  through  a 
decarboxylation reaction to yield phenylethylamine from phe-
nylalanine (Sakai et al., 2007). Glucosinolates are a group of 
plant  secondary  metabolites  that  consist  of  anionic  thioglu-
cosides  with  a  diverse  array  of  carbon  skeletons  (Yan  and 
Chen, 2007). They are formed predominantly in cruciferous 
plants.  Tissue  damage  facilitates  their  hydrolysis  into  various 
nitrogen-containing  molecules  such  as  isothiocyanate,  nitrile, 
and so on. Glucosinolates are also biosynthesized from amino 
acids, such as methionine and tryptophan.

Terpenoids  (or 

isoprenoids)  are  compounds  consist-
ing  of  five-carbon  units  with  widely  diversified  structures. 
Monoterpenoids  (C10)  and  sesquiterpenoids  (C15)  are  gen-
erally volatile. The five-carbon units are derived from isopen-
tenyl  pyrophosphate  (IPP)  that  is  formed  either  in  plastids 
from pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (methyleryth-
ritol phosphate: MEP pathway) or in cytosol from acetyl-CoA 
(mevalonic acid: MVA pathway; Arimura et al., 2009). In gen-
eral,  monoterpenoids  are  formed  through  the  MEP  pathway, 
while  sesquiterpenoids  are  formed  through  the  MVA  path-
way,  although  this  is  not  entirely  strict  because  of  cross-talk 
between  the  pathways.  A  cumulative  chain  elongation  reac-
tion yields higher terpenoids such as phytosterols (C30) and 
carotenoids (C40). The cleavage of carotenoids by a caroten-
oid  cleavage  oxygenase  yields  apo-carotenoids  (Walter  et  al., 
2010). Some of them are also volatiles and important constit-
uents of the aroma of various fruits.

Shikimate pathway

Tryptophan

PEP + E4P

COOH

O

COOH

O
chorismate

OH

CM

COOH

O

HOOC

Benzenoids

CHO

Phenylpropanoids

COOH

HOOC

COOH

NH2

ADT

phenylacetaldehyde

PAAS
COOH

NH2

PAL

OH

prephenate

OH

arogenate

phenylalanine

trans-cinnamic acid

Tyrosine

Phenylalanine

Figure 28.7 l Phenylalanine is formed specifically for benzenoids/phenylpropanoids in P. hybrida petals l For most of the 
biosynthetic steps downstream of chorismate, there is a special set of enzymes dedicated to benzenoid/phenylpropanoid formation (red 
arrows). This specialization offers a new strategy to modify volatile secondary metabolism. Abbreviations: CM, chorismate mutase; ADT, 
arogenate dehydratase; PAL, phenylalanine ammonia lyase; and PAAS, phenylacetaldehyde synthase. 

453

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Fatty acids are also precursors of volatile secondary metab-
olites in plants. Lipoxygenases add oxygen to polyunsaturated 
fatty  acids  such  as  linoleic  and  linolenic  acids  to  form  their 
hydroperoxides.  They  are  further  converted  into  a  diverse 
array  of  phytooxylipins  (Mosblech  et  al.,  2009).  Some  of 
them,  such  as  green  leaf  volatiles  and  some  jasmonates,  are 
volatiles.

Flavor compounds in fruits

The reproductive tissues of plants form volatile metabolites as 
infochemicals  to  disperse  seeds  and  attract  pollinators.  With 
fruits such as tomatoes, these volatiles are somehow related to 
their nutritional qualities because they are formed from nutri-
tionally valuable constituents, such as amino acids, fatty acids, 
or carotenoids (Goff and Klee, 2006). This implies that fruit 
flavors contribute to the positive perception of food and that 
we  are  intrinsically  attracted  to  fruit  flavors  and  develop  an 
appetite after perceiving favorable flavor compounds in fruits. 
Consequently,  flavor  properties  are  criteria  that  consumers 
use  to  choose  fruits,  vegetables,  and  processed  foods  made 
thereof.

Crop  plants  that  are  currently  available  have  been  estab-
lished  through  extensive  domestication.  Breeding  programs 
generally target yield, fruit size, or tolerance against stresses, 
and  volatile  properties  have  received  less  attention.  As  a 
result,  current  crop  plants  are  somewhat  “flavorless”  com-
pared  to  their  original,  wild  cultivars  (Gutterson,  1993). 
One  introgression  line  made  from  modern  tomato  (Solanum 
lycopersicon)  and  wild  tomato  (Solanum  pennellii)  smelled 
like  cucumber  (Matsui  et  al.,  2007).  It  was  revealed  that 
S.  pennellii  contains  active  9/13-hydroperoxide  lyase  (HPL), 
which  converts  9-hydroperoxide  of  linolenic  acid  into  (Z,Z)-
3,6-nonadienal, which has a cucumber-like flavor. The modern 
tomato,  S.  lycopersicon,  has  a  corresponding  gene;  however, 
it has one different amino acid, and as a result it encodes an 
inactive  enzyme.  Introgression  of  the  chromosome  region 
spanning  the  9/13-HPL  gene  from  S.  pennellii  into  S.  lycop-
ersicon  restores  the  biosynthetic  pathway  to  form  carbon  9 
volatiles in the modern tomato. This can be achieved because 
S. lycopersicon fruits have high lipoxygenase (LOX) activity to 
provide a substrate, that is, 9-hydroperoxide of linolenic acid, 
for the 9/13-HPL derived from S. pennellii. In contrast, when 
the  9/13-HPL  gene  derived  from  cucumber  was  introduced 
into S.  lycopersicon  under  the  control  of  the  CaMV35S  pro-
moter, there was little change in the flavor profile even though 
expression of the introduced gene was evident (Matsui. et al. 
2001). This indicates that tomato 9/13-HPL and 9-LOX are 
compatible  with  each  other,  while  cucumber  9/13-HPL  is 
incompatible with tomato 9-LOX. Even though the molecular 
mechanism of this compatibility has not been elucidated, this 
implies  that  the  biosynthetic  pathway  for  volatiles  is  closely 
regulated in plants.

Tomato  fruits  vigorously  synthesize  carotenoids  like  lyco-
pene during maturation. Since lycopene is formed through the 
terpenoid pathway, it is possible to intercept the intermediate 
for  monoterpene  synthesis.  Linalool  synthase  from  Clarkia 
breweri  was  introduced  into  tomato  under  the  control  of 

the tomato E8 promoter, which is active in maturing tomato 
fruits  (Lewinsohn  et  al.,  2001).  With  this  enzyme,  a  mono-
terpene alcohol, linalool, is formed from geranyl diphosphate 
(GPP) in a single step. Introduction of the synthase enhanced 
the  amount  of  linalool  in  the  transgenic  tomato  fruits;  how-
ever, the amount was insufficient to change the overall flavor 
properties.  In  fact,  there  was  little  change  in  the  carotenoid 
content,  which  indicated  that  redirection  of  the  metabolic 
flow from lycopene synthesis to linalool synthesis was not so 
obvious.

Introduction  of  the  lemon  basil  geraniol  synthase  gene 
under  the  control  of  the  tomato  polygalacturonase  promoter 
into tomato resulted in an enhanced monoterpene content in 
tomato fruits (Davidovich-Rihanati et al., 2007). Due to the 
rather  broad  product  specificity  of  geraniol  synthase,  a  wide 
range of monoterpenes, such as geraniol, rose oxide, citronel-
lol,  and  geranial,  which  are  essentially  absent  from  control 
tomato fruits, were found. In a sensory evaluation, more than 
90% of the panelists distinguished the smell of the transgenic 
tomato  fruits  from  that  of  the  control  fruits,  and  more  than 
60%  of  the  panelists  preferred  the  transgenic  tomato  fruits. 
This success might be due to the nature of the promoter used 
to  drive  geraniol  synthase,  but  the  threshold  values  of  flavor 
compounds must also be taken into account. For example, the 
odor  threshold  value  of  linalool  is  6 ppb,  while  that  of  rose 
oxide  is  0.5 ppb  (http://www.leffingwell.com/odorthre.htm). 
Thus, a small increase in the amount of rose oxide in the gera-
niol  synthase-over-expressing  tomato  might  strongly  affect 
its  organoleptic  properties.  Therefore,  a  clear  understanding 
of  the  composition  of  flavor  compounds  that  considers  the 
organoleptic  properties  of  the  designed  bouquet  of  volatiles 
is  needed  when  designing  transgenic  fruits  with  novel  flavor 
properties.

In  the  geraniol  synthase-over-expressing  tomato,  the  caro-
tenoid contents were markedly reduced (Davidovich-Rihanati 
et  al.,  2007).  Since  the  carotenoid  content  is  an  important 
trait  of  tomato  fruits,  this  creates  an  apparent  dilemma.  To 
overcome this dilemma, an in silico simulation on the impact 
of the modification of metabolic pathways is needed, based on 
accumulating information regarding metabolomics (Iijima and 
Aoki, 2009).

Edible  seeds  such  as  grains  and  legumes  also  contain  vola-
tile  compounds.  Generally,  the  amounts  of  volatile  secondary 
metabolites  formed  in  seeds  are  not  so  high,  partly  because 
they do not want to attract organisms. However, even though 
the  amounts  of  volatiles  are  not  very  high,  some  pests,  such  
as the granary weevil, can respond to a wide range of cereal vol-
atiles (Germinara et al., 2008), which results in a serious prob-
lem  worldwide.  For  humans,  GLVs  derived  from  fatty  acids, 
for example, usually have negative effects on the flavor proper-
ties of foods made from the seeds. For soymilk, n-hexanal and 
n-hexan-1-ol formed predominantly from soybean seed lipoxy-
genase-2 give an off flavor (Furuta et al., 1996). (E)-2-Nonenal 
formed from linoleic acid via lipoxygenase reaction also gives an 
off flavor for beer, which is derived from barley grains (Hirota 
et  al.,  2006).  In  both  cases,  breeding  studies  have  established 
soybean seeds and barley grains that have no lipoxygenase activ-
ity  (Furuta  et  al.,  1996;  Hirota  et  al.,  2006).  However,  the 
established varieties are not always suitable for cultivation, and 

454

Engineering the biosynthesis of low molecular weight metabolites

C H A P T E R   2 8

thus a molecular biotechnological approach may be an alterna-
tive way to solve this problem.

Scent/aroma of flowers

Terpenoids  and  benzenoids  are  the  major  volatiles  formed 
in  flower  organs.  While  they  are  not  directly  related  to  any 
nutritional  value,  flowers  provide  rewards  (honey  or  nec-
tar) to pollinators, and thus insects and birds are attracted to 
flowers.  In  return,  plants  can  achieve  more  efficient  pollina-
tion.  In  this  way,  flowers  should  advertise  themselves  with 
their scent as well as their shape and color, and humans have 
loved such inherent properties of flowers since ancient times. 
Improvements in the quality of flower scents may lead to new 
products  with  higher  value,  and  may  be  welcomed  by  con-
sumers. Even consumers who dislike GM crops tend to toler-
ate  transgenic  ornamental  flowers  because  they  are  not  used 
for food.

The first attempt to modify the scent of flowers was made 
with  petunia  and  carnation  by  introducing  Clarkia  linalool 
synthase  under  the  control  of  35S  promoter  (Lücker  et  al., 
2001;  Lavy  et  al.,  2002).  This  introduction  was  successful 
and a high production of linalool was observed with transgenic 
petunia  and  carnation;  however,  the  resulting  linalool  was 
largely  converted  into  non-volatile  glucoside  in  petunia,  and 
oxidized to volatile linalyl oxides in carnation. In both cases, 
the  organoleptic  properties  of  the  transgenic  flowers  toward 
humans  were  indistinguishable  from  those  of  the  respective 
wild-types.  Again,  this  implies  that  rational  design  based  on 
the  metabolic  flow  of  the  target  plant  tissues  and  the  orga-
noleptic  properties  of  expected  volatile  compositions  are 
important prerequisites for success.

The 

introduction  of  three  terpene  synthases  (i.e., 
γ-terpinene  synthase,  limonene  synthase,  and  β-pinene  syn-
thase)  into  tobacco,  which  produces  low  levels  of  terpe-
noids in flowers, resulted in the accumulation of γ-terpinene, 
limonene, and β-pinene in the flowers (Lücker et al., 2004). 
Other monoterpenoids that are not usually detected in wild-
type tobacco plants were also detected, probably because of 
the  broad  product  specificities  of  the  introduced  enzymes.  
In this case, a sensory evaluation indicated that the transgenic 
tobacco  flowers  had  a  more  intense  and  flowery  scent  than 
the  wild-type  flowers  (El  Tamer  et  al.,  2003).  In  the  trans-
genic  tobacco,  the  level  of  β-caryophyllene  (a  sesquiterpene 
formed  from  farnesyl  pyrophosphate,  FPP),  which  was  the 
most abundant terpenoid in the wild-type tobacco, was about 
three-fold lower than that in the control plants, which again 
implies  that  a  metabolic  shift  took  place  through  competi-
tion  for  intermediates.  This  result  was  unexpected  because 
monoterpenes  are  formed  from  the  plastidic  MEP  pathway, 
whereas sesquiterpenes are formed from the cytosolic MVA 
pathway.  This  indicated  that  the  two  compartmentalized 
pathways share some intermediates, and the modification of 
one affects the other.

An alternative to the time-consuming introduction of sev-
eral genes into a plant may be enhancement of the biochemi-
cal  and  transcriptional  bottlenecks  in  a  metabolic  pathway 
for  the  formation  of  volatile  compounds.  As  an  amino  acid, 

phenylalanine is a primary metabolite. Secondary metabolites, 
such  as  benzenoids  and  phenylpropanoids,  are  formed  from 
phenylalanine.  Thus,  it  has  been  recognized  that  the  benze-
noid/phenylpropanoid  pathway  should  “steal”  phenyl alanine 
from  the  primary  metabolic  pathway.  However,  in  petals  of 
Petunia  hybrida  there  is  a  pathway  to  form  pheny lalanine 
that  is  dedicated  to  secondary  metabolites  (Colquhoun 
et  al.,  2010).  The  expression  of  a  chorismate  mutase  in 
P.  hybrida,  PhCM1,  correlated  with  emission  of  its  floral 
scent.  Prephenate  that  is  formed  by  this  chorismate  mutase 
is  converted  into  arogenate,  and  then  further  converted  into 
phenylalanine  with  arogenate  dehydratase1,  the  expression 
of  which  is  again  positively  correlated  with  phenylalanine 
levels  and  phenylpropanoid/benzenoid  volatiles  in  the  petals 
(Maeda  et  al.,  2010).  Taken  together,  these  results  indicate 
that  there  is  a  specified  pathway  for  the  formation  of  floral 
scents in P. hybrida from unexpected upstream steps, at least 
from upstream of phenylalanine synthesis. Fortification of the 
upstream  steps  to  provide  a  sufficient  amount  of  a  primary 
substrate,  such  as  phenylalanine  for  phenylpropanoid/benze-
noid  formation,  might  be  a  useful  approach  to  improve  the 
scent of ornamental flowers.

ODORANT1  (ODO1)  is  an  MYB  transcription  fac-
tor  that  regulates  volatile  benzenoid  biosynthesis  (Verdonk 
et  al.,  2005).  Silencing  of  ODO1  reduced  the  expression  of 
most  genes  involved  in  benzenoid  production  from  phenyla-
lanine in flowers of P. hybrida, and as a result reduced vola-
tile  benzenoid  production  in  the  flower.  The  expression  of 
ODO1 in petals of P. hybrida flowers shows a diurnal cycle, 
which correlates with the emission of scent from the flower. 
Suppression  of  ODO1  had  little  effect  on  the  color  of  the 
petals,  which  is  mainly  the  result  of  anthocyanins  formed 
from  phenylalanine.  Therefore,  it  was  expected  that  ODO1 
was the master switch that controlled volatile benzenoid pro-
duction.  An  Arabidopsis  MYB  transcription  factor  (Pap1) 
regulates  anthocyanin  pigmentation.  When  Arabidopsis  Pap1 
was  introduced  into  P.  hybrida  under  regulation  of  the  35S 
promoter, both the pigmentation and volatile benzenoid/phe-
nylpropanoid  production  were  enhanced  (Zvi  et  al.,  2008), 
which indicates that gross modification of a biosynthetic path-
way  through  the  introduction  of  a  transcription  factor  may 
represent  a  new  strategy  for  the  metabolic  engineering  of 
flower  properties.  Even  though  the  transcription  factors  that 
control  volatile  secondary  metabolism  are  still  being  identi-
fied,  transcription  factors  appear  to  be  useful  tools  for  plant 
metabolic engineering (Grotewold, 2008).

Accordingly, we are now elucidating the regulatory machin-
ery required for floral scent formation at the biochemical and 
transcriptional levels. This knowledge will likely be useful for 
the design of flowers with improved scent.

Volatile organic chemicals in vegetative 
organs of plants

In vegetative tissues of plants, volatile metabolites are formed 
to cope with stresses mainly caused by herbivores and patho-
gens  (Arimura  et  al.,  2009).  Herbs  usually  accumulate  vola-
tile compounds in glandular trichomes distributed on the leaf 

455

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

surface. Upon herbivore attack, the trichomes are disrupted, 
and  high  concentrations  of  volatile  compounds,  which  repel 
herbivores, are released (Schilmiller et al., 2008). After being 
damaged  by  an  herbivore,  plant  leaves  quickly  form  GLVs, 
which  repel  herbivores  or  pathogens  that  attempt  to  invade 
the  plant  tissues  through  the  wound  site  (Matsui,  2006). 
Isothiocyanates that are formed after wounding in cruciferous 
plants  also  have  anti-herbivore  effects  (Zhang  et  al.,  2006). 
Accordingly, the rational engineering of these herbal volatiles 
should improve the ability of crops to tolerate biotic stresses. 
In  addition,  these  herbal  volatiles  often  refresh  and  relieve 
humans,  probably  because  these  odors  are  associated  with 
the absence of harmful insects or dangerous microbes. Some 
herbal  volatiles  are  called  “phytoncides”  because  of  their 
potent bactericidal activities, and Asians love “forest bathing” 
to inhale phytoncides.

The  volatile  compounds  emitted  from  vegetative  tissues 
function not only to provide the previously mentioned direct 
defense  effects,  but  also  to  exert  indirect  defense  effects 
(Arimura  et  al.,  2009;  Dicke,  2009).  Plants  emit  a  subset 
of  volatile  compounds  after  they  are  attacked  by  herbiv-
ores.  This  bouquet  is  an  attractive  “smell”  to  carnivorous  or 
symbiotic  animals.  Through  this  higher  trophic  interaction, 
plants receive a benefit because the carnivorous or symbiotic 
animals  impair  the  action  of  herbivores.  Accordingly,  plant 
volatile  secondary  metabolites  are  useful  weapons  for  plants 
to  improve  their  fitness  in  a  stressful  ecosystem.  Thus,  the 
rational  design  of  “supersmelly”  plants  could  enhance  their 
tolerance  to  biotic  stresses  either  directly  or  indirectly  and 
could be useful in agriculture.

In  the  oxylipin  pathway  in  plants,  fatty  acid  hydroperox-
ides  are  the  common  intermediates  for  each  branch,  and 
allene  oxide  synthase  and  HPL  are  the  most  important 
enzymes that divert the metabolic flow at the branch point to 
jasmonates  and  GLVs,  respectively  (Matsui,  2006;  Arimura 
et al., 2009). When the expression of HPL was enhanced by 
the  introduction  of  the  corresponding  gene  under  regulation 
of the 35S promoter in Arabidopsis, the GLV levels in intact 
transgenic  plants  were  still  equivalent  to  those  in  the  wild-
type plants (Shiojiri et al., 2006). However, when the trans-
genic plants were infested by cabbage white butterfly (Pieris 
rapae) or infected by gray mold (B. cinerea), higher amounts 
were  emitted  from  the  transgenic  plants.  This  is  because 
the amount of GLV is directly regulated by the supply of its 
substrate,  and  not  by  the  level  of  HPL  activity.  As  a  result, 
the  transgenic  plants  recruited  a  higher  number  of  parasitic 
wasps  (Cotesia  glomerata)  that  attacked  P.  rapae  larvae  and 
also showed higher tolerance against gray mold disease. This is 
because of the positive effects of GLVs in the direct and indi-
rect defense responses. This was the first attempt to enhance 
GLV formation to improve plant traits in the context of inte-
grated pest management.

Strawberry  linalool/nerolidol  synthase  (FaNES)  was  tar-
geted  to  the  mitochondria  of  Arabidopsis  (Kappers  et  al., 
2005). Mitochondria are the sites of ubiquinone biosynthesis, 
and therefore possess an FPP synthase that provides FPP (C15 
compound) that can be used as a substrate for FaNES to form 
a C15 volatile, nerolidol. The amount of nerolidol formed in 
transgenic  plants  was  20–30  times  higher  than  that  found  in 

transgenic plants that were made by introducing FaNES with 
a  plastid-targeted  signal  sequence.  The  growth  of  transgenic 
plants was almost the same as that of wild-type plants, which 
suggested that mitochondria in the transgenic plants still pro-
duced enough FPP for both ubiquinone and heme A, as well 
as  for  the  new  end  product,  nerolidol.  The  transgenic  plants 
recruited  a  greater  number  of  carnivorous  predatory  mites, 
which  suggested  that  the  transgenic  plants  were  more  fit  for 
survival if they were to be attacked by herbivores.

The addition of a new branch to an existing pathway in a 
subcellular  compartment  is  a  promising  strategy  in  meta-
bolic  engineering  because,  in  some  cases,  there  may  be  an 
abundance of metabolic flow in a compartment so that there 
would  be  little  effect  if  a  small  portion  of  the  intermedi-
ate is provided to the new branch. This concept was applied 
to  sesquiterpene  formation  in  tobacco  plants  by  redirect-
ing the MEP pathway in plastids to form patchoulol through 
the  introduction  of  FPP  synthase  and  patchoulol  synthase  in 
plastids  (Wu  et  al.,  2006).  The  amounts  of  the  sesquiterpe-
nes  patchoulol  and  amorpha-4,11-diene  increased  more  than 
1000-fold and the transgenic tobacco became less preferable 
than  the  wild  type  to  tobacco  hornworm  larvae.  However, 
some of the transgenic lines formed extremely high levels of 
sesquiterpenes, and growth reduction and leaf chlorosis were 
evident,  indicating  that  the  introduced  enzymes  consumed 
too much of the carbon source for sesquiterpene synthesis.

Maize roots emit β-caryophyllene into their rhizosphere in 
response to feeding by larvae of the Diabrotica virgifera vir-
gifera  (Rasmann  et  al.,  2005).  An  entomopathogenic  nema-
tode  was  strongly  attracted  by  the  volatile  sesqui terpene, 
and  this  then  efficiently  infected  the  larvae.  Even  though 
this  below-ground  tritrophic  system  is  found  in  most  maize 
lines  and  in  their  closest  wild  relative,  teosinte,  expres-
sion  of  the  β-caryophyllene  synthase  gene  (TPS23)  in  most 
North  American  maize  lines  is  reduced,  which  results  in  a 
loss  of  β-caryophyllene  production.  Due  to  this  low  level  of 
β-caryophyllene,  North  American  maize  lines  are  more  sus-
ceptible to this herbivore. The β-caryophyllene synthase gene 
from  oregano  was  introduced  into  a  North  American  maize 
line. The transgenic maize was able to form β-caryophyllene, 
and,  as  a  result,  it  suffered  less  root  damage  in  a  field  test 
because  of  the  efficient  recruitment  of  entomopathogenic 
nematodes (Degenhardt et al., 2009). Breeding programs usu-
ally  have  a  definitive  objective,  such  as  fruit  size,  yield,  and 
pathogen  tolerance.  During  breeding  of  the  North  American 
maize  line,  the  breeders  did  not  pay  much  attention  to  the 
ability to form β-caryophyllene from roots, and malfunctional 
β-caryophyllene synthase was propagated. If this background 
information can be clarified, a transgenic strategy to “restore” 
a forgotten trait should be feasible. Such restoration was also 
successful  with  tomato  9/13-HPL,  as  previously  mentioned, 
even though the physiological significance of the formation of 
a C9-volatile in wild tomatoes has not been elucidated.

Perspectives

As previously mentioned, plants are rich resources for health-
promoting  phytochemicals.  While  the  biosynthetic  pathways 

456

Engineering the biosynthesis of low molecular weight metabolites

C H A P T E R   2 8

of many important metabolites have been characterized, little 
is known about other biosynthetic pathways, such as those of 
capsaicin in hot pepper, gingerol in ginger, and apocarotenoid 
in  saffron  (Cocus  sativus).  However,  recent  advances  in  sec-
ondary metabolism have also been very rapid, and the effects 
of this progress have been amazing, as shown in onion.

Onion (Allium cepa), garlic (A. sativum), and many of the 
Allium  species  are  important  vegetables  due  to  their  flavors. 
Intensive studies have revealed the relevant biosynthetic path-
ways (Jones et al., 2004). Allium species synthesize a unique 
set  of  secondary  sulfur  metabolites  derived  from  Cys;  for 
example,  the  S-alk(en)yl-L-Cys  sulfoxides,  including  S-2-
propenyl-L-cysteine sulfoxide (alliin; 2-PRENCSO) and trans-
S-1-propenyl-L-cysteine  sulfoxide  (isoalliin;  1-PRENCSO). 
When  the  tissues  of  any  Allium  species  are  disrupted,  these 
amino acid derivatives are cleaved by the enzyme alliinase into 
the corresponding sulfenic acids, and the resulting volatile sul-
fur compounds give the characteristic flavor and bioactivity of 
the species. In garlic (A. sativum), tissue disruption produces 
di-2-propenyl thiosulfinate (allicin) from 2-PRENCSO, which 
then  liberates  di-2-propenyl  disulfide,  the  dominant  volatile 
component. In onion (A. cepa), however, propanthial S-oxide 
(lachrymatory  factor,  LF),  1-propenyl  methane  thiosulfinate, 
and di-propyl disulfide are produced from 1-PRENCSO upon 
tissue disruption (Figure 28.8).

It had been considered that lachrymatory factor is formed 
spontaneously in onion, but after a careful enzymological anal-
ysis, Imai et al. (2002) identified lachrymatory factor synthase 
(LFS),  which  converts  1-propenyl  sulfenic  acid  to  LF.  Later, 
Eady  et  al.  (2008)  transformed  onion  with  RNAi  vector  for 

the lachrymatory factor synthase gene, and then significantly 
reduced  the  levels  of  tear-inducing  lachrymatory  factor  after 
wounding. They also confirmed that more 1-propenyl sulfenic 
acid was converted into di-1-propenyl thiosulfinate and mark-
edly  increased  the  production  of  a  zwiebelane  isomer  and 
other  volatile  sulfur  compounds,  di-1-propenyl  disulfide  and 
2-mercapto-3,4-dimethyl-2,3-dihydrothiophene, which had pre-
viously been reported in trace amounts or had not been detected 
in onion. This successful engineering is expected to increase the 
health and flavor attributes of the onion.

This work in the onion clearly indicates the importance of 
traditional  biochemical  analysis,  and  the  power  of  the  inte-
gration  of  molecular  biology  and  metabolomics.  Many  other 
metabolites are awaiting a similar investigation.

However,  we  should  also  note  that  additional  progress  is 
needed in the metabolic engineering of low molecular weight 
compounds  for  their  application,  since  we  do  not  know  the 
exact mechanisms of the physiological functions of many phy-
tochemicals for health promotion. A more integrated analysis 
of the physiological mechanisms of phytochemicals and their 
interaction with other components is needed, as with medic-
inal  plants.  In  addition,  a  more  detailed  investigation  of  the 
consequences of metabolic engineering will be needed for the 
development  of  functional  food,  since  metabolic  engineer-
ing  can  considerably  modify  chemical  profiles.  The  effects 
of  metabolic  engineering  on  plant  growth  and  yield  should 
also be fine-tuned, since modification of the flow of primary 
metabolites for an engineered metabolism might impair plant 
growth.  While  there  are  several  obstacles  for  the  application 
of  these  techniques  to  the  development  of  functional  foods, 

O–

S+

NH2

COOH

alliinase

1-PRENCSO

OH

S

+ Pyruvate + NH3

O– 

S+

S

1-propenyl sulfenic acid

LF synthase

O–

S+

propanthial S-oxide (LF)

thiosulfinate

Figure 28.8 l Onion flavor formation and an engineering target l When onion cells (Allium cepa) are disrupted, trans-S-1-propenyl-
L-cysteine sulfoxide (isoalliin; 1-PRENCSO) is cleaved by the enzyme alliinase into 1-propenyl sulfenic acids, and propanthial S-oxide 
(lachrymatory factor, LF], 1-propenyl methane thiosulfinate, and di-propyl disulfide are produced. Based on the discovery of LF synthase, the 
formation of a more volatile flavor compound has been attempted.

457

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

engineered materials should certainly be useful for the indus-
trial preparation of these chemicals.

Conclusion

The  underlying  science  of  low  molecular  weight  metabo-
lites,  including  essential  nutrients,  phytochemicals,  and  vola-
tiles, has been recognized fairly recently. Since low molecular 
weight  metabolites  have  not  been  targets  for  breeders,  who 
have provided many crops with advantageous agronomic traits 
such  as  high  yield  or  low  susceptibility  to  biotic  and  abiotic 
stresses, these small compounds have been overlooked or even 
deteriorated  in  the  pursuit  of  other  agronomic  traits.  Now, 
however, we recognize that low molecular weight metabolites 
are  important  components  of  crop  plants  for  both  consum-
ers and producers. This is why many researchers are now try-
ing  to  modify  the  composition  and/or  the  amounts  of  these 
metabolites  through  molecular  biological  techniques.  Even 
though  several  important  achievements  have  been  reported 
so  far,  not  every  effort  to  improve  crop  plants  through  the 
modification  of  low  molecular  weight  compounds,  especially 
secondary  metabolites,  has  been  successful.  Since  secondary 
metabolites are formed when their physiological functions are 
needed,  plants  fine-tune  their  formation.  In  fact,  the  forma-
tion of these compounds is often limited to a specific devel-
opmental  stage  or  a  specific  organ,  tissue,  or  even  cell.  The 
subcellular compartments where their biosynthesis occurs are 
also tightly controlled; otherwise, they would disturb the pri-
mary metabolism. Plant metabolisms are highly organized and 
are  controlled  by  innate  regulatory  and  homeostatic  mecha-
nisms.  Therefore,  the  molecular  design  of  a  transgenic  plant 
that  shows  an  improved  trait  through  a  modified  ability  to 
form  secondary  metabolites  should  be  based  on  the  molecu-
lar  mechanisms  of  secondary  metabolite  formation  in  plants, 
which are now being extensively studied. A kinetic modeling 
approach has been successfully used to predict the metabolic 
flux  of  benzenoids  in  petunia  flowers  (Colon  et  al.,  2010). 
This  approach  predicted  that  phenylacetaldehyde  synthase 
plays  a  critical  role  in  determining  the  flux  to  form  benze-
noids. Even though this prediction still requires experimental 

validation, this approach may provide valuable clues for modi-
fying  plant  volatiles  through  genetic  modification.  A  recent 
omics-based  approach  that  considers  both  the  transcriptome 
and  metabolome  may  also  be  useful  for  obtaining  a  basic 
understanding  of  plant  secondary  metabolism  (Yokota-Hirai 
et  al.,  2007).  Research  on  plant  systems  through  this  omics-
based  approach  may  provide  a  deeper  understanding  of  the 
network structure of plant secondary metabolism, and, based 
on  such  information,  it  may  be  possible  to  design  crop  and 
ornamental  plants  with  improved  quality  traits  that  involve 
low molecular weight compounds.

Another  important  point  to  consider  in  attempting  to 
improve  the  traits  of  plants  through  the  modification  of 
secondary  metabolites  is  how  organisms,  such  as  humans, 
insects, or pathogens, perceive these chemicals. For example, 
the  threshold  value  of  a  volatile  compound  can  vary  greatly. 
Furthermore,  in  humans,  olfactory  sensation  caused  by  vola-
tile  compounds  is  quite  complicated  and  other  factors,  such 
as texture and color, must also be taken into account (Taylor 
and  Roberts,  2004).  Therefore,  every  attempt  to  improve 
the  flavor  quality  of  foods  must  be  evaluated  by  an  orga-
noleptic  assessment.  In  contrast,  insects  usually  show  inher-
ent  behavioral  responses  to  volatile  compounds.  However,  it 
has  also  been  shown  that  insects  can  learn  odors  that  might 
be beneficial to them (De Boer et al., 2005). The ecosystem 
that  surrounds  a  plant  consists  of  a  network  of  multitrophic 
interactions  (Dicke,  2009),  and  thus  an  improvement  in 
one  trophic  system  might  have  an  adverse  effect  on  another 
trophic system. Since metabolic engineering is a powerful tool 
for modifying the quality traits of plant metabolites, practical 
agricultural and nutritional evaluations will be essential for the 
application of this approach.

Acknowledgments

This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  a  Grant-in-Aid  from 
the  Ministry  of  Education,  Culture,  Sports,  Science,  and 
Technology of Japan (21248013 to F.S.) and by Grants-in-Aid 
for  Scientific  Research  (18580105  and  19101009  to  K.M.) 
from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

References

Arimura, G., Matsui, K., & Takabayashi, J. 

(2009). Chemical and molecular ecology of 
herbivore-induced plant volatiles: Proximate 
factors and their ultimate functions. Plant 
and Cell Physiology, 50, 911–923.
Baur, J. A., & Sinclair, D. A. (2006). 

Therapeutic potential of resveratrol: The 
in vivo evidence. Nature Reviews Drug 
Discovery, 5, 493–506.

Borevitz, J. O., Xia, Y. J., Blount, J., Dixon, R. 
A., & Lamb, C. (2000). Activation tagging 
identifies a conserved MYB regulator of 
phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. Plant Cell, 
12, 2383–2393.

Bovy, A., de Vos, R., Kemper, M., Schijlen, E., 

Pertejo, M. A., & Muir, S., et al. (2002). 

458

High-flavonol tomatoes resulting from 
the heterologous expression of the maize 
transcription factor genes LC and C1. Plant 
Cell, 14, 2509–2526.

Brigelius-Flohe, R., & Traber, M. G. (1999). 
Vitamin E: Function and metabolism. The 
FASEB Journal, 13, 1145–1155.

Butelli, E., Titta, L., Giorgio, M., Mock, H. 

-P., Matros, A., & Peterek, S., et al. (2008). 
Enrichment of tomato fruit with health-
promoting anthocyanins by expression 
of select transcription factors. Nature 
Biotechnology, 26, 1301–1308.

Chen, Z., Young, T. E., Ling, J., Chang, S-C., 
& Gallie, D. R. (2003). Increasing vitamin 
C content of plants through enhanced 

ascorbate recycling. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 100, 3525–3530.

Clemente, T. E., & Cahoon, E. B. (2009). 

Soybean oil: Genetic approaches for 
modification of functionality and total 
content. Plant Physiology, 151, 1030–1040.

Colon, A. M., Sengupta, N., Rhodes, D., 
Dudareva, N., & Morgan, J. (2010). A 
kinetic model describes metabolic response 
to perturbations and distribution of flux 
control in the benzenoid network of Petunia 
hybrida. Plant Journal, 62, 64–76.

Colquhoun, T. A., Schimmel, B. C. J., Kim, 

J. Y., Reinhardt, D., Cline, K., & Clark, D. 
G. (2010). A petunia chorismate mutase 

Engineering the biosynthesis of low molecular weight metabolites

C H A P T E R   2 8

specialized for the production of floral 
volatiles. Plant Journal, 61, 145–155.

Davidovich-Rihanati, R., Sitrit, Y., Tadmor, 

Y., Iijima, Y., Bilenko, N., & Bar, E., et al. 
(2007). Enrichment of tomato flavor by 
diversion of the early plastidial terpenoid 
pathway. Nature Biotechnology, 25, 899–901.

Davuluri, G. D., van Tuinen, A., Fraser, P. 
D., Manfredonia, A., Newman, R., & 
Durgess, D., et al. (2005). Fruit-specific 
RNAi-mediated suppression of DET1 
enhances carotenoid and flavonoid content 
in tomatoes. Nature Biotechnology, 23, 
890–895.

De Boer, J. G., Snoeren, T. A. L., & Dicke, 

M. (2005). Predatory mites learn to 
discriminate between plant volatiles induced 
by prey and nonprey herbivores. Animal 
Behaviour, 69, 869–879.

Degenhardt, J., Hiltpold, I., Köller, T. G., 

Frey, M., Gierl, A., & Gershenzon, J., et al. 
(2009). Restoring a maize root signal that 
attracts insect-killing nematodes to control 
a major pest. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 106, 13213–13218.

Diaz de la Garza, R., Quinlivan, E. P., Klaus, 
S. M., Basset, G. J., Gregory, J. F., III, & 
Hanson, A. D. (2004). Folate biofortification 
in tomatoes by engineering the pteridine 
branch of folate synthesis. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 101, 13720–13725.

Diaz de la Garza, R. I., Gregory, J. F., III, & 

Hanson, A. D. (2007). Folate biofortification 
of tomato fruit. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 104, 4218–4222.

Dicke, M. (2009). Behavioural and community 
ecology of plants that cry for help. Plant Cell 
and Environment, 32, 654–665.

Diretto, G., Al-Babili, S., Tavazza, R., 

Papacchioli, V., Beyer, P., & Giuliano, G. 
(2007). Metabolic engineering of potato 
carotenoid content through tuber specific 
overexpression of a bacterial mini-pathway. 
PLoS ONE, 2, e350.

Eady, C. C., Kamoi, T., Kato, M., Porter, N. 
G., Davis, S., & Shaw, M., et al. (2008). 
Silencing onion lachrymatory factor 
synthase causes a significant change in the 
sulfur secondary metabolite profile. Plant 
Physiology, 147, 2096–2106.

El Tamer, M. K., Smeets, M., Holthuysen, 
N., Lücker, J., Tang, A., & Roozen, J., et 
al. (2003). The influence of monoterpene 
synthase transformation on the odour of 
tobacco. Journal of Biotechnology, 106, 
15–21.

Enfissi, E. M. A., Barneche, F., Ahmed, I., 

Lichtle, C., Gerrish, C., & MaQuinn, 
R. P., et al. (2010). Integrative 
transcript and metabolite analysis of 
nutritionally enhanced DE-ETIOLATED1 
downregulated tomato fruit. Plant Cell, 22, 
1190–1215.

Falco, S. C., Guida, T., Locke, M., Mauvais, J., 

Sanders, C., & Ward, R. T., et al. (1995). 
Transgenic canola and soybean seeds with 
increased lysine. Nature Biotechnology, 13, 
577–582.

FAO,  The state of food insecurity in the World 

2006. FAO.

Furuta, S., Nishida, Y., Hajika, M., Igita, K., 

& Suda, I. (1996). DETBA value and 
hexanal production with the combination 
of unsaturated fatty acids and extracts 
prepared from soybean seeds lacking two 
or three lipoxygenase isozymes, Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 44, 
236–239.

Germinara, G. S., Cristofaro, A. D., & 

Rotundo, G. (2008). Behavioral responses 
of adult Sitophilus granaries to individual 
cereal volatiles. Journal of Chemical Ecology, 
34, 523–529.

Goff, S. A., & Klee, H. J. (2006). Plant volatile 

compounds: Sensory cues for health and 
nutritional value? Science, 311, 815–819.

Goossens, A., Häkkinen, S. T., Laakso, I., 
Seppänen-Laakso, T., Biondi, S., & De 
Sutter, V., et al. (2003). A functional 
genomics approach toward the 
understanding of secondary metabolism 
in plant cells. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 100, 8595–8600.

Goto, F., Yoshihara, T., Shigemoto, N., Toki, 
S., & Takaiwa, F. (1999). Iron fortification 
of rice seeds by the soybean ferritin gene. 
Nature Biotechnology, 17, 282–286.

Grotewold, E. (2008). Transcription factors 

for predictive plant metabolic engineering: 
Are we there yet? Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 19, 138–144.

Gutterson, N. C. (1993). Molecular breeding 

for color, flavor and fragrance. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 55, 141–160.

Hain, R., Reif, H-J., Krause, E., Langebartels, 
R., Kindl, H., & Vornam, B., et al. (1993). 
Disease resistance results from foreign 
phytoalexin expression in a novel plant. 
Nature, 361, 153–156.

Hall, C., & Yu, O. (2008). Potential for 
metabolic engineering of resveratrol 
biosynthesis. Trends in Biotechnology, 26, 
77–81.

Hashimoto, T., & Yamada, Y. (2003). New 

genes in alkaloid metabolism and transport. 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 14, 
163–168.

Hirota, N., Kuroda, H., Takoi, K., Kaneko, 

T., Kaneda, H., & Yoshida, I., et al. 
(2006). Brewing performance of malted 
lipoxygenase-1 null barley and effect on the 
flavor stability of beer. Cereal Chemistry, 
83, 250–254.

Hossain, T., Rosenberg, I., Selhub, J., Kishore, 

G., Beachy, R., & Schubert, K. (2004). 
Enhancement of folates in plants through 
metabolic engineering. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 101, 5158–5163.
Hounsome, N., Hounsome, B., Tomos, 

D., & Edwards-Jones, G. (2008). Plant 
metabolites and nutritional quality of 
vegetables. Journal of Food Science, 73, 
R48–R65.

http://www.fruitsandveggiesmatter.gov/
Iijima, Y., & Aoki, K. (2009). Application of 

metabolomics to improve tomato fruit 
productivity and quality. Journal of the 
Japanese Society for Horticultural Science, 
78, 14–22.

Imai, S., Tsuge, N., Tomotake, M., Nagatome, 
Y., Sawada, H., & Nagata, T., et al. (2002). 

Plant biochemistry: An onion enzyme that 
makes the eyes water. Nature, 419, 685.

Jain, A. K., & Nessler, C. L. (2000). Metabolic 

engineering of an alternative pathway 
for ascorbic acid biosynthesis in plants. 
Molecular Breeding, 6, 73–78.

Jones, M. G., Hughes, J., Tregova, A., Milne, 
J., Tomsett, A. B., & Collin, H. A. (2004). 
Biosynthesis of the flavour precursors of 
onion and garlic. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 55, 1903–1918.

Kappers, I. F., Aharoni, A., van Herpen, T. 

W. J. M., Luckerhoff, L. L. P., Dicke, M., 
& Bouwmeester, H. J. (2005). Genetic 
engineering of terpenoid metabolism attract 
bodyguards to Arabidopsis. Nature, 309, 
2070–2072.

Kato, N., Dubouzet, E., Kokabu, Y., 

Yoshida, S., Dubouzet, J., & Yazaki, K., 
et al. (2007). Identification of a WRKY 
protein as a transcriptional regulator of 
benzylisoquinoline alkaloid biosynthesis in 
Coptis japonica. Plant and Cell Physiology, 
48, 8–18.

Kim, H. J., Ono, E., Morimoto, K., Yamagaki, 

T., Okazawa, A., & Kobayashi, A., et al. 
(2009). Metabolic engineering of lignan 
biosynthesis in Forsythia cell culture. Plant 
and Cell Physiology, 50, 2200–2209.

Lange, B. M., Wildung, M. R., Stauber, E. J., 
Sanchez, C., Pouchnik, D., & Croteau, R. 
(2000). Probing essential oil biosynthesis 
and secretion by functional evaluation of 
expressed sequence tags from mint glandular 
trichomes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 97, 2934–2939.

Laurence, K. M., James, N., Miller, M. H., 

Tennants, G. B., & Campbell, H. (1981). 
Double-blind randomized controlled trial 
of folate treatment before conception to 
prevent recurrence of neural-tube defects. 
British Medical Journal, 282, 1509–1511.

Lavy, M., Zuker, A., Lewinsohn, E., Larkov, O., 

Ravid, U., & Vainstein, A., et al. (2002). 
Linalool and linalool oxide production in 
transgenic carnation flowers expressing 
the Clarkia breweri linalool synthase gene. 
Molecular Breeding, 9, 103–110.

Lee, S., Jeon, U. S., Lee, S. J., Kim, Y. K., 

Persson, D. P., & Husted, S., et al. (2009). 
Iron fortification of rice seeds through 
activation of the nicotianamine synthase 
gene. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
106, 22014–22019.

Lewinsohn, E., Schalechet, F., Wilkinson, J., 
Matsui, K., Tadmor, Y., & Nam, K. -H.,  
et al. (2001). Enhanced levels of the aroma 
and flavor compound S-linalool by metabolic 
engineering of the terpenoid pathway 
in tomato fruits. Plant Physiology, 127, 
1256–1265.

Liu, Z., Saarinen, N. M., & Thompson, L. U. 

(2006). Sesamin is one of the major precursors 
of mammalian lignans in sesame seed 
(Sesamum indicum) as observed in vitro and in 
rats. The Journal of Nutrition, 136, 906–912.

Lloyd, A. M., Walbot, V., & Davis, R. W. 

(1992). Arabidopsis and Nicotiana 
anthocyanin production activated by maize 
regulator-r and regulator-C1. Science, 258, 
1773–1775.

459

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Lorence, A., Chevone, B. I., Mendes, P., 
& Nessler, C. L. (2004). Myo-inositol 
oxygenase offers a possible entry point 
into plant ascorbate biosynthesis. Plant 
Physiology, 134, 1200–1205.

Luo, J., Butelli, E., Hill, L., Parr, A., Niggeweg, 

R., & Bailey, P., et al. (2008). AtMYB12 
regulates caffeoyl quinic acid and flavonol 
synthesis in tomato: Expression in fruit 
results in very high levels of both types of 
polyphenol. Plant Journal, 56, 316–326.

Lücker, J., Bouwmeester, H. J., Schwab, 
W., Blaas, J., van der Plas, L. H. W., & 
Verhoeven, H. A. (2001). Expression of 
Clarkia S-linalool synthase in transgenic 
petunia plants results in the accumulation of 
S-linalyl β-D-glucopyranoside. Plant Journal, 
27, 315–324.

Lücker, J., Schwab, W., van Hautum, B., Blaas, 
J., van der Plas, L. H. W., & Bouwmeester, 
H. J., et al. (2004). Increased and altered 
fragrance of tobacco plants after metabolic 
engineering using three monoterpene 
synthases from lemon. Plant Physiology, 
134, 510–519.

Maeda, H., Shasany, A. K., Schnepp, J.,  

Orlova, I., Taguchi, G., & Cooper, B. R.,  
et al. (2010). RNAi suppression of arogenate 
dehydratase1 reveals that phenylalanine is 
synthesized predominantly via the arogenate 
pathway in petunia petals. Plant Cell, 22, 
832–849.

Mann, V., Harker, M., Pecker, I., & Hirschberg, 

J. (2000). Metabolic engineering of 
astaxanthin production in tobacco flowers. 
Nature Biotechnology, 18, 888–892.
Matsui, K. (2006). Green leaf volatiles: 

Hydroperoxide lyase pathway of oxylipin 
metabolism. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 9, 274–280.

Matsui, K., Ishii, M., Sasaki, M., Rabinowitch, 

H. D., & Ben-Oliel, G. (2007). 
Identification of an allele attributable to 
formation of cucumber-like flavor in wild 
tomato species (Solanum pennellii) that was 
inactivated during domestication. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 55, 
4080–4086.

Matsui, K., Fukutomi, S., Wilkinson, J., 

Hiatt, B., Knauf, V., & Kajiwara, T. 
(2001). Effect of overexpression of fatty 
acid 9-hydroperoxide lyase in tomatoes 
(Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.). Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 49, 
5418–5424.

Mayer, J. E., Pfeiffer, W. H., & Beyer, P. (2008). 
Biofortified crops to alleviate micronutrient 
malnutrition. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 11, 166–170.

Molvig, L., Tabe, L. M., Eggum, B. O., Moore, 

A. E., Craig, S., & Spencer, D., et al. (1997). 
Enhanced methionine levels and increased 
nutritive values of seeds of transgenic lupins 
(Lupinus angustifolius L.) expressing a 
sunflower seed abumin gene. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 94, 8393–8398.
Morishige, T., Tamakoshi, M., Takemura, T., & 
Sato, F. (2010). Molecular characterization 
of O-methyltransferases involved in 
isoquinoline alkaloid biosynthesis in Coptis 
japonica. Proceedings of the Japan Academy, 
Series B, 86, 757–768.

460

Mosblech, A., Feussner, I., & Heilmann, I. 
(2009). Oxylipins: Structurally diverse 
metabolites from fatty acid oxidation. Plant 
Physiology and Biochemistry, 47, 511–517.

Runguphan, W., & O’Connor, S. E. (2009). 
Metabolic reprogramming of periwinkle 
plant culture. Nature Chemical Biology, 5, 
151–153.

Naqvi, S., Zhu, C. F., Farre, G., Ramessar, 

L, Bassie, L., & Breitenbach, J., et al. 
(2009). Transgenic multivitamin corn 
through biofortification of endosperm with 
three vitamins representing three distinct 
metabolic pathways. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 106, 7762–7767.

Newell-McGloughlin, M. (2008). Nutritionally 

improved agricultural crops. Plant 
Physiology, 147, 939–953.

Nicoletti, I., De Rossi, A., Giovinazzo, G., 
& Corradini, D. (2007). Identification 
and quantification of stilbenes in fruits of 
transgenic tomato plants (Lycopersicon 
esculentum Mill.) by reversed phase HPLC 
with photodiode array and mass spectrometry 
detection. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 55, 3304–3311.

Ono, E., Nakai, M., Fukui, Y., Tomimori, N., 
Fukuchi-Mizutani, M., & Saito, M., et al. 
(2006). Formation of two methylenedioxy 
bridges by a Sesamum CYP81Q protein 
yielding a furofuran lignan, ()-sesamin. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
103, 10116–10121.

Paine, J. A., Shipton, C. A., Chaggar, S., 

Howells, R. M., Kennedy, J. J., & Vernon, 
G., et al. (2005). Improving the nutritional 
value of Golden Rice through increased 
provitamin A content. Nature Biotechnology, 
23, 482–487.

Panel on Micronutrients, Subcommittees on 

Upper Reference Levels of Nutrients and of 
Interpretation and Use of Dietary Reference 
Intakes, and the Standing Committee on the 
Scientific Evaluation of Dietary Reference 
Intakes (2001). Dietary reference intakes 
for vitamin A, vitamin K, arsenic, boron, 
chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, 
molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and 
zinc. The National Acad. Press. http://
books.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_
id  10026/.

Peterkofsky, B. (1991). Ascorbate requirement 

for hydroxylation and secretion of 
procollagen: Relationship to inhibition of 
collagen synthesis in scurvy. The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 54, 11355–
11405.

Pichersky, E., Noel, J. P., & Dudareva, N. 
(2006). Biosynthesis of plant volatiles: 
Nature’s diversity and ingenuity. Science, 
311, 808–811.

Qi, B., Fraser, T., Mugford, S., Dobson, 
G., Sayanova, O., & Butler, J., et al. 
(2004). Production of very long chain 
polyunsaturated omega-3 and omega-6 fatty 
acids in plants. Nature Biotechnology, 22, 
739–745.

Raboy, V. (2002). Progress in breeding low 
phytate crops. The Journal of Nutrition, 
132, 503S–505S.

Rasmann, S., Köllner, T. G., Degenhardt, J., 

Hiltpold, I., Toepfer, S., & Kuhlmann, U.,  
et al. (2005). Recruitment of 
entomopathogenic nematodes by insect-
damaged maize roots. Nature, 434, 732–737.

Sakai, M., Hirata, H., Sayama, H., Sekiguchi, 

K., Itano, H., & Asai, T., et al. (2007). 
Production of 2-phenylethanol in roses as 
the dominant floral scent compound from 
L-phenylalanine by two key enzymes, 
a PLP-dependent decarboxylase and a 
phenylacetaldehyde reductase. Bioscience, 
Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 71, 
2408–2419.

Sato, F., Inai, K., & Hashimoto, T. (2007a). 

Metabolic engineering in alkaloid 
biosynthesis: Case studies in tyrosine- 
and putrescine-derived alkaloids. In R. 
Verpoorte, A. W. Alfermann & T. S. Johnson 
(Eds.), Applications of Plant Metabolic 
Engineering (pp. 145–173). Dordrecht, 
Netherlands: Springer.

Sato, F., Inui, T., & Takemura, T (2007b). 
Metabolic engineering in isoquinoline 
alkaloid biosynthesis. Current 
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, 8(4), 
211–218.

Schilmiller, A. L., Last, R. L., & Pichersky, 

E. (2008). Harnessing plant trichome 
biochemistry for the production of useful 
compounds. Plant Journal, 54, 702–711.
Segal, G., Song, R., & Messing, J. (2003). A 
new opaque variant of maize by a single 
dominant RNA interference-inducing 
transgene. Genetics, 165, 387–397.

Shintani, D., & Della-Penna, D. (1998). 

Elevating the vitamin E content of plants 
through metabolic engineering. Science, 282, 
2098–2100.

Shiojiri, K., Kishimoto, K., Ozawa, R., 

Kugimiya, S., Urashimo, S., & Arimura, G., 
et al. (2006). Changing green leaf volatile 
biosynthesis in plants: An approach for 
improving plant resistance against both 
herbivores and pathogens. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 16672–16676.

Takabayashi, A., Ishikawa, N., Obayashi, T., 
Ishida, S., Obokata, J., & Endo, T., et al. 
(2009). Three novel subunits of Arabidopsis 
chloroplastic NAD(P)H dehydrogenase 
identified by bioinformatic and reverse 
genetic approaches. Plant Journal, 57, 
207–219.

Takahashi, M., Nakanishi, H., Kawasaki, S., 

Nishizawa, N. K., & Mori, S. (2001). 
Enhanced tolerance of rice to low iron 
availability in alkaline soils using barley 
nicotianamine aminotransferase genes. 
Nature Biotechnology, 19, 466–469.

Takemura, T., Ikezawa, N., Iwasa, K., & Sato, 

F. (2010). Metabolic diversification of 
benzylisoquinoline alkaloid biosynthesis 
through the introduction of a branch 
pathway in Eschscholzia californica. Plant 
and Cell Physiology, 51, 949–959.
Tanaka, Y., Sasaki, N., & Ohmiya, A. 

(2008). Biosynthesis of plant pigments: 
Anthocyanins, betalains and carotenoids. 
Plant Journal, 54, 733–749.

Taylor, A. J., & Roberts, D. D. (2004). Flavor 

perception. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

Tohge, T., Nishiyama, Y., Hirai, M. Y., Yano, 
M., Nakajima, J., & Awazuhara, M., et al. 

Engineering the biosynthesis of low molecular weight metabolites

C H A P T E R   2 8

(2005). Functional genomics by integrated 
analysis of metabolome and transcriptome 
of Arabidopsis plants over-expressing an 
MYB transcription factor. Plant Journal, 42, 
218–235.

Truksa, M., Wu, G., Vrinte, P., & Qiu, X. (2006). 

Metabolic engineering of plants to produce 
very long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
Transgenic Research, 15, 131–137.

Usuda, K., Wada, Y., Ishimaru, Y., Kobayashi, 

T., Takahashi, M., & Nakanishi, H., et 
al. (2008). Genetically engineered rice 
containing larger amounts of nicotianamine 
to enhance the antihypertensive effect. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 7, 87–95.

Van Eenennaam, A. L., Lincoln, K., Durrett, 

T. P., Valentin, H. E., Shewmaker, C. K., & 
Thorne, G. M., et al. (2003). Engineering 
vitamin E content: From Arabidopsis mutant 
to soy oil. Plant Cell, 15, 3007–3019.

Verdonk, J. C., Haring, M. A., van Tunen, A. J., 

& Schuurink, R. C. (2005). ODORANT1 
regulates fragrance biosynthesis in petunia 
flowers. Plant Cell, 17, 1612–1624.
Verpoorte, R., & Memelink, J. (2002). 
Engineering secondary metabolite 
production in plants. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 13, 181–187.

Vogt, T. (2010). Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. 

Molecular Plant, 3, 2–20.

Wakasa, K., Hasegawa, H., Nemoto, H., 
Matsuda, F., Miyazawa, H., & Tozawa, 
Y., et al. (2006). High-level tryptophan 
accumulation in seeds of transgenic rice 

and its limited effects on agronomic traits 
and seed metabolite profile. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 57, 3069–3078.
Walter, M. H., Floss, D. S., & Strack, D. 
(2010). Apocarotenoids: Hormones, 
mycorrhizal metabolites and aroma volatiles. 
Planta, 232, 1–27.

Watson, L. (2000). Jacobson’s organ and the 

remarkable nature of smell. New York: W. W. 
Norton & Company.

WHO report (1995). Global prevalence of 

Vitamin A deficiency;  http://www.who
.int/nutrition/publications/vad_global_
prevalence/en/index.html/

Wu, S., Schalk, M., Clark, A., Miles, R. 

B., Coates, R., & Chappell, J. (2006). 
Redirection of cytosolic or plastidic 
isoprenoid precursors elevates terpene 
production in plants. Nature Biotechnology, 
24, 1441–1447.

Xie, D-Y., Sharma, S. B., Wright, E., Wang, 
Z-Y., & Dixon, R. A. (2006). Metabolic 
engineering of proanthocyanidins through 
co-expression of anthocyanidin reductase 
and the PAP1 MYB transcription factor. 
Plant Journal, 45, 895–907.

Yan, X., & Chen, S. (2007). Regulation of plant 

glucosinolate metabolism. Planta, 226, 
1343–1352.

Yokota-Hirai, M., Sugiyama, K., Sawada, Y., 

Tohge, T., Obayashi, T., & Suzuki, A.,  
et al. (2007). Omics-based identification 
of Arabidopsis Myb transcription 
factors regulating aliphatic glucosinolate 

biosynthesis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 104, 6478–6483.

Zhang, Z., Ober, J. A., & Kliebenstein, 

D. J. (2006). The gene controlling the 
quantitative trait locus EPITHIOSPECIFIER 
MODIFIER1 alters glucosinolate hydrolysis 
and insect resistance in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Cell, 18, 1524–1536.

Zhu, C., Naqvi, S., Gomez-Galera, S., Pelacho, 

A. M., Capell, T., & Christou, P. (2007). 
Transgenic strategies for the nutritional 
enhancement of plants. Trends in Plant 
Science, 12, 548–555.

Zhu, X., & Galili, G. (2003). Increased 

lysine synthesis coupled with a knockout 
of its catabolism synergistically boosts 
lysine content and also trans-regulates 
the metabolism of other amino acids in 
Arabidopsis seeds. Plant Cell, 15, 845–853.

Ziegler, J., Diaz-Chavez, M. L., Kramell, R., 

Ammer, C., & Kutchan, T. M. (2005). 
Comparative macroarray analysis of 
morphine-containing Papaver somniferum 
and eight morphine-free Papaver species 
identifies an O-methyltransferase involved in 
benzylisoquinoline biosynthesis. Planta, 222, 
458–471.

Zvi, M. M. B., Negre-Zakharov, F., Masci, T., 

Ovadis, M., Shklarman, E., & Ben-Meir, H., 
et al. (2008). Interlinking showy traits: Co-
engineering of scent and colour biosynthesis 
in flowers. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 6, 
403–415.

461

Control of flowering

25

Alon Samach
The R. H. Smith Institute for Plant Sciences and Genetics in Agriculture, the Hebrew University 
of Jerusalem, Israel

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 387
A plant’s perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
A farmer’s perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
Proteins Controlling Flowering Time  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 388
Florigen and FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT)  . . . . . . . . . . 388
Transcription factors regulating FT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 389
Proteins parallel or downstream of FT . . . . . . . . . . . . . 390
Processes Affecting Flowering Time Proteins   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 391
Histone modifications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 391
Gibberellin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 392
MicroRNAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 393
The circadian clock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 394
Regulated proteolysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 394
Sugars  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 394
Developmental Decisions on Timing of Flowering  .  .  .  .  .  . 395
Juvenility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 395
Seasonality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 395
Reproductive cycles and alternate bearing . . . . . . . . . 397
Summary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 398
Acknowledgment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 398

Introduction

A plant’s perspective

The  vast  amounts  of  diverse  plant  species  currently  on  our 
planet  are  still  here  because  they  have  succeeded  in  repro-
ducing  over  many  generations,  surviving  many  environmental 
and  human-caused  catastrophes.  The  timing  in  which  differ-
ent  plant  species  attempt  to  sexually  reproduce  is  influenced 
by  the  need  for  sufficient  resources  to  support  reproduction 
as well as the vulnerability of the exposed plant reproductive 

organs  to  unfavorable  environmental  conditions.  Thus,  many 
species  have  developed  a  sensitive  mechanism  both  to  avoid 
flowering when they lack the sufficient resources, and also to 
avoid flowering during certain seasons, or better yet, to flower 
at a specific, best time of the year. This mechanism requires an 
ability to sense and react to internal changes as well as seasonal 
and daily changes in the environment, including temperature, 
light  quality/intensity,  and  daylength.  Three  major  decisions 
regarding timing of flowering are (Figure 25.1): the length of 
the juvenile phase (“juvenility”), a period lasting from germi-
nation  until  plants  allow  themselves  to  enter  the  reproduc-
tive cycle; when to flower during the year (“seasonality”); and 
when  to  time  the  next  cycle  of  reproduction  (in  polycarpic 
plants),  that  is,  the  “reproductive  cycle”.  There  are  quite  a 
few  comprehensive  current  reviews  on  plant  reproduction 
(Michaels, 2009; Albani and Coupland, 2010; Amasino, 2010; 
Crevillen and Dean, 2010).

A farmer’s perspective

The product of most agricultural crops is flowers or fruit, thus 
the  need  for  farmers  to  get  more  product  seems  to  fit  well  
with  the  need  of  plants  to  reproduce.  Conflicts  arise  when 
humans  move  plants  that  are  adjusted  to  a  specific  environ-
ment into a new environment. How will plants know when to 
flower  when  facing  a  different  annual  cycle  of  environmental 
changes? For example, how will a plant that is geared to respond 
to changes in photoperiod respond if it is moved to the equator?
A different point of conflict is that plants are happy to pro-
duce fruit at a certain time of year, while humans feel the need 
to  produce  a  certain  commodity  in  different  seasons—con-
sumers “need” their favorite vegetable/fruit all year round. A 
new generation of seedlings uses the juvenile phase to establish 
themselves and are in no hurry to enter the reproductive cycle; 
if plant breeders would like to improve fruiting traits of these 
seedlings, they need great patience and the ability to convince 
others why they are progressing so slowly. Lastly, in polycarpic 
plants like fruit trees, a high quality and quantity of fruit every 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00025-0

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Florigen and FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT)

Plants  are  subject  to  annual  cycles  in  climate  including  tem-
perature,  light  quality,  light  intensity,  humidity,  precipitation, 
and  other  environmental  events;  yet  the  timing  and  intensity 
of those phenomena are subject to change and are influenced 
by  human  impact.  Changes  in  daylength  (photoperiod)  are  a 
reliable  annual  clock,  unlikely  to  be  disrupted  by  human  or 
other  impact.  Annual  amplitude  in  daylength  cycle  is  influ-
enced by where organisms reside on Earth. In regions further 
from the equator, many plants use these predicted changes in 
photoperiod  to  correctly  time  the  transition  to  flowering  as 
well  as  other  developmental  processes.  Some  plants  respond 
to shortening of daylength while others respond to increasing 
daylengths.  The  switch  occurs  in  the  apical  meristem  which 
starts  making  flowers  instead  of  leaves.  Scientists  noted  this 
photoperiodic affect on flowering time (Tournois, 1914; Klebs, 
1918;  Garner  and  Allard,  1920),  and  the  need  for  leaves  to 
perceive daylength suggested the existence of a moving signal 
termed  “Florigen”  formed  in  leaves  and  reaching  the  meris-
tem  (Knott,  1934;  Chailakhyan,  1936).  By  grafting  between 
species  with  opposite  daylength  requirements,  it  was  shown 
that  Florigen  could  be  a  common  mobile  flowering  chemical 
(Zeevaart, 1962).

Molecular  genetic  studies  in  Arabidopsis  (Redei,  1962; 
Koornneef  et  al.,  1991;  Kobayashi  et  al.,  1999;  Kardailsky  
et  al.,  1999;  Michaels  et  al.,  2005;  Yamaguchi  et  al.,  2005; 
Jang et al., 2009) as well as rice (Kojima et al., 2002; Ishikawa 
et al., 2005), tomato (Lifschitz et al., 2006), and wheat (Yan 
et  al.,  2006)  provided  the  identity  of  one,  and  perhaps  the 
only,  component  of  Florigen  (Turck  et  al.,  2008),  which  is  a 
small  (23 kDa)  protein  encoded  by  FLOWERING  LOCUS 
T  (FT)  and  TWIN  SISTER  OF  FT  (TSF)  in  Arabidopsis, 
SINGLE  FLOWER  TRUSS  (SFT)  in  tomato,  HEADING 
DATE 3 (HD3A) in rice, and VRN3 in wheat. Here we will 
use the name FT to describe proteins of different species that 
are  similar  in  structure  and  function  to  the  protein  encoded 
by  FT  of  Arabidopsis.  Lack  of  FT  causes  late  flowering,  and 
high  levels  of  FT  are  correlated  with  early  flowering.  Many 
environmental  cues  regulate  flowering  time  through  regulat-
ing  FT-encoding  gene  expression.  Under  conditions  that  pro-
mote flowering in Arabidopsis, FT is expressed in the phloem 
of  leaves  (Takada  and  Goto,  2003),  and  after  translation,  FT 
is  loaded  into  the  phloem  and  moves  toward  the  meristem 
(Corbesier  et  al.,  2007;  Jaeger  and  Wigge,  2007;  Lin  et  al., 
2007; Mathieu et al., 2007; Tamaki et al., 2007). Once reach-
ing the vegetative meristem, FT was shown to trigger a change 
in  its  identity,  turning  it  into  an  inflorescence  meristem  pro-
ducing flower rather than leaf primordia.

Based  on  present  knowledge,  it  is  likely  that  FT-like  pro-
teins  are  formed  in  leaves  of  all  plant  species  and  once  they 
reach  the  meristem  they  can  potentially  trigger  the  flower-
ing response in any plant species (Figure 25.1). The timing of 
FT formation, together with internal signals that intervene in 
steps that occur after FT formation, will define the flowering 
behavior of each plant. Polycarpic plants require a mechanism 
preventing all meristems from reacting to the FT signal, once 
it  is  formed.  This  would  allow  certain  meristems  to  remain 

Figure 25.1  Diagram describing three decisions (as described 
in the section Developmental Decisions on Timing of Flowering) 
regarding time of flowering in plants (juvenility, seasonal flowering, 
and reproductive cycles). The place where FLOWERING LOCUS 
T (FT) is made (leaves) and the place where it acts (meristem) are 
shown. The proteins (described in the section Proteins Controlling 
Flowering Time) that regulate FT expression, can work instead of FT 
(SPLs), and genes that are downstream of FT, Processes (described 
in the section Processes Affecting Flowering Time Proteins), such as 
histone modifications or microRNA regulation, that affect the levels of 
the different genes or proteins involved in flowering control.

year  is  desirable,  but  many  plants  are  just  as  happy  and  able 
to make what humans consider “low quality” fruits once every 
two years.

Reaching  human  goals  by  overcoming  or  circumventing 
plant mechanisms is a slow process that likely began with the 
start of agriculture. Introducing agricultural techniques such as 
“forcing”  to  partially  overcome  juvenility,  artificial  cold  treat-
ment to convince a plant it had gone through winter, or fruit 
thinning  to  intervene  in  fruiting  cycles  are  some  examples. 
Humans also bred or selected for new varieties with preferable 
flowering traits likely caused by modified alleles of genes (orig-
inating from wild species or mutations). Today, knowing more 
about the processes can help in devising more precise agricul-
tural techniques. Our knowledge of genes that regulate these 
processes can serve in marker-assisted breeding and in the use 
of transgenic manipulations (Flachowsky et al., 2009; Jung and 
Muller, 2009).

Proteins Controlling Flowering Time

In  this  section  we  will  concentrate  on  what  is  known  in 
Arabidopsis  regarding  the  proteins  involved  in  setting  the 
switch  within  the  meristem,  from  formation  of  leaf  primor-
dia to formation of flower primordia. Similar roles of similar 
proteins were identified in other species such as rice, maize, 
and tomato, and we will mention a few examples. These pro-
teins act at four sites: leaf; phloem; meristem; and the initial 
flower primordium formed by it. The proteins that decide the 
identity  and  quantity  of  organs  within  the  flower,  known  as 
flower-organ identity proteins (Liu et al., 2009a), will not be 
discussed in this section.

388

vegetative, and to act as a source of a new round of meristems 
that will be induced in the next flowering cycle.

There is no current evidence that FT-like proteins are DNA 
binding  proteins,  so  they  likely  require  other  proteins  to  regu-
late  changes  in  gene  expression.  One  such  candidate  is  the 
bZIP  transcription  factor  FLOWERING  LOCUS  D  (FD), 
expressed  in  meristems  and  young  leaf  primordia  (anlagen), 
which interacts with FT-like proteins and in its absence, flower-
ing is delayed (Abe et al., 2005; Wigge et al., 2005). The fact 
that a mutation in FD does not mimic the severity in delay of 
flowering shown by loss-of-function of both FT and TSF (Wang 
et al., 2009a), and that this mutation does not completely sup-
press  early  flowering  caused  by  high  expression  of  FT  (Teper-
Bamnolker and Samach, 2005) suggests that, in the absence of 
FD, paralogs or proteins of a different nature help FT turn on 
the  flowering  switch.  Two  proteins  that  negate  FT  function  in 
what  seems  to  be  direct  protein–protein  interaction  are  FWA 
and 14-3-3. FWA is not usually expressed outside of the seed, 
but when it is, it causes a delay in flowering (Soppe et al., 2000; 
Ikeda et al., 2007). 14-3-3 proteins were shown to interact with 
FT-like proteins (Pnueli et al., 2001), and a role for such a pro-
tein in delaying flowering by interfering with FT entry into the 
nucleus was recently shown in rice (Purwestri et al., 2009).

TERMINAL  FLOWER1  (TFL1)  encodes  a  protein  similar 
to FT and TSF yet with an opposite role. TFL1 is expressed in 
the vegetative and inflorescence meristem, and in its absence 
plants  are  early  flowering  and  the  inflorescence  meristem  is 
rapidly  transformed  into  a  flower,  causing  a  terminal  flower 
phenotype  (Shannon  and  Meeks-Wagner,  1991).  The  trans-
formation of the inflorescence meristem into flower primordia 
is accompanied by the appearance in the meristem of flower-
primodia-specific  genes,  such  as  APETALA1  and  LEAFY 
(Liljegren  et  al.,  1999).  TFL1  over-expression  causes  late 
flowering (Ratcliffe et al., 1998; Kobayashi et al., 1999). The 
interaction  between  these  two  proteins  (FT  and  TFL1)  with 
negating affects has been nicely studied in tomato where the 
TFL1 ortholog is encoded by the SELF PRUNING (SP) gene 
(Pnueli et al., 1998; Krieger et al., 2010).

Transcription factors regulating FT

FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) and MADS 
AFFECTING FLOWERING (MAF) proteins
FLC  is  a  MADS-box  transcription  factor  expressed  in  both 
leaves  and  meristem,  that  represses  the  transition  to  flowering 
(Michaels  and  Amasino,  1999;  Sheldon  et  al.,  1999)  through 
repressing  FT  and  TSF  expression,  and  additionally  repress-
ing  expression  of  the  FT  partner  FD,  and  one  of  their  down-
stream targets SOC1 (see the next section). There is evidence 
for the presence of FLC on regulatory elements of these genes 
(Hepworth et al., 2002; Michaels et al., 2005; Yamaguchi et al., 
2005; Helliwell et al., 2006; Searle et al., 2006). In Arabidopsis, 
there  are  several  additional  genes  encoding  proteins  similar  to 
FLC,  named  together  they  become  the  MADS  AFFECTING 
FLOWERING (MAF) genes. Some of them have been shown 
to  repress  flowering,  likely  through  the  same  mechanism 
(Alexandre  and  Hennig,  2008).  Among  them,  FLOWERING 

Control of flowering

C H A P T E R   2 5

LOCUS M (FLM, also known as MAF1 and AGL27) was bet-
ter  characterized  (Ratcliffe  et  al.,  2001,  2003;  Scortecci  et  al., 
2001, 2003; Werner et al., 2005; Balasubramanian et al., 2006). 
FLM  loss-of-function  causes  early  flowering,  especially  in  short 
days.  Genetic  analysis  suggests  that  FLM  works  together  with 
an  additional  flower  repressor  (see  the  next  section),  SHORT 
VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP) as well as with SCHLAFMÜTZE 
(SMZ; Scortecci et al., 2003; Mathieu et al., 2009).

SHORT VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP)
This is an additional MADS-box transcription factor expressed 
in  both  leaves  and  meristem  (Hartmann  et  al.,  2000;  Jang  et 
al.,  2009)  that  represses  the  transition  to  flowering  through 
repressing FT, TSF, and SOC1 expression (Lee et al., 2007a; 
Li et al., 2008; Jang et al., 2009). Its levels in the apical mer-
istem  decrease  together  with  the  increase  in  the  FT  target, 
SOC1  levels  (Jang  et  al.,  2009).  Less  similar  in  sequence  to 
FLC  compared  to  members  of  the  MAF  clade,  there  is  both 
genetic  and  biochemical  evidence  that  repression  of  these 
genes is achieved by interaction of SVP and a member of the 
MAF  clade  (Scortecci  et  al.,  2003;  Fujiwara  et  al.,  2008).  In 
other words, in the absence of SVP, the MAF proteins are less 
capable of delaying flowering. There is quite a lot of evidence 
suggesting  that  the  FLC  clade  of  MADS-box  repressors  act 
through  repression  of  FT  transcription  through  CARG  box 
binding  sites  in  the  promoter  and  first  intron  (Searle  et  al., 
2006; Li et al., 2008; Adrian et al., 2010).

CONSTANS (CO)
This  directly  activates  FT  expression  (Samach  et  al.,  2000) 
in response to daylength in the phloem of leaves. Expression 
of  CONSTANS  is  affected  by  the  circadian  clock  (Suarez-
Lopez  et  al.,  2001),  whereas  protein  stability  is  affected  by 
light quality (Valverde et al., 2004). CONSTANS has a CCT 
domain found in many other proteins in plants. CO does not 
contain  a  known  DNA  binding  domain,  and  it  has  recently 
been proposed that it might interact with DNA through inter-
action with proteins that comprise the trimeric CCAAT bind-
ing  factor  also  known  as  Nuclear  Factor  Y  (NF-Y)  complex 
(Ben-Naim et al., 2006). Since the CCT domain shares simi-
larity to the DNA binding domain of one of the components, 
HAP2/NFYA (Wenkel et al., 2006; Distelfeld et al., 2009a), 
it is possible that CCT domain proteins like CO replace that 
component  in  the  complex  (Wenkel  et  al.,  2006).  Indeed 
members  of  the  NF-Y  complex  play  a  role  in  photoperiodic 
flowering,  and  without  members  of  this  complex,  the  abil-
ity  of  CO  to  cause  early  flowering  is  attenuated  (Cai  et  al., 
2007; Chen et al., 2007; Kumimoto et al., 2008, 2010; Tiwari  
et  al.,  2010).  On  the  other  hand  it  was  recently  made  clear 
that  CO  can  activate  FT  promoter  without  regions  contain-
ing a CCAAT domain, and a new unique cis-element that CO 
uses was identified in the FT promoter (Tiwari et al., 2010).

APETALA2-like flowering time repressors
Combined  loss-of-function  of  four  members  of  this  group, 
TARGET OF EAT1,2 (TOE1 and TOE2), SCHLAFMÜTZE 

389

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

(SMZ),  and  SCHNARCHZAPFEN  causes  early  flowering 
under  short  days  (Mathieu  et  al.,  2009).  Over-expression  of 
these genes causes late flowering (Schmid et al., 2003). This 
group of transcription factors is regulated by miR172 (see the 
next section). SMZ was shown to repress FT expression and 
this ability was dependent on the presence of the MAF pro-
tein  FLM  (Mathieu  et  al.,  2009).  Over-expression  of  SMZ 
could significantly reduce the ability of CO to upregulate FT. 
It is clear that aside from regulating FT expression, this pro-
tein regulates other meristem identity genes because it causes 
a change in inflorescence identity when expressed exclusively 
in the meristem (where FT transcription does not need to be 
regulated), and causes slight suppression of 35S:FT early flow-
ering  (Mathieu  et  al.,  2009).  It  is  likely  that  similar  to  FLC 
and FLM, it targets genes like SOC1.

TEMPRANILLO (TEM)
TEM1 and TEM2 are two RAV transcription factors that con-
tain two DNA-binding domains: an AP2/ERF and a B3 DNA-
binding  domain.  Loss-of-function  of  both  genes  causes  early 
flowering  and  abnormally  high  levels  of  FT,  whereas  over-
expression of these genes causes late flowering and low levels 
of  FT.  When  a  plant  contains  both  high  levels  of  TEM1  and 
of CO, there seems to be a competition between them rather 
than  an  epistasis  relationship  (Castillejo  and  Pelaz,  2008). 
TEM1 seems to regulate FT by binding the 5UTR of the gene.

Proteins parallel or downstream of FT

SOC1 and FRUITFULL
In  the  SAM,  FT  associates  with  the  b-ZIP  transcription  fac-
tor FD to mediate the floral transition and specify flower mer-
istems  by  activating  expression  of  MADS-box  genes  such  as 
SUPPRESSOR  OF  OVEREXPRESSION  OF  CONSTANS1 
(SOC1) and FRUITFULL (FUL; Abe et al., 2005; Wigge et al., 
2005;  Teper-Bamnolker  and  Samach,  2005;  Yoo  et  al.,  2005; 
Lee  and  Lee,  2010).  Expression  of  both  genes  in  the  meris-
tem occurs within 24 h from introducing receptive (20 days or 
older)  plants  to  an  inductive  photoperiod,  and  these  are  cur-
rently  the  earliest  known  changes  in  gene  expression  in  the 
meristem  (Menzel  et  al.,  1996;  Samach  et  al.,  2000;  Wang  et 
al., 2009a). A mutation in SOC1 causes late flowering (Samach 
et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2000) and in FUL causes slight late flow-
ering  (Ferrandiz  et  al.,  2000;  Teper-Bamnolker  and  Samach, 
2005;  Wang  et  al.,  2009a;).  A  plant  mutated  in  both  genes 
is  severely  late  flowering  (Melzer  et  al.,  2008;  Wang  et  al., 
2009a)  suggesting  that  they  act  in  parallel  to  promote  flower-
ing.  Expressing  FUL  in  the  meristem  can  partially  compensate 
for  the  loss  of  FT  (Wang  et  al.,  2009a).  It  seems  that  in  the 
absence  of  SOC1,  loss  of  FUL  in  the  apical  meristem  (using 
the  FD  promoter)  is  sufficient  to  delay  flowering.  Reversion 
to  vegetative  growth  after  the  floral  transition  suggests  that 
the  floral  transition  decision  in  the  double  mutant  is  unstable 
(Melzer  et  al.,  2008).  Combining  a  knockout  of  both  FT  and 
TSF (p35S:amiR-FT/TSF) the over-expression of miR156 in the 
apex (pFD:mir156), which (see the next section) should repress 
both  SOC1  and  FUL  expression,  caused  a  severe  delay  com-
pared to either construct. This might suggest that FT and TSF 

390

activate  genes  that  are  not  suppressed  by  pFD:mir156.  SOC1 
seems to have a dependence on an additional MADS-box tran-
scription factor, AGL24 (Michaels et al., 2003). AGL24 is itself 
a flowering promoter, the mutant being late flowering and over-
expression  causing  early  flowering.  Its  expression  increases  in 
the inflorescence meristem with the flowering transition and it 
is also expressed in flower primordia (Yu et al., 2002). Although 
AGL24  is  induced  by  vernalization,  similar  to  SOC1,  it  is  not 
repressed  by  FLC  (Michaels  et  al.,  2003).  Both  proteins  were 
shown to activate each other's expression (Liu et al., 2008a) and 
together with SVP to downregulate expression of SEPALLATA3 
(SEP3, see next section; Liu et al., 2009b), a gene upregulated 
by FT (Teper-Bamnolker and Samach, 2005). SOC1s entry into 
the nucleus was shown to be dependent on AGL24 (Lee et al., 
2008), and it was claimed that they both are needed to cause 
expression of LEAFY (see next section).

APETALA1 and LEAFY
The MADS-BOX transcription factor APETALA1 (AP1) tran-
script accumulates in flower primordia produced by the inflo-
rescence  meristem.  A  mutation  in  both  AP1  and  its  close 
paralog  CAULIFLOWER  (CAL)  causes  the 
inflorescence 
meristem  to  make  more  and  more  inflorescence  meristems 
instead  of  flower  primordia,  forming  a  cauliflower-like  struc-
ture (Kempin et al., 1995). The gene encoding AP1 is consid-
ered in many instances in the literature as a direct and major 
target  of  FT,  due  to  the  in  vitro  binding  assays  of  FD  (Wigge 
et al., 2005). Still, non-flowering time phenotype of its loss-of-
function both in wt and plants that over-express FT (Kardailsky 
et al., 1999) suggest it is not what FT uses to promote a change 
in  flowering  time.  In  addition,  AP1  comes  up  48 h  after  both 
FUL  and  SOC1  in  the  transition  to  long  days  (Wang  et  al., 
2009a),  and  unlike  these  other  FT  targets  it  is  expressed  in 
flower primordia and not the inflorescence meristem that forms 
these  primordia.  This  protein  is  required  to  establish  the  fate 
of the flower primordia, and in addition, to coordinately organ-
ize the expression of the flower organ identity genes. AP1 was 
recently  shown  to  repress  expression  of  flowering  promoters 
that are required to establish the inflorescence meristem, such 
as  SOC1  and  AGL24  (Liu  et  al.,  2007),  FD,  and  its  putative 
paralog FDP, as well as SQUAMOSA-PROMOTER BINDING 
PROTEIN LIKE 9, 15 (see the next section; Kaufmann et al., 
2010).  At  the  same  time  it  also  represses  expression  of  flow-
ering  repressor  SVP  (Liu  et  al.,  2007),  repressors  from  the 
APETALA2  family,  TEM1,2,  and  TFL1  (Kaufmann  et  al., 
2010).  It  is  interesting  that  AP1  downregulates  three  genes 
(SVP,  SOC1,  and  AGL24)  that  downregulate  SEP3,  and  that 
AP1 and SEP3 work together in a complex to induce expres-
sion of many class B genes (Kaufmann et al., 2010).

LEAFY  (LFY),  a  plant-specific  transcription  factor,  is  also 
required  to  establish  the  fate  of  the  flower  primordia.  It  is 
expressed  in  all  primordia,  yet  expression  is  much  higher  in 
flower  primordia.  In  its  absence,  primordia  arising  from  the 
inflorescence meristem have shoot-like phenotypes, and when 
over-expressed, 
inflorescence  meristems  become  terminal 
flowers. LFY directly activates the expression of AP1 (Wagner 
et  al.,  1999),  and  in  its  role  to  establish  the  fate  of  the 
flower  primordia,  AP1  activates  LFY  (Ferrandiz  et  al.,  2000; 
Kaufmann et al., 2010; Weigel et al., 1992), so there seems to 

be  a  mutual  backing  of  each  other's  expression.  In  an  ap1cal 
background,  the  knockout  of  LFY  causes  the  inflorescence 
meristem  to  make  “flowers”  containing  leaf-like  structures 
(Bowman et al., 1993). In the same background, the knockout 
of FUL causes the compound inflorescence meristem to make 
shoot-like structures (Ferrandiz et al., 2000). Over-expression 
of LEAFY can cause flower formation in ful ap1 cal (Ferrandiz 
et al., 2000) and in other non-flowering backgrounds described 
later,  suggesting  that  LFY  alone  can  establish  the  flowering 
program within a primordia if introduced at high enough lev-
els.  Many  transcription  factors  have  been  shown  to  regulate 
LFY  expression  besides  AP1.  This  includes  MADS-box  pro-
teins such as SOC1, SPL3, and MYBs (Blazquez et al., 2006).

SEPALLATA3 (SEP3)
SEP3  is  expressed  in  leaves  and  in  the  upper  portion  of  late 
stage  2  flower  primordia  (Smyth  et  al.,  1990;  Mandel  and 
Yanofsky, 1998). SEP3 is upregulated by FT in leaves (Teper-
Bamnolker  and  Samach,  2005).  It  does  not  switch  on  ear-
lier  in  the  inflorescence  meristem  because  it  is  repressed 
by  SOC1,  SVP,  and  AGL24  (Liu  et  al.,  2009b).  The  triple 
mutant  soc1  svp  agl24  has  flower  defects  that  can  be  attrib-
uted to miss-expression of SEP3 in the meristem and can be 
partially  overcome  by  adding  a  mutation  in  SEP3  (Liu  et  al., 
2009b). This repression involves recruitment of histone modi-
fication  enzymes  HDAC  and  LHP1/TFL2  (see  the  next  sec-
tion)  through  SAP18  (Liu  et  al.,  2009b).  The  accumulation 
of AP1 in stage 1 flowers enables the downregulation of SEP3 
repressors  in  the  flower  primordia.  Once  it  is  accumulated 
in  flower  primordia,  SEP3  seems  to  mediate  in  multimeric 
MADS-box  complexes  (Immink  et  al.,  2009).  It  functions 
together  with  AP1  to  regulate  many  flower  organ  iden-
tity  genes  as  well  as  repression  of  SOC1  (Pelaz  et  al.,  2001; 
Kaufmann  et  al.,  2009;  Liu  et  al.,  2009b;  Kaufmann  et  al., 
2010).

SQUAMOSA-PROMOTER BINDING PROTEIN 
LIKE (SPL)
Transcription  factors  belonging  to  the  SPL  family  play  a  con-
served  central  role  in  the  floral  transition.  This  has  not  been 
so obvious by studying single loss-of-function mutations, likely 
due to redundancy. Ten out of the 16 genes encoding this fam-
ily are regulated by microRNA156 (see the section miR156). 
Over-expression of miR156, supposedly affecting the 10 genes, 
causes  late  flowering  and  loss  of  apical  dominance  (Schwab 
et  al.,  2005;  Wang  et  al.,  2009a).  This  would  suggest  that  as 
a  group  these  genes  are  positive  regulators  of  flowering.  This 
is  also  evident  in  early  flowering  of  transgenic  plants  that 
overexpress  an  miR156-resistant  version  of  SPL3  (Gandikota 
et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2009a). Expressing this construct in 
the meristem and early primordia causes early flowering in the 
ft-10 mutant background. This suggests that SPL3 can activate 
flowering  time  genes  downstream  of  FT  in  the  apical  meris-
tem (Wang et al., 2009a). SPL3 seems to act as a direct tran-
scriptional  activator  of FUL  (Wang  et  al.,  2009a).  The  ability 
of  miR-resistant  SPL3  to  cause  early  flowering  is  significantly 
reduced  in  the  absence  of  FUL  or  FD  (Wang  et  al.,  2009a). 
Over-expression of miR156 is less late flowering in plants that 

Control of flowering

C H A P T E R   2 5

also  over-express  FUL  or  FD.  Still,  SPL3  targets  other  genes 
such  as  flower-primordia  markers  AP1  and  LFY.  SPL9  seems 
to  induce  expression  of  SOC1,  AGL42,  and  the  microRNA 
172 (Wu et al., 2009; see the next section). FD and SPLs are 
two types of transcription factors that seem to work partially 
in parallel to induce expression of flowering time genes. Indeed 
the loss of FD together with over-expression of miR156 causes 
an additive severe delay in flowering time (Wang et al., 2009a).

PENNYWISE and PENNYFOOLISH
Pennywise  (PNY)  and  Pennyfoolish  (PNF)  belong  to  the 
BEL1-like  (BELL)  subgroup  of  Three-Amino-Acid-Loop-
Extension  (TALE)  plant  homeobox  proteins  (Hamant  and 
Pautot,  2010).  BELL  and  KNOX  proteins  (the  second  sub-
group of TALE homeobox proteins) seem to regulate transcrip-
tion as heterodimers (Bellaoui et al., 2001; Smith et al., 2002). 
PNY and PNF seem to be required for at least part of FT func-
tion.  Like  FD,  they  are  expressed  in  the  shoot  apical  meris-
tem. A pny pnf plant does not flower under long days (Smith 
et  al.,  2004;  Kanrar  et  al.,  2008).  It  seems  that  the  double 
mutant  does  respond  to  photoperiodic  induction,  by  increas-
ing  shoot  apical  meristem  size  and  the  appearance  of  SOC1 
in the meristem, yet meristems do not reach the size of a wt 
inflorescence  meristem  and  do  not  produce  flower  primordia 
(lack of evocation, as described by the authors). Together with 
the lack of flower primordia, AP1, LFY, and CAL transcripts 
do not appear. As mentioned earlier, a triple mutant of ap1 lfy 
cal  produces  “flowers”  containing  leaf-like  organs  (Bowman 
et  al.,  1993),  so  that  pny  pnf  mutants  lack  something  else. 
The  ability  of  FT  over-expression  to  cause  early  flowering 
is  severely  perturbed  in  a  pny  pnf  background  (Kanrar  et  al., 
2008).  The  abnormally  high  levels  of  AP1  associated  with 
35S:FT  plants  (Teper-Bamnolker  and  Samach,  2005)  are  not 
present in the pny; pnf background, yet more immediate tar-
gets of FT were not tested (Kanrar et al., 2008). Interestingly, 
over-expression of LFY can cause flowering of the pny pnf non-
flowering  mutant  (Kanrar  et  al.,  2006)  as  it  caused  flowering 
of the ful ap1 cal triple non-flowering mutant (Ferrandiz et al., 
2000).  Although  the  pny  pnf  mutant  continues  to  form  leaf 
primordia  after  photoperiodic  induction,  these  primordia  are 
different from normal leaf primordia because they can take on 
the identity of a flower if high levels of LFY are introduced to 
them.

An additional BELL protein, ATH1, is required to maintain 
high  levels  of  FLC  expression,  so  that  in  its  absence  plants 
flower earlier (Proveniers et al., 2007). Ectopic expression of 
the  BELL  protein  BLH3  together  with  its  suggested  KNOX 
partner, SHOOT MERISTEMLESS (STM), caused very early 
flowering (Cole et al., 2006).

Processes Affecting Flowering  
Time Proteins

Histone modifications

DNA is not bare within the nucleus; it is wound around a his-
tone protein core (together called a nucleosome). The histone 

391

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

core is an octamer built from four different types of histones. 
Access to DNA by transcription factors is influenced by local-
ized  covalent  modifications  in  specific  histones.  The  involve-
ment of histone modifications in gene transcription has been 
well  documented  in  different  organisms.  Many  plant  com-
ponents  in  this  process  have  initially  been  revealed  through 
cloning  of  Arabidopsis  genes  that,  when  mutated,  cause 
a  flowering  time  phenotype.  The  reason  for  this  is  mostly 
because  the  chromatin  surrounding  the  gene  encoding  the 
flowering  repressor  FLC  undergoes  environmentally  induced 
changes  in  modifications  that  close  down  its  transcription. 
Any mutations that ruin the initial modifications or the envi-
ronment-dependent  modifications  will  therefore  lead  to  a 
change  in  flowering  time.  Once  these  genes  were  revealed, 
they were shown to be involved in chromatin modifications in 
other genes involved in flowering time as well as other proc-
esses (Veley and Michaels, 2008).

Modifications associated with active genes
Highly  transcribed  genes  normally  wrap  a  nucleosome  in 
which the N-terminal tails of histones 3 and 4 are acetylated. 
Deacetylation in the N-terminal tails of histones 3 and 4 can 
cause  a  reduction  in  gene  transcription.  In  Arabidopsis,  FVE 
partly mediates this deacetylation and its absence causes even 
higher  levels  of  expression  of  the  flowering  repressor  FLC. 
An  additional  histone  deacetylase  (HDAC),  named  HDA19, 
was shown to be linked to the repressors of SEP3 transcrip-
tion, SOC1, SVP, and AGL24 (mentioned previously) via the 
structural SAP18 protein (Liu et al., 2009b).

A  gene  that  is  actively  transcribed  is  likely  to  have  its  5 
region  wrapped  around  a  nucleosome  that  contains  a  histone 
3 that is trimethylated on Lysine 4 (H3K4me3). This happens 
when  RNA  polymerase  II  associates  with  two  protein  com-
plexes,  PAF1  (RNA  Polymerase  II  Associated  Factor  1)  and 
COMPASS (Complex Proteins Associated with Set1) contain-
ing an H3K4 methyltransferase known as SET1, that catalyzes 
H3K4 trimethylation. The FRIGIDA (FRI) protein is required 
in the enrichment of a COMPASS-like complex at FLC chro-
matin  (Jiang  et  al.,  2009).  Thus,  Arabidopsis  accessions  that 
have  an  active  FRI  allele  have  higher  expression  of  FLC  and 
obtain a winter-annual growth habit. Mutations in components 
of  the  PAF1  complex  cause  less  H3K4me3  around  certain 
genes, which is correlated with reduced transcription. Since a 
major target of this modification is FLC, these mutations cause 
accumulation of less FLC transcript and, as a result, are early 
flowering.  Mutations  in  H3K4  demethylases  (FLD,  LDL1, 
LDL2)  increase  H3K4me3  and  FLC  expression.  H3K36me2 
and  H3K36me3  modifications  are  also  associated  with  highly 
transcribed genes, including FLC. The balance between H3K4- 
and H3K36-specific histone methyl transferases versus H3K4- 
and  H3K36-specific  histone  demethylases  play  an  important 
part  in  regulation  of  gene  expression,  as  recently  shown  for 
FLC (Ko et al., 2010).

Another  mark  associated  with  transcriptional  activity  is 
monoubiquitination  of  histone  2B  (H2Bub1).  In  yeast,  this 
modification seems to be a prerequisite for H3K4me3, and in 
Arabidopsis it seems to promote the latter modification.

Histone  2A  can  be  replaced  by  a  variant  named  histone 
2A.Z, and this is performed by the conserved complex called 
SWR1c. The deposition of histone 2A.Z in chromatin of the 
FLC  gene  is  associated  with  high  FLC  expression  (Martin-
Trillo et al., 2006; Choi et al., 2007; Deal et al., 2007). It was 
recently  shown  that  the  presence  of  this  variant  in  chroma-
tin allows plants to react to changes in ambient temperatures 
(Kumar  and  Wigge,  2010).  Depletion  of  H2A.Z  from  many 
sites, including the FT promoter, was observed at higher tem-
peratures. Higher temperatures cause early flowering through 
increase  in  FT  expression  (Balasubramanian  et  al.,  2006). 
Unlike FLC, with FT the absence of this variant is correlated 
with higher transcription. Since FLC represses FT expression, 
the increase in FT expression may be due to depleted H2A.Z 
in FLC and other MAF loci.

Modifications associated with inactive genes
Silencing  short-interfering  RNAs  (siRNAs)  that  recognize 
sequence  in  the  3  region  of  the  FLC  gene  seems  to  recruit 
chromatin  modifying  components  capable  of 
increasing 
H3K9me2,  a  modification  associated  with  gene  repression 
(Swiezewski  et  al.,  2007).  There  is  also  evidence  for  RNA-
mediated  chromatin  silencing  mediated  by  FCA  and  FPA 
(Baurle  et  al.,  2007;  Veley  and  Michaels,  2008).  Methylation 
of arginine in tails of histones 3 and 4, for example symmetric 
methylation of arginine 3 on histone 4 (H4R3sme2), has been 
linked to gene silencing.

While  H3K4me3  is  a  mark  for  high  gene  expression,  tri-
methylation of Lysine 27 on histone 3 (H3K27me3) is a mark 
for reduced expression. In Arabidopsis, this modification was 
found in chromatin surrounding the regulatory regions of 4400 
genes (Zhang et al., 2007a). This modification is performed by 
a  conserved  protein  complex  known  as  Polycomb  repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2). LIKE HETEROCHROMATIN 1 (LHP1/
TFL2)  binds  this  modification  and  causes  transcriptional 
repression (Zhang et al., 2007b; Turck et al., 2007). Different 
regions of the same gene can wrap around histones that have 
opposing  modifications  (H3K4me3  versus  H3K27me3),  and 
their  relative  levels  seem  to  modulate  gene  expression,  as 
shown for FLC. Expression of FT and other MAF genes is also 
repressed  by  H3K27me3  modifications  (Jiang  et  al.,  2008). 
Recently, histone modifications on chromatin surrounding the 
FT gene have been documented (Adrian et al., 2010).

Gibberellin

Many  plant  hormones  are  associated  with  flowering  (Davis, 
2009), and here, for lack of space, I will concentrate on gib-
berellins  (GAs).  GAs  are  involved  in  flowering  of  many 
annuals  (King  et  al.,  2006)  and  perennials,  in  some  plants 
they  promote  flowering  while  in  other  plants  they  pre-
vent  flowering.  A  good  deal,  if  not  all  of  GA  function  is  to 
degrade  DELLA  transcription  factors  (Cheng  et  al.,  2004). 
That  is  why  plants  containing  non-degradable  versions  of 
DELLA  proteins  are  insensitive  to  GAs.  Other  hormones 
seem  to  also  affect  DELLA  proteins  (Achard  et  al.,  2007) 
so  that  DELLAs  are  at  the  summit  of  hormone  cross-talk. 

392

In  Arabidopsis  plants  grown  under  short  days  (no  external 
stimuli  induces  flowering  under  these  conditions),  there  is  a 
three-fold accumulation of sucrose and GA4 in the meristem 
together  or  perhaps  even  prior  to  the  induction  of  flowering 
(Eriksson et al., 2006). GA biosynthesis mutants or mutants 
that  are  insensitive  to  GA  do  not  flower  under  short  days 
(Reeves  and  Coupland,  2001).  In  published  flowering  time 
models, SOC1 appears as the major target of GA with regard 
to flowering time since expression of  SOC1 is influenced by 
GA,  and  plants  that  either  over-express  SOC1  or  contain  a 
mutation in SOC1 have a reduced response to GA (Moon et 
al.,  2003).  Still,  the  facts  seem  to  be  that  the  rise  in  SOC1 
expression  after  GA  application  takes  quite  a  while  and 
requires an additional protein (AGL24). Also, in the absence 
of SOC1, GA still strongly affects flowering time (Liu et al., 
2008a), and flowering time of plants that over-express SOC1 
is still delayed by a GA biosynthesis inhibitor (Blazquez et al., 
2002)  or  by  a  mutation  in  a  GA  biosynthesis  gene  (Moon 
et  al.,  2003).  How  DELLA  proteins  interact  with  flowering 
time genes is still an open question. As described in the next 
section,  DELLAs  downregulate  miR159  levels,  and  miR159 
might have a role in flowering time that is not yet clear.

MicroRNAs

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are a subgroup of siRNAs made by dif-
ferent organisms including plants (Voinnet, 2009). An miRNA 
gene includes a transcribed inverted repeat, so that the RNA 
forms an imperfect stem-loop foldback structure. Its original 
form (pri-miRNA) is edited by DICER LIKE-1 into a 20–24 
bp  dsRNA  structure.  This  structure  is  methylated  and  goes 
into  the  cytoplasm  where  it  associates  with  the  RISC  com-
plex. This complex will now use a specific region of the micro 
RNA as a template for recognizing mRNAs with complemen-
tary sequence within the cell. The complex will either “slice” 
these  mRNAs,  leading  to  their  degradation,  or  inhibit  their 
translation. The ARGONAUTE1 (AGO) protein is the main 
“slicer” in Arabidopsis.

Plants  reduce  the  action  of  a  certain  microRNA  family 
using  a  mechanism  recently  identified  and  termed  “target 
mimicry”  (Franco-Zorrilla  et  al.,  2007).  Instead  of  a  normal 
miRNA,  they  include  a  3-nucleotide  insertion  at  the  site 
where cleavage should have taken place. The fake miRNA is 
sequestered in the RISC complex causing a reduction in the 
normal activity of the specific miRNA family.

This mechanism can be artificially introduced into plants to 
study how plants behave without a certain family of miRNAs 
(Todesco  et  al.,  2010).  This  type  of  phenotype  was  difficult 
to assess using TDNA knockout procedures since they belong 
to families, and the genes are relatively small so that chances 
of getting a TDNA insertion in them is low. The other option 
was to express a target gene with a ruined microRNA target 
site (miR-resistant), yet in this case we are only fixing one tar-
get  and  expressing  it  in  abnormal  tissues  at  abnormal  levels. 
Using target mimicry, a clear developmental shoot phenotype 
was  observed  in  14  miRNA  families  out  of  the  73  families 
found  in  Arabidopsis  (Todesco  et  al.,  2010).  Among  these, 
several are involved in flowering time (Poethig, 2009).

Control of flowering

C H A P T E R   2 5

miR156
In  Arabidopsis,  miR156  levels  decrease  with  age,  while 
expression  of  the  genes  it  represses,  encoding  SPL  transcrip-
tion  factors  that  promote  flowering  (see  previous  section), 
increase  with  age  (Wang  et  al.,  2009a).  Over-expression  of 
miR156  causes  late  flowering  under  both  short  and  long  days 
in  Arabidopsis  (Schwab  et  al.,  2006;  Wu  and  Poethig,  2006; 
Wang et al., 2009a) as well as rice (Xie et al., 2006) and maize 
(Chuck  et  al.,  2007).  Target  mimicry  of  miR156  causes  early 
flowering under both daylengths (Wang et al., 2009a), although 
the  rate  of  leaf  production  is  much  slower  (Todesco  et  al., 
2010).  miR156  levels  decrease  with  age  while  miR172  lev-
els  increase  with  age  (Wu  et  al.,  2009).  miR156  levels  affect 
miR172 levels: over-expression of miR156 reduces miR172 and 
target mimicry of miR156 increases miR172 (Wu et al., 2009). 
The  effect  of  miR156  on  miR172  is  likely  through  SPL9  and 
SPL10,  which  promote  transcription  of  miR172  (Wu  et  al., 
2009).  Over-expressing  an  miR-resistant  SPL3  gene  causes 
early flowering under both daylengths (see previous section).

miR159
Over-expression of miR159 causes late flowering under short 
days in Arabidopsis (Achard et al., 2004). Plants were not late 
under long photoperiods. This suggests that long photoperiods 
directly overcome the delay caused by miR159 or circumvent 
this problem. Targets of miR159 are a subgroup of MYB tran-
scription factors, some associated with GA signal transduction 
(GAMYB).  DELLA  downregulates  miR159  levels  (Achard 
et  al.,  2004)  so  that  GA  dependent  DELLA  degradation 
increases miR159 levels and thus increases the degradation of 
its target MYBs, such as MYB33 in Arabidopsis. Interestingly, 
while  GA  promotes  flowering  under  SDs  in  Arabidopsis,  it 
increases the levels of miR159, which was shown here to delay 
flowering under SDs. No flowering time phenotype was attrib-
uted to target mimicry of miR159 (Todesco et al., 2010), sug-
gesting  that  the  role  of  this  miRNA  in  flowering  time  is  still 
obscure.

miR167
Target  mimicry  of  the  miR167  group  causes  late  flowering 
under  long  days  (Todesco  et  al.,  2010).  Its  known  targets, 
ARF6 and ARF8, were not shown to be involved in flowering 
time. The double mutant has miss-expressed KNOX-encoding 
genes, and many of its phenotypes can be mimicked by over-
expression of STM (Tabata et al., 2010). Recently, new targets 
have been identified for this and other miRNAs (Alves et al., 
2009), which might explain this discrepancy.

miR169
Mimicry  of  the  miR169  group  causes  plants  with  smaller 
leaves (Todesco et al., 2010). This microRNA targets HAP2/
NFYA encoding genes (Combier et al., 2006), which are part 
of  the  trimeric  CCAAT  binding  factor  complex  (Nuclear 
Factor Y). These genes seem to have a role in flowering time, 
perhaps in the ability of CO to activate FT (see previous sec-
tion).  Recently  this  microRNA  was  found  to  be  abundant  in 

393

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

phloem sap in Brassica (Buhtz et al., 2010), suggesting that it 
might travel and cause changes in flowering time.

Sugars

miR172
Over-expressing miR172 caused early flowering (Chen, 2004; 
Jung et al., 2007). Target mimicry of the miR172 group causes 
late flowering under long days (Todesco et al., 2010). Without 
miR172, its targets, APETALA2-like transcription factors, are 
expected to be highly expressed. These proteins were shown 
to  act  as  flowering  time  repressors  when  over-expressed 
(Schmid  et  al.,  2003;  Mathieu  et  al.,  2009),  as  they  work 
through transcriptional regulation of FT and TSF.

The circadian clock

The  circadian  clock  generates  near  24h  oscillations 
in 
gene  expression  that  persist  under  constant  environmen-
tal  conditions  (Mas  and  Yanovsky,  2009;  Harmer,  2009).  In 
Arabidopsis, about 25% of protein coding genes oscillate, and 
in addition oscillations in introns, intragenic regions, and non-
coding RNAs were recently detected (Hazen et al., 2009). In 
Arabidopsis,  and  possibly  in  any  other  plant  that  changes  in 
photoperiod  to  affect  flowering  time,  the  circadian  clock  sets 
the expression of CO (Suarez-Lopez et al., 2001), which even-
tually  activates  expression  of  FT  (Samach  et  al.,  2000).  Any 
mutation  in  genes  that  have  a  role  in  the  input,  the  central 
oscillator,  or  the  output  of  the  clock  may  affect  the  expres-
sion pattern of CO, and this will likely change flowering time 
(Samach and Coupland, 2000). One example is the CYCLING 
DOF  FACTORS  (CDFs)  shown  to  repress  CO  transcription 
(Imaizumi  et  al.,  2005;  Fornara  et  al.,  2009).  These  proteins 
are degraded by controlled proteolysis, and the use of control-
led  proteolysis  seems  to  be  central  to  clock  function  (Yakir 
et al., 2009) and CO stability. In addition, microRNAs such as 
miR167 (Hazen et al., 2009) also display a circadian rhythm, 
but  whether  this  affects  flowering  time  is  still  unknown.  We 
will  not  discuss  the  current  model  of  the  proteins  that  are 
thought  to  comprise  the  Arabidopsis  oscillator  (Mas  and 
Yanovsky, 2009) in this section. Interestingly, chromatin mod-
ifications  (previously  discussed)  play  an  important  role  in  the 
regulation of these oscillators

Regulated proteolysis

Regulated  proteolysis  is  required  for  plant  hormone  signal 
transduction  (Santner  and  Estelle,  2010),  circadian  clock 
function  (Mas  and  Yanovsky,  2009),  photoreceptor  function 
(Henriques et al., 2009), and for the stability of CO (Valverde 
et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2008b), among many other processes. 
Thus, any problem with this process is likely to affect flower-
ing  time.  It  is  clear  from  research  in  many  other  plants  that 
photoperiod  is  influenced  by  light  quality  (Zeevaart,  1962), 
and  the  molecular  basis  of  this  could  well  be  through  pro-
tein stability of the output from the clock as well as the clock 
itself,  which  relies  on  regulated  proteolysis  to  function  cor-
rectly (Henriques et al., 2009).

Signals  in  plants  can  use  the  phloem  to  travel  (Turgeon  and 
Wolf, 2009). Sucrose is the main sugar traveling in the phloem 
in Arabidopsis and many other plants. Its levels in the phloem 
sap increase during photoperiodic floral induction (Corbesier 
et  al.,  1998).  Also  under  non-inductive  short  days  there  is  a 
three-fold  accumulation  of  sucrose  in  the  meristem  together  
with  or  perhaps  even  prior  to  the  induction  of  flowering 
(Eriksson et al., 2006).

The  uploading  of  sucrose  into  the  companion  cells  of  the 
sieve  elements  requires  non-symplastic  movement  through 
plant  membranes  via  membrane  bound  sucrose  transport-
ers  (SUTs  or  SUCs).  Some  of  these  transporters  are  tissue 
specific  and  their  loss-of-function  can  have  different  effects 
including changes in flowering time (Sauer, 2007). In tobacco, 
reduction  of  NtSUT1  expression  reduces  loading  of  sucrose 
to  the  phloem  and  causes  delayed  flowering  (Burkle  et  al., 
1998),  whereas  reducing  levels  of  the  potato  sucrose  trans-
porter  SUT4  caused  an  earlier  increase  in  sucrose  levels  in 
the  meristem,  leading  to  earlier  flowering  (Chincinska  et  al., 
2008). In Arabidopsis, a mutation in the AtSUC9 gene encod-
ing  a  sucrose  transporter  caused  early  flowering  under  short 
days without affecting flowering time under long days (Sivitz 
et al., 2007).

Sucrose application in growth media can reduce flowering 
time  of  wild-type  plants  grown  under  suboptimal  photosyn-
thetic  conditions,  and  recover  the  late  flowering  phenotypes 
of mutations in genes that act upstream to FT (Roldan et al., 
1999).  Sucrose  could  not  rescue  mutations  in  FT  (Roldan 
et al., 1999), so it seems to require FT for its function, or per-
haps FT requires sucrose for its function. On the other hand, 
high  amounts  of  sucrose  application  in  growth  media  can 
delay  flowering  through  a  reduction  in  FT  expression  (Ohto 
et al., 2001). Recently sucrose was also shown to affect circa-
dian clock function (Knight et al., 2008).

Trehalose 6-phosphate (T6P) is a carbohydrate that seems 
to  be  made  by  many  different  plants  yet  at  very  low  abun-
dance,  thus  not  serving  as  a  carbon  source.  T6P  levels  seem 
to  correlate  with  sugar  availability,  so  in  other  words,  T6P 
level  can  serve  as  an  indicator  of  the  metabolic  state  of  the 
plant.  T6P  has  been  shown  to  regulate  sugar  utilization  and 
starch  metabolism  and  interacts  with  other  signaling  path-
ways, including those mediated by sugars and plant hormones 
(Ramon and Rolland, 2007; Smeekens et al., 2010). T6P has 
been  recently  shown  to  pass  on  the  signal  by  inhibiting  the 
activity  of  SNF1-Related  Protein  Kinase  1  (SnRK1),  which 
is part of the family of calcium-independent Ser/Thr protein 
kinases  (Zhang  et  al.,  2009).  SNF1  kinases  are  conserved  in 
eukaryotic cells and seem to have a universal role in mediating 
the reaction to a state of energy limitation and lack of carbon 
source. In such situations, the reaction mediated by SNF1s is 
activation of catabolic pathways and switching off biosynthe-
sis (proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids), cell growth, and cell 
proliferation (Hardie, 2007). In Arabidopsis, SnRK1 regulates 
close to 1000 genes partially through post-translational modi-
fication  of  a  subgroup  of  bZIP  transcription  factors  (Baena-
Gonzalez et al., 2007).

394

Genetic  evidence  has  recently  connected  the  T6P/SnRK1 
relationship  to  the  transition  to  flowering  in  Arabidopsis. 
Double  knockout  of  two  genes  encoding  SnRK1,  KIN10, 
and  KIN11  caused,  among  other  things,  a  phenotype  of  bolt-
ing  without  flower  formation.  Over-expression  of  KIN10 
caused late flowering under long days (Baena-Gonzalez, 2007). 
Trehalose-6-phosphate  Synthase  1  is  required  for  T6P  bio-
synthesis,  and  a  loss-of-function  mutation  in  this  gene  in 
Arabidopsis is embryo lethal (Eastmond et al., 2002; van Dijken 
et  al.,  2004).  Interestingly,  plants  containing  weak  alleles  are 
very  late  flowering  (Gomez  et  al.,  2010),  suggesting  that  this 
unique sugar is somehow required for flower induction. The fact 
that low levels of T6P and high levels of SnRK1 are associated 
with low sugar levels and that they cause the same late flower-
ing  phenotype  suggest  an  interesting  connection  worth  further 
investigation.

Developmental Decisions on  
Timing of Flowering

Juvenility

Juvenility  describes  the  phase  of  growth  following  germina-
tion from seed during which flowering does not occur and the 
bud meristem is not “competent” to respond to seasonal envi-
ronmental inductive cues, and hence remains vegetative. This 
could take days or years depending on the species. Juvenility 
in  most  trees  is  a  significant  impediment  in  breeding  pro-
grams.  For  example,  apple  seedlings  usually  remain  vegeta-
tive  for  7–9  years  after  seed  germination  (Flachowsky  et  al., 
2009),  while  olive  seedlings  remain  juvenile  for  4–5  years 
(Moreno-Alias et al., 2010). This can be reduced to a certain 
degree  by  growing  the  seedling  tree  under  “forcing”  condi-
tions, which accelerates its growth until reaching a minimum 
of main stem nodes (Aldwinckle, 1975; Santos-Antunes et al., 
2005). Still, it has been estimated that creating a new apple 
cultivar takes 15–20 years and costs approximately  €400,000 
(Flachowsky et al., 2009). Wild-type Arabidopsis can respond 
to  photoperiodic  induction  two  weeks  after  germination 
(Corbesier et al., 1996), so it does not seem like the perfect 
model system to study juvenility. Still, even in its short veg-
etative  stage  Arabidopsis  goes  through  a  phase  change  that 
can  be  studied  using  the  powerful  tools  of  molecular  genet-
ics (Poethig, 2003). The fact that there is conservation among 
distant species might suggest a common theme among plants. 
Indeed,  both  miR172  and  miR156  were  identified  in  apple 
(Gleave et al., 2008).

The  last  decade  provided  quite  a  lot  of  evidence  that  one 
can shorten the juvenile phase of trees by transgenic manipu-
lation of internal genes or ectopic expression of foreign genes 
(Flachowsky et al., 2009). Over-expression of the LEAFY gene 
from  Arabidopsis  was  shown  to  reduce  juvenility  in  aspen 
(Weigel  and  Nilsson,  1995),  poplar  (Rottmann  et  al.,  2000), 
and  citrus  (Pena  et  al.,  2001).  Over-expression  of  FT  in  cit-
rus,  poplar,  pear,  and  apple  (Endo  et  al.,  2005;  Bohlenius  et 
al.,  2006;  Hsu  et  al.,  2006;  Matsuda  et  al.,  2009;  Kotoda  et 
al.,  2010)  or  downregulation  of  a  gene  encoding  a  TFL1-like 

Control of flowering

C H A P T E R   2 5

protein  in  apple  (Kotoda  et  al.,  2006)  significantly  reduced 
the  juvenile  phase.  Introducing  a  construct  over-expressing  a 
FUL ortholog gene from silver birch caused very early flower-
ing of apple trees (Flachowsky et al., 2007). There are ongoing 
attempts to over-express FT in apple using inducible promot-
ers and making use of its ability to move in the phloem, so that 
transgenic  root-stocks  can  be  used  to  overcome  juvenility  of 
one-year-seedlings through grafting (Flachowsky et al., 2009).

Seasonality

Photoperiod
An increase in daylength causes a gradual accumulation of the 
CONSTANS protein in leaves (Putterill et al., 1995; Suarez-
Lopez et al., 2001; Valverde et al., 2004). Arabidopsis plants 
flower much earlier, and after producing fewer leaves in long 
days (16/8 hours of light/dark cycles) compared to short days 
(8/16).  This  is  mainly  because  under  long  photoperiods  high 
levels of the CONSTANS (CO) transcription factor accumu-
late  and  can  directly  activate  FT  and  TSF  expression  in  the 
vascular  bundles  of  the  leaves,  leading  to  movement  of  these 
proteins  via  the  phloem  to  the  SAM.  The  meeting  between 
FT  and  FD  proteins  is  assumed  to  occur  in  the  shoot  apical 
meristem.

In  rice  and  Pharbitis  nil,  flowering  is  promoted  by  short 
days,  and  indeed  FT-encoding  genes  accumulate  in  short 
days (Hayama et al., 2003, 2007). In rice, a gene encoding a 
CO-like  protein  acts  to  delay  flowering,  which  might  be  the 
reason why FT-like genes accumulate under short days (Yano 
et al., 2000, 2001).

In  passion  fruit  (Passiflora  edulis)  after  a  relatively  short 
juvenile  period  (a  few  months),  the  shoot  apical  meristem 
produces  new  leaf  primordia  that  also  contain  a  subtending 
meristem  that  produces  both  a  flower  and  a  tendril  (Nave 
et  al.,  2010).  As  long  as  environmental  conditions  and  the 
state of the vine allow growth of the apical meristem, flower 
primordia will be present in every node. Flower development 
depends  on  long  photoperiods  so  that  photoperiods  below 
11 h  will  cause  the  flower  to  stop  developing  after  formation 
of sepals. So seasonality in passion fruit is not caused by con-
trolling  flower  induction,  but  by  controlling  flower  develop-
ment.  In  passion  fruit,  similar  to  other  photoperiodic  plants, 
photoperiod is perceived by the leaves and a positive signal can 
move through graft junctions. So passion fruit and Arabidopsis 
share the existence of a mobile signal originating from the leaf 
under  inductive  photoperiods,  yet  in  Arabidopsis  it  controls 
flower induction, while in passion fruit it controls flower devel-
opment. The nature of the signal in passion fruit is unknown.

Vernalization
To  avoid  flowering  before  the  end  of  winter,  several  annuals 
will  not  flower  before  experiencing  a  certain  long  period  of 
cold  temperatures.  The  mechanism  is  relatively  well  under-
stood  at  the  molecular  level  in  Arabidopsis  (Amasino,  2010; 
Crevillen and Dean, 2010). Explaining this mechanism is sim-
plified when concentrating on FLC, the transcriptional repres-
sor  of  FT,  and  what  we  already  learned  regarding  histone 

395

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

modifications  in  the  FLC  chromatin.  Still,  it  is  quite  clear 
that other MAF genes are involved, and that they do not only 
repress FT.

The  expression  of  FLC  is  downregulated  by  cold  tem-
perature  through  stable  changes 
in  chromatin  structure 
caused by specific changes in histone modification at the FLC 
locus  from  modifications  that  cause  high  expression,  such  as 
H3K4me3,  to  those  that  cause  repression  of  transcription, 
such  as  H3K27me3.  One  trigger  for  this  change  seems  to  be 
the  VERNALIZATION  INSENSITIVE  3  (VIN3)  gene  (Sung 
and  Amasino,  2004),  whose  expression  increases  in  response 
to  prolonged  low-temperature  exposure.  Its  product,  a  plant 
homeo domain  finger  (PHD  Finger)  containing  protein,  inter-
acts  with  two  additional  similar  proteins  (Greb  et  al.,  2007) 
and the PRC2 complex described in the next section, in prox-
imity  to  FLC.  This  complex  causes  H3K27me3  enrichment 
(De  Lucia  et  al.,  2008).  Histone  modifications  surrounding 
FLC  in  response  to  vernalization  do  not  mirror  changes  in  all 
genes.  Those  that  are  activated  show  opposite  modifications 
(Schonrock et al., 2006; Adrian et al., 2010). Without dividing 
cells vernalization does not occur (Wellensiek, 1962), and this is 
likely because the memory of winter, characterized by contin-
ued H3K27me3 modifications surrounding FLC, is only main-
tained  in  dividing  cells  (Finnegan  and  Dennis,  2007).  Natural 
variation  in  the  need  for  vernalization  to  cause  flowering  was 
found  to  be  caused  by  inactive  alleles  of  FRIGIDA  (Johanson 
et  al.,  2000)  (described  previously)  and  FLC.  In  Arabidopsis 
ecotypes  respond  to  vernalization,  which  relieves  FLC  tran-
scriptional  repression  in  both  the  leaf  (FT)  and  meristem 
(SOC1 and FD) allowing photoperiod-dependent production of 
systemic signals in the leaves and conferring competence on the 
meristem to respond to these signals (Searle et al., 2006).

In  the  perennial  Arabidopsis  alpina,  the  memory  of  win-
ter  is  only  temporary,  so  that  expression  of  the  gene  encod-
ing  the  FLC  ortholog  PERPETUAL  FLOWERING  1  (PEP1) 
goes down in winter and up again in warm temperatures. This 
seems  to  provide  a  mechanism  to  avoid  all  meristems  from 
becoming reproductive, thus allowing this species to be poly-
carpic (Wang et al., 2009b).

In both wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) and barley (Hordeum 
vulgare  L.)  there  are  cultivars  with  a  vernalization  require-
ment and cultivars with no such requirement. This provided 
a  means  to  identify  genes  responsible  for  natural  variation 
in  the  vernalization  response  (Distelfeld  et  al.,  2009).  Here, 
the  FT  wheat  ortholog  is  called  VRN3  (Yan  et  al.,  2006), 
and it seems to act together with an FD-like protein (Li and 
Dubcovsky,  2008).  One  of  their  targets  is  a  gene  encoding  a 
protein  similar  to  FUL  and  AP1,  called  VRN1  in  wheat  and 
BM5 in barley (Yan et al., 2003). In response to vernalization, 
the FUL-encoding gene is upregulated, and in some cultivars 
this gene is upregulated without vernalization, which seems to 
be enough for vernalization not to occur. Repressors of flow-
ering  include  a  CCT-domain  protein  (a  domain  found  in  the 
activator  of  flowering  CO)  called  VRN2  (Yan  et  al.,  2004; 
Trevaskis et al., 2006) and a gene encoding an SVP-like pro-
tein called TaVRT-2 (Kane et al., 2005), both downregulated 
by  vernalization.  What  seems  different  between  Arabidopsis 
and  wheat  is  that  so  far  no  connection  to  chromatin  modifi-
cations has been made, and that the FUL-like gene seems to 

be upregulated by vernalization independently and before the 
FT-like gene.

Olives  (Olea  europa  L)  need  to  be  exposed  to  cold  tem-
peratures  before  they  will  initiate  flowering  (Hartmann  and 
Porlingis, 1953, 1957; Hartmann and Whisler, 1975). For some 
cultivars, exposure to 12°C was sufficient to induce flowering. 
Thus, similar to Arabidopsis, wheat, and barley, olives respond 
to  a  vernalization  treatment.  Flowering  (anthesis)  occurs  in 
spring  (~April  in  Israel,  mid-May  in  Italy/Spain;  Orlandi  et 
al., 2005). Using a microscope, the first clear sight of an inflo-
rescence meristem is in early February (Andreini et al., 2008;  
Kitsaki  et  al.,  2010).  The  first  sign  of  sepal  formation  occurs 
two months before full bloom (Hartmann, 1951). Before that 
there are many reports of changes in the meristem shape, RNA 
accumulation, production of additional primordia, and accumu-
lation of different hormones (Andreini et al., 2008), yet none 
of  these  “signs”  clearly  distinguish  an  inflorescence  producing 
bud  from  a  vegetative  bud.  Genes  that  might  be  involved  in 
flowering time have not been characterized in olive.

Warm ambient temperatures
While  Arabidopsis  plants  grown  under  short  photoperiods 
flower late, raising temperatures to 25–30°C in the same pho-
toperiod  cause  a  significant  reduction  in  time  and  number  
of leaves until flowering (Balasubramanian et al., 2006; Paltiel 
et al., 2006). This early flowering is dependent on the FT gene 
(Balasubramanian et al., 2006), and FLM seems to be involved 
in  this  process.  An  Arabidopsis  accession  from  Niederzenz 
(Nd) has a natural deletion of this gene and this accession flow-
ers  relatively  early  under  short  days,  and  increasing  tempera-
tures cause a reduced early flowering response (Werner et al., 
2005; Balasubramanian et al., 2006).

SVP  was  also  associated  with  flowering  dependent  on 
ambient temperatures, when comparing long day plants under 
16  or  23°C  (Lee  et  al.,  2007a).  In  the  Col-0  ecotype,  16°C 
causes delayed flowering and in the svp early flowering mutant 
it does not. Late flowering is likely due to high levels of FLC 
(Lee  et  al.,  2007a)  or  other  MAF-like  proteins  that  require 
SVP  to  cause  late  flowering  (see  previous  section).  In  plants 
that  have  high  FLC  levels  at  23°C,  SVP  functions  as  a  per-
fect  flowering  repressor  under  this  temperature  as  well  (Lee 
et  al.,  2007b).  It  is  likely  that  SVP  is  a  partner  to  proteins 
affected  by  changes  in  ambient  temperatures,  thus  its  pres-
ence is required to observe temperature-dependent changes in 
flowering time.

Apples  (Malus    domestica  Borkh.)  flower  (anthesis)  in 
the  spring  and  the  meristem  that  made  these  flowers  went 
through  a  transition  11  months  beforehand,  in  the  begin-
ning  of  summer.  The  first  structural  evidence  of  change  in 
meristem  fate  is  the  transition  of  the  apical  meristem  from 
a  flattened  to  a  domed  shape,  with  an  intermediate  stage  in 
which the meristem apex is broadened (Kotoda et al., 2000; 
Foster et al., 2003). These microscopic morphological changes 
during  flower  initiation  occur,  depending  on  cultivar,  bud 
type,  climatic  conditions,  and  tree  factors,  3–6  weeks  after  
full  bloom  of  the  previous  cycle.  Thus,  unlike  olives,  apples 
do not require exposure to cold temperatures to form flower 
primordia.  Unlike  olives,  apples  are  deciduous  and  enter 

396

dormancy  before  winter  (with  inflorescences  present)  and 
require chilling for bud break.

Several studies on gene expression in apple have provided 
a very nice picture on the expression of flowering time genes 
during the transition to flowering (Sung et al., 1999; Kotoda 
et al., 2000, 2010; Wada et al., 2002; Kotoda and Wada, 2005; 
Hattasch et al., 2008). When looking at expression within the 
apical bud of a fruit-bearing shoot (induction late June, forma-
tion of flower buds mid-July), expression of one FT-encoding 
gene increases during June and peaks in mid-July, and expres-
sion  of  an  AP1-encoding  gene  starts  rising  a  few  weeks  later 
(Kotoda  et  al.,  2010).  SOC1  and  FUL-encoding  genes  were 
transcribed  in  mid-July  (Hattasch  et  al.,  2008).  Additional 
genes  that  showed  expected  expression  patterns  were  those 
encoding  for  TFL1  and  LFY-like  proteins.  Transgenic  apples 
that  have  high  levels  of  the  apple  FT  gene  are  early  flower-
ing  (skipping  juvenility)  and  express  high  levels  of  the  FUL, 
SOC1,  and  AP1  encoding  genes  (Kotoda  et  al.,  2010).  This 
basically shows that the transition to flowering in apple shares 
many  components  with  Arabidopsis.  What  may  be  different 
is the site in which FT is transcribed, and whether or not FT 
needs to travel in apple, or is made where it acts.

Reproductive cycles and alternate bearing

Within the first six months after giving birth, breastfeeding new 
mothers have a severely reduced chance of becoming pregnant 
(Howie and McNeily, 1982). In cucumbers, a seed containing 
cucumber fruit inhibits fruit set of the following flowers on the 
branch. In olives, a tree that produces many fruit in a certain 
year  will  likely  produce  very  little  fruit  in  the  following  year. 
These are diverse examples of reproductive cycles that occur in 
nature that are not due to environmental input, but to an inter-
nal rhythm, which clearly makes sense. Reproduction requires 
many  resources  and  for  an  organism  to  produce  offspring  in 
more than one cycle it needs to spread its reproduction cycles 
to enable sufficient time for recuperation. It is unknown why 
alternate bearing is more pronounced is some species.

In  curcubits,  for  example  cucumber  and  cantaloupe 
(Bangerth, 1989; Valantin et al., 1999), the first fruits that set 
normally  inhibit  subsequent  flower  maturation  and  fruit  set. 
This effect is pronounced in seed containing fruit, and there is 
genetic variation in the intensity of the response.

With perennial plants that reach anthesis at a specific time 
of year (normally spring), in many cases a high crop load will 
reduce the number of flowers appearing in the following year. 
Thus, a biannual program of reproduction occurs, also known as 
alternate bearing (Goldschmidt and Monselise, 1972; Jonkers, 
1979; Monselise and Goldschmidt, 1982; Lavee, 2007).

The  size  of  fruit  on  a  tree  with  a  heavy  load  is  normally 
smaller and prices are normally reduced due to high supply and 
reduced quality. The “off ” year is financially damaging because 
there is very little yield to sell. An entire fruit-growing region 
may enter this cycle causing a phenomenon of huge economi-
cal importance. This is a great financial burden on the growers 
and  on  the  chain  of  production  and  sales.  Thus,  this  rhythm 
that plants keep to protect themselves negates the interests of 
growers, and requires a solution that will satisfy both sides.

Control of flowering

C H A P T E R   2 5

In  alternate  bearing  fruit  crops,  high  fruit  load  has  two 
major effects: a reduction of vegetative growth (and as a result, 
a reduction in new formed buds); and a reduced chance of a 
formed bud to go through a transition to flowering. The tim-
ing of the transition to flowering is very different among fruit 
trees,  even  if  anthesis  occurs  at  the  same  time;  for  example, 
while  apples  and  olives  reach  anthesis  in  spring,  in  apples, 
inflorescences  differentiate  10  months  before  anthesis, 
whereas in olives this happens only a couple of months before 
anthesis.  The  ability  of  fruit  to  repress  growth  and  induction 
occurs in both species.

A  year  with  low  yield  can  occur  due  to  two  different 
events,  one  internal  and  one  external.  The  internal  event  is 
the high crop load from the previous year, and this is a mech-
anism  that  is  tree  specific  and  in  several  examples,  branch 
specific. Meaning, in olive, one can remove all flowers from a 
branch of a tree that is full of flowers, and as a result, the next 
year, that branch will be the only branch with high amounts 
of flowers. An external event is some environmental or man-
agement  catastrophe  that  caused  the  loss  of  all  fruit  in  the 
orchard, or in a growing area. This will be an “off ” year and 
many genotypes of fruit trees will respond to this by flowering 
profusely in the following year, creating a cycle of bearing that 
is  regional.  This  cycle  can  be  stopped  or  subdued  by  farmer 
intervention if flowers or young fruit are removed early dur-
ing their development (Dennis, 2000; Tromp, 2000) or by an 
additional catastrophe that can cause two “off ” years in a row. 
Non-alternate-bearing  genotypes  seem  to  have  the  ability  to 
avoid  profuse  flowering  after  an  “off ”  year  and  by  doing  so, 
they  avoid  entering  into  this  cycle.  They  can  be  just  as  sen-
sitive  as  alternate-bearing  genotypes  to  catastrophes  such  as 
weather conditions that cause all flowers to abscise, or condi-
tions that reduce pollination or fertilization, or conditions that 
enhance fruit drop early in development.

How  does  fruit  load  affect  flower  induction  in  nearby 
buds?  Fruits  are  important  for  creating  the  inhibitor  signal 
since removal of fruit early on in development can allow high 
induction  (Fernandez-Escobar  et  al.,  1992;  Bangerth,  2000; 
Al-Shdiefat  and  Qrunfleh,  2006;  Dag  et  al.,  2010).  In  some 
species, there is evidence that the presence of seed is necessary 
for inhibiting induction. Killing an embryo in olive seemed to 
have reduced the inhibiting signal (Stutte and Martin, 1986). 
The  “Spencer  Seedless”  apple  cultivar  has  apetalous  parthen-
ocarpy  and  can  be  either  seedless  or  with  seeds  if  pollinated. 
Non-pollinated  parthenocarpic  fruit  cause  no  reduction  in 
return  bloom,  while  pollinated  seed-containing  fruit  reduced 
flowering  in  shoots  of  certain  length  (Chan  and  Cain,  1967; 
Neilsen and Dennis, 2000). In longer shoots seed did not have 
an inhibitory affect. It could be that the influence of seeds in 
this  case  is  indirect.  Diffusates  from  seeded  and  non-seeded 
fruit were compared for GA activity (Hoad, 1978) and higher 
levels of GA activity were identified in diffusates from seeded 
fruit.  Still,  in  citrus,  there  are  seedless  cultivars  that  have  a 
strong  alternate  bearing  tendency.  Many  have  shown  changes 
in hormone and sugar content in diffusates coming out of the 
pedicels of fruit (Marino and Greene, 1981; Bangerth, 1989). 
On  the  other  hand,  transport  in  the  phloem  is  supposed  to 
be  in  the  opposite  direction,  from  stem  to  fruit  (Oparka  and 
Cruz,  2000;  Turgeon  and  Wolf,  2009).  Whether  there  is  a 

397

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

signal coming out of fruit (Bangerth, 2009), or whether some 
other  source  organ,  like  the  leaf,  can  perceive  fruit  load  and 
send out a signal is still an unknown. It is clear that hormone 
and  carbohydrate  levels  are  different  in  a  branch  with  heavy 
fruit load compared to a branch without fruit (Li et al., 2003; 
Baktir  et  al.,  2004),  yet  which  hormone/carbohydrate,  if  any, 
is responsible for lack of flower induction is still unknown. It 
is also unknown in what way the signal(s) interact(s) with the 
mechanism of flower induction.

25.1).  Our  initial  knowledge  came  mostly  from  the  model 
plant  Arabidopsis.  Our  current  knowledge  of  mechanisms 
in  other  plants  provides  many  examples  in  which  different 
species  have  been  using  the  same  set  of  proteins  to  create  a 
unique timing mechanism that answers their specific needs. It 
has taken plants a very long time to reach the perfect control 
of these processes. It still remains a challenge to intervene in 
this process, for the good of mankind, without causing dam-
age to the plant, and long-term damage to agriculture.

Summary

Acknowledgment

Man  has  been  attempting  to  manipulate  time  of  flowering 
of plants for agricultural purposes for quite a long time. Our 
current  understanding  of  the  mechanisms  plant  use  provides 
us  with  better  tools  to  intervene  in  these  processes  (Figure 

Research  in  the  AS  lab  is  supported  by  German  Israeli 
Project  Cooperation  (DIP  project  H3.1)  the  Israeli  Science 
Foundation (grant no. 1464/07) and the Chief Scientist of the 
Israeli Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.

References

Abe, M., Kobayashi, Y., Yamamoto, S., Daimon, 
Y., Yamaguchi, A., & Ikeda, Y., et al. (2005). 
FD, a bZIP protein mediating signals from 
the floral pathway integrator FT at the shoot 
apex. Science, 309, 1052–1056.

Achard, P., Baghour, M., Chapple, A.,  

Hedden, P., Van Der Straeten, D., & 
Genschik, P., et al. (2007). The plant stress 
hormone ethylene controls floral transition 
via DELLA-dependent regulation of floral 
meristem-identity genes. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences United States 
of America, 104, 6484–6489.

Achard, P., Herr, A., Baulcombe, D. C., & 

Harberd, N. P. (2004). Modulation of floral 
development by a gibberellin-regulated 
microRNA. Development, 131, 3357–3365.

Adrian, J., Farrona, S., Reimer, J. J.,  

Albani, M. C., Coupland, G., & Turck, F.  
(2010). cis-regulatory elements and 
chromatin state coordinately control 
temporal and spatial expression of 
FLOWERING LOCUS T in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Cell, 22, 1425–1440.

Al-Shdiefat, S. M., & Qrunfleh, M. M. (2006). 
Effect of fruit thinning on endogenous plant 
hormones and bearing of the olive (Olea 
europaea L.) nabali muhasa. Jordan Journal 
of Agricultural Sciences, 2, 348–360.
Albani, M. C., & Coupland, G. (2010). 

Comparative analysis of flowering in annual 
and perennial plants. Current topics in 
developmental biology. In M. C. P. (2010). 
Timmermans (Ed.), Plant Development (Vol. 
91, pp. 323–348). Academic Press.

Aldwinckle, H. S. (1975). Flowering of apple 
seedlings 16–20 months after germination. 
Horticultural. Science, 10, 124–126.

Alexandre, C. M., & Hennig, L. (2008). FLC 

or not FLC: The other side of vernalization. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 59, 1127–
1135.

Alves, L., Jr., Niemeier, S., Hauenschild, A., 

Rehmsmeier, M., & Merkle, T. (2009). 
Comprehensive prediction of novel 
microRNA targets in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 37, 4010–4021.

398

Amasino, R. (2010). Seasonal and 

developmental timing of flowering. The 
Plant Journal, 61, 1001–1013.

Andreini, L., Bartolini, S., Guivarc’h, A., 
Chriqui, D., & Vitagliano, C. (2008). 
Histological and immunohistochemical 
studies on flower induction in the olive 
tree (Olea europaea L.). Plant Biology, 10, 
588–595.

Baena-Gonzalez, E., Rolland, F., Thevelein, J. M., 

& Sheen, J. (2007). A central integrator of 
transcription networks in plant stress and 
energy signalling. Nature, 448, 938–942.

Baktir, I., Ulger, S., Kaynak, L., & Himelrick, 

D. G. (2004). Relationship of seasonal 
changes in endogenous plant hormones and 
alternate bearing of olive trees. HortScience: 
A Publication of the American Society for 
Horticultural Science, 39, 987–990.

Balasubramanian, S., Sureshkumar, S., Lempe, J.,  

& Weigel, D. (2006). Potent induction of 
Arabidopsis thaliana flowering by elevated 
growth temperature. PLoS Genetics, 2, 
e106.

Bangerth, F. (1989). Dominace among fruit/

sinks and the search for a correlative signal. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 76, 608–614.

Bangerth, F. (2000). Abscission and thinning 

of young fruit and their regulation by 
plant hormones and bioregulators. In Plant 
growth regulation, (Vol. 31, pp. 43–59). 
Netherlands: Springer.

Bangerth, K. F. (2009). Floral induction in 

mature, perennial angiosperm fruit trees: 
Similarities and discrepancies with annual/
biennial plants and the involvement of plant 
hormones. Scientia Horticulturae, 122, 
153–163.

Baurle, I., Smith, L., Baulcombe, D. C., & 

Dean, C. (2007). Widespread role for the 
flowering-time regulators FCA and FPA in 
RNA-mediated chromatin silencing. Science, 
318, 109–112.

Bellaoui, M., Pidkowich, M. S., Samach, A., 

Kushalappa, K., Kohalmi, S. E., & Modrusan, 
Z., et al. (2001). The Arabidopsis BELL1 
and KNOX TALE homeodomain proteins 

interact through a domain conserved 
between plants and animals. Plant Cell, 13, 
2455–2470.

Ben-Naim, O., Eshed, R., Parnis, A., Teper-

Bamnolker, P., Shalit, A., & Coupland, G.,  
et al. (2006). The CCAAT binding factor can 
mediate between CONSTANS-like proteins 
and DNA. Plant Journal, 46, 462–476.

Blazquez, M. A., Ferrandiz, C., Madueno, F., & 
Parcy, F. (2006). How floral meristems are 
built. Plant Molecular Biology, 60, 855–870.

Blazquez, M. A., Trenor, M., & Weigel, D. 

(2002). Independent control of gibberellin 
biosynthesis and flowering time by the 
circadian clock in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiology, 130, 1770–1775.

Bohlenius, H., Huang, T., Charbonnel- 

Campaa, L., Brunner, A. M., Jansson, S.,  
& Strauss, S. H., et al. (2006). CO/FT  
regulatory module controls timing of 
flowering and seasonal growth cessation in 
trees. Science, 312, 1040–1043.

Bowman, J. L., Alvarez, J., Weigel, D., 
Meyerowitz, E. M., & Smyth, D. R. 
(1993). Control of flower development 
in Arabidopsis thaliana by APETALA1 
and interacting genes. Development, 119, 
721–743.

Buhtz, A., Pieritz, J., Springer, F., Kehr, J. 

(2010). Phloem small RNAs, nutrient stress 
responses, and systemic mobility. BMC 
Plant Biology 10, 64.

Burkle, L., Hibberd, J. M., Quick, W. P., Kuhn, C.,  

Hirner, B., & Frommer, W. B. (1998). 
The H-sucrose cotransporter NtSUT1 
is essential for sugar export from tobacco 
leaves. Plant Physiology, 118, 59–68.

Cai, X., Ballif, J., Endo, S., Davis, E., Liang, M.,  

& Chen, D., et al. (2007). A putative 
CCAAT-binding transcription factor is a 
regulator of flowering timing in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Physiology, 145, 98–105.

Castillejo, C., & Pelaz, S. (2008). The balance 

between CONSTANS and TEMPRANILLO 
activities determines FT expression to 
trigger flowering. Current Biology, 18, 
1338–1343.

Chailakhyan, M. K. (1936). New facts in 

support of the hormonal theory of plant 
development. C. R. (Dokl.) Academy of 
Sciences USSR, 13, 79–83.

Chan, B. G., & Cain, J. C. (1967). The effect 
of seed formation on subsequent flowering 
in apple. Proceedings of the American Society 
for Horticultural Science, 91, 63–67.

Chen, K.-Y., Cong, B., Wing, R., Vrebalov, J.,  

& Tanksley, S. D. (2007). Changes in 
regulation of a transcription factor lead to 
autogamy in cultivated tomatoes. Science, 
318, 643–645.

Chen, X. (2004). A MicroRNA as a 

translational repressor of APETALA2 in 
Arabidopsis flower development. Science, 
303, 2022–2025.

Cheng, H., Qin, L., Lee, S., Fu, X., Richards, 

D. E., & Cao, D., et al. (2004). Gibberellin 
regulates Arabidopsis floral development 
via suppression of DELLA protein function. 
Development, 131, 1055–1064.

Chincinska, I. A., Liesche, J., Krugel, U., 

Michalska, J., Geigenberger, P., & Grimm, B., 
et al. (2008). Sucrose transporter StSUT4 
from potato affects flowering, tuberization, 
and shade avoidance response. Plant 
Physiology, 146, 515–528.

Choi, K., Park, C., Lee, J., Oh, M., Noh, B., 
& Lee, I. (2007). Arabidopsis homologs 
of components of the SWR1 complex 
regulate flowering and plant development. 
Development, 134, 1931–1941.

Chuck, G., Cigan, A. M., Saeteurn, K., &  

Hake, S. (2007). The heterochronic 
maize mutant Corngrass1 results from 
overexpression of a tandem microRNA. 
Nature Genetics, 39, 544–549.

Cole, M., Nolte, C., & Werr, W. (2006). 

Nuclear import of the transcription factor 
SHOOT MERISTEMLESS depends on 
heterodimerization with BLH proteins 
expressed in discrete sub-domains of the 
shoot apical meristem of Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Nucleic Acids Research, 34, 
1281–1292.

Combier, J. P., Frugier, F., de Billy, F., Boualem, 

A., El-Yahyaoui, F., & Moreau, S., et al. 
(2006). MtHAP2-1 is a key transcriptional 
regulator of symbiotic nodule development 
regulated by microRNA169 in Medicago 
truncatula. Genes & Development 20.
Corbesier, L., Gadisseur, I., Silvestre, G., 

Jacqmard, A., & Bernier, G. (1996). Design 
in Arabidopsis thaliana of a synchronous 
system of floral induction by one long day. 
Plant Journal, 9, 947–952.

Corbesier, L., Lejeune, P., & Bernier, G. (1998). 

The role of carbohydrates in the induction 
of flowering in Arabidopsis thaliana: 
Comparison between the wild type and a 
starchless mutant. Planta, 206, 131–137.
Corbesier, L., Vincent, C., Jang, S., Fornara, 
F., Fan, Q., & Searle, I., et al. (2007). FT 
protein movement contributes to long-
distance signaling in floral induction of 
Arabidopsis. Science, 316, 1030–1033.

Crevillen, P., & Dean, C. (2010). Regulation 

of the floral repressor gene FLC: The 
complexity of transcription in a chromatin 
context. Current Opinion in Plant Biology.

Dag, A., Bustan, A., Avni, A., Tzipori, I., 
Lavee, S., & Riov, J. (2010). Timing of 

Control of flowering

C H A P T E R   2 5

fruit removal affects concurrent vegetative 
growth and subsequent return bloom and 
yield in olive (Olea europaea L.). Scientia 
Horticulturae, 123, 469–472.

Davis, S. J. (2009). Integrating hormones into 
the floral-transition pathway of Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Plant, Cell & Environment, 32, 
1201–1210.

De Lucia, F., Crevillen, P., Jones, A. M.,  
Greb, T., & Dean, C. (2008). A PHD-
polycomb repressive complex 2 triggers 
the epigenetic silencing of FLC during 
vernalization. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 105, 16831–16836.

Deal, R. B., Topp, C. N., McKinney, E. C., 
& Meagher, R. B. (2007). Repression of 
flowering in Arabidopsis requires activation of 
FLOWERING LOCUS C expression by the 
histone variant H2A.Z. Plant Cell, 19, 74–83.

Dennis, F. G. J. (2000). The history of fruit 

thinning. In Plant Growth Regulation, 
(Vol. 31, pp. 1–16). Netherlands: Springer.

Distelfeld, A., Li, C., & Dubcovsky, J. (2009b). 
Regulation of flowering in temperate cereals. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 12, 
178–184.

Distelfeld, A., Tranquilli, G., Li, C., Yan, L.,  

& Dubcovsky, J. (2009a). Genetic and 
molecular characterization of the VRN2 loci 
in tetraploid wheat. Plant Physiology, 149, 
245–257.

Eastmond, P. J., van Dijken, A. J., Spielman, M.,  
Kerr, A., Tissier, A. F., & Dickinson, H. G., 
et al. (2002). Trehalose-6-phosphate 
synthase 1, which catalyses the first step 
in trehalose synthesis, is essential for 
Arabidopsis embryo maturation. Plant 
Journal, 29, 225–235.

Endo, T., Shimada, T., Fujii, H., Kobayashi, Y., 

Araki, T., & Omura, M. (2005). Ectopic 
expression of an FT homolog from citrus 
confers an early flowering phenotype on 
trifoliate orange (Poncirus trifoliata L. Raf.). 
Transgenic Research, 14, 703–712.

Eriksson, S., Bohlenius, H., Moritz, T., & 
Nilsson, O. (2006). GA4 is the active 
gibberellin in the regulation of LEAFY 
transcription and Arabidopsis floral 
initiation. Plant Cell, 18, 2172–2181.

Fernandez-Escobar, R., Benlloch, M., Navarro, 

C., & Martin, G. C. (1992). The time of 
floral induction in the olive. Journal of the 
American Society for Horticultural Science, 
117, 304–307.

Ferrandiz, C., Gu, Q., Martienssen, R., 

& Yanofsky, M. F. (2000). Redundant 
regulation of meristem identity and plant 
architecture by FRUITFULL, APETALA1 
and CAULIFLOWER. Development, 127, 
725–734.

Finnegan, E. J., & Dennis, E. S. (2007). 
Vernalization-induced trimethylation 
of histone H3 lysine 27 at FLC is not 
maintained in mitotically quiescent cells. 
Current Biology, 17, 1978–1983.

Flachowsky, H., Hanke, M., Peil, A., Strauss, 
S. H., & Fladung, M. (2009). A review on 
transgenic approaches to accelerate breeding 
of woody plants. Plant Breeding, 128, 
217–226.

Flachowsky, H., Peil, A., Sopanen, T., Elo, A., 

& Hanke, V. (2007). Overexpression of 

BpMADS4 from silver birch (Betula pendula 
Roth.) induces early-flowering in apple 
(Malus domestica Borkh.). Plant Breeding, 
126, 137–145.

Fornara, F., Panigrahi, K. C., Gissot, L., 

Sauerbrunn, N., Ruhl, M., & Jarillo, J. A.,  
et al. (2009). Arabidopsis DOF transcription 
factors act redundantly to reduce 
CONSTANS expression and are essential 
for a photoperiodic flowering response. 
Developmental Cell, 17, 75–86.

Foster, T., Johnston, R., & Seleznyova, A. 

(2003). A morphological and quantitative 
characterization of early floral development 
in apple (Malus x domestica Borkh.). Annals 
of Botany, 92, 199–206.

Franco-Zorrilla, J. M., Valli, A., Todesco, M., 

Mateos, I., Puga, M. I., & Rubio-Somoza, I.,  
et al. (2007). Target mimicry provides a 
new mechanism for regulation of microRNA 
activity. Nature Genetics, 39, 1033–1037.

Fujiwara, S., Oda, A., Yoshida, R., Niinuma, K.,  

Miyata, K., & Tomozoe, Y., et al. (2008). 
Circadian clock proteins LHY and CCA1 
regulate SVP protein accumulation to 
control flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 
20, 2960–2971.

Gandikota, M., Birkenbihl, R. P., Hohmann, S.,  

Cardon, G. H., Saedler, H., & Huijser, P. 
(2007). The miRNA156/157 recognition 
element in the 3' UTR of the Arabidopsis 
SBP box gene SPL3 prevents early flowering 
by translational inhibition in seedlings. The 
Plant Journal, 49, 683–693.

Garner, W. W., & Allard, H. A. (1920). Effects 

of the relative length of night and day and 
other factors of the environment on growth 
and reproduction in plants. Journal of 
Agricultural Research, 18, 553–606.
Gleave, A., Ampomah-Dwamena, C.,  

Berthold, S., Dejnoprat, S., Karunairetnam, 
S., & Nain, B., et al. (2008). Identification 
and characterisation of primary microRNAs 
from apple (Malus domestica cv. Royal Gala) 
expressed sequence tags. Tree Genetics & 
Genomes, 4, 343–358.

Goldschmidt, E. E., & Monselise, S. P. (1972). 

Hormonal control of flowering in Citrus 
and some other woody perennials. In  
D. J. Carr (Ed.), Plant growth substances 
(pp. 758–766). Berlin/Heidelberg/New 
York: Springer-Verlag.

Gomez, L. D., Gilday, A., Feil, R., Lunn, J. E., 
& Graham, I. A. (2010). AtTPS1-mediated 
trehalose 6-phosphate synthesis is essential 
for embryogenic and vegetative growth and 
responsiveness to ABA in germinating seeds 
and stomatal guard cells. The Plant Journal, 
64, 1–13.

Greb, T., Mylne, J. S., Crevillen, P., Geraldo, 

N., An, H., & Gendall, A. R., et al. (2007). 
The PHD finger protein VRN5 functions in 
the epigenetic silencing of Arabidopsis FLC. 
Current Biology, 17, 73–78.

Hamant, O., & Pautot, V. (2010). Plant 

development: A TALE story. Comptes 
Rendus Biologies Dיveloppement vיgיtatif 
des plantes, Georges Pelletier, Jean-Franיois 
Morot-Gaudy, 333, 371–381.

Hardie, D. G. (2007). AMP-activated/SNF1 

protein kinases: Conserved guardians of 
cellular energy. Nature Reviews Molecular 
Cell Biology, 8, 774–785.

399

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Harmer, S. L. (2009). The circadian system 
in higher plants. Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 60, 357–377.

Hartmann, H., & Porlingis, I. (1953). Effect of 
winter chilling on fruitfulness and vegetative 
growth in the olive. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences United States 
of America, 62, 184–190.

Hartmann, H., & Porlingis, I. (1957). Effect 

of different amounts of winter chilling 
on fruitfulness of several olive varieties. 
Botanical Gazette, 119, 102–104.

Hartmann, H. T. (1951). Time of floral 

differentiation of the olive in California. 
Botanical Gazette, 112, 323–327.

Hartmann, H. T., & Whisler, J. E. (1975). 

Flower production in olive as influenced by 
various chilling temperature regimes. Journal 
of the American Society for Horticultural 
Science, 100, 670–674.

Hartmann, U., Hohmann, S., Nettesheim, K.,  

Wisman, E., Saedler, H., & Huijser, P. 
(2000). Molecular cloning of SVP: A 
negative regulator of the floral transition  
in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 21, 351–360.
Hattasch, C., Flachowsky, H., Kapturska, D.,  

& Hanke, M. -V. (2008). Isolation of 
flowering genes and seasonal changes in their 
transcript levels related to flower induction 
and initiation in apple (Malus domestica). 
Tree Physiology, 28, 1459–1466.

Hayama, R., Agashe, B., Luley, E., King, R., & 
Coupland, G. (2007). A circadian rhythm 
set by dusk determines the expression of FT 
homologs and the short-day photoperiodic 
flowering response in Pharbitis. Plant Cell, 
19, 2988–3000.

Hayama, R., Yokoi, S., Tamaki, S., Yano, M., 
& Shimamoto, K. (2003). Adaptation of 
photoperiodic control pathways produces 
short-day flowering in rice. Nature, 422, 
719–722.

Hazen, S. P., Naef, F., Quisel, T., Gendron, J. M.,  

Chen, H., & Ecker, J. R., et al. (2009). 
Exploring the transcriptional landscape of 
plant circadian rhythms using genome tiling 
arrays. Genome Biology, 10, R17.

Helliwell, C. A., Wood, C. C., Robertson, M.,  
James Peacock, W., & Dennis, E. S. (2006). 
The Arabidopsis FLC protein interacts 
directly in vivo with SOC1 and FT 
chromatin and is part of a high-molecular-
weight protein complex. The Plant Journal, 
46, 183–192.

Henriques, R., Jang, I. C., & Chua, N. H. 
(2009). Regulated proteolysis in light-
related signaling pathways. Current Opinion 
in Plant Biology, 12, 49–56.

Hepworth, S. R., Valverde, F., Ravenscroft, 

D., Mouradov, A., & Coupland, G. (2002). 
Antagonistic regulation of flowering-time 
gene SOC1 by CONSTANS and FLC via 
separate promoter motifs. The EMBO 
Journal, 21, 4327–4337.

Hoad, G. V. (1978). The role of seed derived 

hormones in the control of flowering in 
apple. Acta Horticulturae, 80, 93–103.

Howie, P. W., & McNeily, A. S. (1982). Effect 
of breast-feeding patterns on human birth 
intervals. Journal of Reproduction & Fertility, 
65, 545–557.

Hsu, C. Y., Liu, Y., Luthe, D. S., & Yuceer, C. 

(2006). Poplar FT2 shortens the juvenile 

400

phase and promotes seasonal flowering. 
Plant Cell, 18, 1846–1861.

Ikeda, Y., Kobayashi, Y., Yamaguchi, A., Abe, 

M., & Araki, T. (2007). Molecular basis 
of late-flowering phenotype caused by 
dominant epi-alleles of the FWA locus in 
Arabidopsis. Plant and Cell Physiology, 48, 
205–220.

Imaizumi, T., Schultz, T. F., Harmon, F. G., 

Ho, L. A., & Kay, S. A. (2005). FKF1 F-box 
protein mediates cyclic degradation of a 
repressor of CONSTANS in Arabidopsis. 
Science, 309, 293–297.

Immink, R. G., Tonaco, I. A., de Folter, S.,  

Shchennikova, A., van Dijk, A. D., 
& Busscher-Lange, J., et al. (2009). 
SEPALLATA3: The “glue” for MADS box 
transcription factor complex formation. 
Genome Biology, 10, R24.

Ishikawa, R., Tamaki, S., Yokoi, S., Inagaki, N., 
Shinomura, T., & Takano, M., et al. (2005). 
Suppression of the floral activator Hd3a is 
the principal cause of the night break effect 
in rice. Plant Cell, 17, 3326–3336.

Jaeger, K. E., & Wigge, P. A. (2007). FT protein 

acts as a long-range signal in Arabidopsis. 
Current Biology, 17, 1050–1054.

Jang, S., Torti, S., & Coupland, G. (2009). 

Genetic and spatial interactions between 
FT, TSF and SVP during the early stages 
of floral induction in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Journal, 60, 614–625.

Jiang, D., Gu, X., & He, Y. (2009). 

Establishment of the winter-annual growth 
habit via FRIGIDA-mediated histone 
methylation at FLOWERING LOCUS C in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 21, 1733–1746.

Jiang, D., Wang, Y., & He, Y. (2008). 

Repression of FLOWERING LOCUS 
C and FLOWERING LOCUS T by the 
Arabidopsis Polycomb repressive complex 2 
components. PLoS One, 3, e3404.

Johanson, U., West, J., Lister, C., Michaels, S., 
Amasino, R., & Dean, C. (2000). Molecular 
analysis of FRIGIDA, a major determinant 
of natural variation in Arabidopsis flowering 
time. Science, 290, 344–347.

Jonkers, H. (1979). Biennial bearing in apple 

and pear: A literature survey. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 11, 303–317.

Jung, C., & Muller, A. E. (2009). Flowering 

time control and applications in plant 
breeding. Trends in Plant Science, 14, 
563–573.

Jung, J. H., Seo, Y. H., Seo, P. J., Reyes, J. L., 
Yun, J., & Chua, N. H., et al. (2007). The 
GIGANTEA-regulated microRNA172 
mediates photoperiodic flowering 
independent of CONSTANS in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Cell, 19, 2736–2748.

Kane, N. A., Danyluk, J., Tardif, G., Ouellet, F., 
Laliberte, J. F., & Limin, A. E., et al. (2005). 
TaVRT-2, a member of the StMADS-11 
clade of flowering repressors, is regulated 
by vernalization and photoperiod in wheat. 
Plant Physiology, 138, 2354–2363.

Kanrar, S., Bhattacharya, M., Arthur, B., 
Courtier, J., & Smith, H. M. (2008). 
Regulatory networks that function to specify 
flower meristems require the function 
of homeobox genes PENNYWISE and 
POUND-FOOLISH in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Journal, 54, 924–937.

Kanrar, S., Onguka, O., & Smith, H. M. (2006). 

Arabidopsis inflorescence architecture 
requires the activities of KNOX-BELL 
homeodomain heterodimers. Planta, 224, 
1163–1173.

Kardailsky, I., Shukla, V. K., Ahn, J. H., 

Dagenais, N., Christensen, S. K., & Nguyen, 
J. T., et al. (1999). Activation tagging of the 
floral inducer FT. Science, 286, 1962–1965.

Kaufmann, K., Muino, J. M., Jauregui, R., 

Airoldi, C. A., Smaczniak, C., & Krajewski, P.,  
et al. (2009). Target genes of the MADS 
transcription factor SEPALLATA3: 
Integration of developmental and hormonal 
pathways in the Arabidopsis flower. PLoS 
Biology, 7, e1000090.

Kaufmann, K., Wellmer, F., Muino, J. M., 

Ferrier, T., Wuest, S. E., & Kumar, V., et al. 
(2010). Orchestration of floral initiation by 
APETALA1. Science, 328, 85–89.

Kempin, S. A., Savidge, B., & Yanofsky, M. F. 
(1995). Molecular basis of the cauliflower 
phenotype in Arabidopsis. Science, 267, 
522–525.

King, R. W., Moritz, T., Evans, L. T., Martin, J.,  

Andersen, C. H., & Blundell, C., et al. 
(2006). Regulation of flowering in the long-
day grass Lolium temulentum by gibberellins 
and the FLOWERING LOCUS T gene. 
Plant Physiology, 141, 498–507.

Kitsaki, C. K., Andreadis, E., & Bouranis, D. L.  

(2010). Developmental events in 
differentiating floral buds of four olive (Olea 
europaea L.) cultivars during late winter to 
early spring. Flora, 205, 599–607.

Klebs, G. (1918). Uber die Blutentbildung bei 
Sempervivum. Flora (Jena), 128, 111–112.

Knight, H., Thomson, A. J. W., &  

McWatters, H. G. (2008). SENSITIVE 
TO FREEZING6 Integrates cellular and 
environmental inputs to the plant circadian 
Clock. Plant Physiology, 148, 293–303.

Knott, J. E. (1934). Effect of localized 

photoperiod on spinach. Proceedings of 
the Society for Horticultural Science, 31, 
152–154.

Ko, J. H., Mitina, I., Tamada, Y., Hyun, Y., 

Choi, Y., & Amasino, R. M., et al. (2010). 
Growth habit determination by the 
balance of histone methylation activities in 
Arabidopsis. Embo Journal, 29, 3208–3215.
Kobayashi, Y., Kaya, H., Goto, K., Iwabuchi, M.,  

& Araki, T. (1999). A pair of related 
genes with antagonistic roles in mediating 
flowering signals. Science, 286, 1960–1962.

Kojima, S., Takahashi, Y., Kobayashi, Y.,  

Monna, L., Sasaki, T., & Araki, T., et al.  
(2002). Hd3a, a rice ortholog of the 
Arabidopsis FT Gene, promotes transition 
to flowering downstream of Hd1 under 
short-day conditions. Plant and Cell 
Physiology, 43, 1096–1105.

Koornneef, M., Hanhart, C. J., & van der Veen, 

J. H. (1991). A genetic and physiological 
analysis of late flowering mutants in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Molecular & General 
Genetics, 229, 57–66.

Kotoda, N., Hayashi, H., Suzuki, M., Igarashi, M.,  

Hatsuyama, Y., & Kidou, S. -i., et al. 
(2010). Molecular characterization of 
FLOWERING LOCUS T-like genes of apple 
(Malus domestica Borkh.). Plant and Cell 
Physiology, 51, 561–575.

Control of flowering

C H A P T E R   2 5

Kotoda, N., Iwanami, H., Takahashi, S., & 

Abe, K. (2006). Antisense expression of 
MdTFL1, a TFL1-like gene, reduces the 
juvenile phase in apple. Journal of the 
American Society Horticultural Science, 131, 
74–81.

Kotoda, N., & Wada, M. (2005). MdTFL1, 

a TFL1-like gene of apple, retards 
the transition from the vegetative 
to reproductive phase in transgenic 
Arabidopsis. Plant Science, 168, 95–104.

Kotoda, N., Wada, M., Komori, S., Kidou, S. -i.,  

Abe, K., & Masuda, T., et al. (2000). 
Expression pattern of homologues of floral 
meristem identity genes LFY and AP1 
during flower development in apple. Journal 
of the American Society for Horticultural 
Science, 125, 398–403.

Krieger, U., Lippman, Z. B., & Zamir, D. 
(2010). The flowering gene SINGLE 
FLOWER TRUSS drives heterosis for yield 
in tomato. Nature Genetics, 42, 459–463.
Kumar, S. V., & Wigge, P. A. (2010). H2A.Z-

containing nucleosomes mediate the 
thermosensory response in Arabidopsis. 
Cell, 140, 136–147.

Kumimoto, R. W., Adam, L., Hymus, G. J., 

Repetti, P. P., Reuber, T. L., & Marion, 
C. M., et al. (2008). The nuclear factor 
Y subunits NF-YB2 and NF-YB3 play 
additive roles in the promotion of flowering 
by inductive long-day photoperiods in 
Arabidopsis. Planta, 228, 709–723.

Kumimoto, R. W., Zhang, Y., Siefers, N., & 

Holt, B. F. (2010). NF-YC3, NF-YC4 and 
NF-YC9 are required for CONSTANS-
mediated, photoperiod-dependent flowering 
in Arabidopsis thaliana. The Plant Journal, 
63, 379–391.

Lavee, S. (2007). Biennial bearing in olive 

(Olea europea). Annales Ser Hist Nat, 17, 
101–112.

Lee, H., Suh, S. S., Park, E., Cho, E., Ahn, 
J. H., & Kim, S. G., et al. (2000). The 
AGAMOUS-LIKE 20 MADS domain 
protein integrates floral inductive pathways 
in Arabidopsis. Genes & Development, 14, 
2366–2376.

Lee, J., & Lee, I. (2010). Regulation and 

function of SOC1, a flowering pathway 
integrator. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
61, 2247–2254.

Lee, J., Oh, M., Park, H., & Lee, I. (2008). 

SOC1 translocated to the nucleus by 
interaction with AGL24 directly regulates 
leafy. Plant Journal, 55, 832–843.

Lee, J. H., Park, S. H., Lee, J. S., & Ahn, J. H.  

(2007b). A conserved role of SHORT 
VEGETATIVE PHASE (SVP) in controlling 
flowering time of Brassica plants. Biochimica 
et Biophysica Acta, 1769, 455–461.

Lee, J. H., Yoo, S. J., Park, S. H., Hwang, I., 
Lee, J. S., & Ahn, J. H. (2007b). Role of 
SVP in the control of flowering time by 
ambient temperature in Arabidopsis. Genes 
& Development, 21, 397–402.

Li, C., & Dubcovsky, J. (2008). Wheat FT 

protein regulates VRN1 transcription 
through interactions with FDL2. Plant 
Journal, 55, 543–554.

Li, C. Y., Weiss, D., & Goldschmidt, E. E. 
(2003). Girdling affects carbohydrate-
related gene expression in leaves, bark 

and roots of alternate-bearing citrus trees. 
Annals of Botany (London), 92, 137–143.
Li, D., Liu, C., Shen, L., Wu, Y., Chen, H., & 
Robertson, M., et al. (2008). A repressor 
complex governs the integration of flowering 
signals in Arabidopsis. Developmental Cell, 
15, 110–120.

Lifschitz, E., Eviatar, T., Rozman, A., Shalit, A.,  

Goldshmidt, A., & Amsellem, Z., et al. 
(2006). The tomato FT ortholog triggers 
systemic signals that regulate growth 
and flowering and substitute for diverse 
environmental stimuli. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 6398–6403.
Liljegren, S. J., Gustafson-Brown, C., 

Pinyopich, A., Ditta, G. S., & Yanofsky, M. F.  
(1999). Interactions among APETALA1, 
LEAFY, and TERMINAL FLOWER1 specify 
meristem fate. Plant Cell, 11, 1007–1018.
Lin, M. -K., Belanger, H., Lee, Y. -J., Varkonyi-
Gasic, E., Taoka, K. -I., & Miura, E., et al. 
(2007). FLOWERING LOCUS T protein 
may act as the long-distance florigenic signal 
in the cucurbits. Plant Cell, 19, 1488–1506.

Liu, C., Chen, H., Er, H. L., Soo, H. M., 

Kumar, P. P., & Han, J. -H., et al. (2008a). 
Direct interaction of AGL24 and SOC1 
integrates flowering signals in Arabidopsis. 
Development, 135, 1481–1491.

Liu, C., Thong, Z., & Yu, H. (2009a). Coming 

into bloom: The specification of floral 
meristems. Development, 136, 3379–3391.

Liu, C., Xi, W., Shen, L., Tan, C., & Yu, H. 

(2009b). Regulation of floral patterning by 
flowering time genes. Developmental Cell, 
16, 711–722.

Liu, C., Zhou, J., Bracha-Drori, K., Yalovsky, S.,  

Ito, T., & Yu, H. (2007). Specification 
of Arabidopsis floral meristem identity 
by repression of flowering time genes. 
Development, 134, 1901–1910.

Liu, L. -J., Zhang, Y. -C., Li, Q. -H., Sang, 

Y., Mao, J., & Lian, H. -L., et al. (2008b). 
COP1-mediated ubiquitination of 
CONSTANS is implicated in cryptochrome 
regulation of flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Cell, 20, 292–306.

Mandel, M. A., & Yanofsky, M. F. (1998). 

The Arabidopsis AGL9 MADS box gene is 
expressed in young flower primordia. Sexual 
Plant Reproduction, 11, 22–28.

Marino, F., & Greene, D. W. (1981). 

Involvement of gibberellins in the biennial 
bearing of “Early Mcintosh” apples. Journal 
of the American Society for Horticultural 
Science, 106, 593–596.

Martin-Trillo, M., Lazaro, A., Poethig, R. S.,  

Gomez-Mena, C., Pineiro, M. A., & 
Martinez-Zapater, J. M., et al. (2006). 
EARLY IN SHORT DAYS 1 (ESD1) 
encodes ACTIN-RELATED PROTEIN 
6 (AtARP6), a putative component of 
chromatin remodelling complexes that 
positively regulates FLC accumulation in 
Arabidopsis. Development, 133, 1241–1252.

Mas, P., & Yanovsky, M. J. (2009). Time for 

circadian rhythms: Plants get synchronized. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 12, 
574–579.

Mathieu, J., Warthmann, N., Kuttner, F., & 

Schmid, M. (2007). Export of FT protein 
from phloem companion cells is sufficient 

for floral induction in Arabidopsis. Current 
Biology, 17, 1055–1060.

Mathieu, J., Yant, L. J., Murdter, F., Kuttner, F.,  

& Schmid, M. (2009). Repression of 
flowering by the miR172 target SMZ. PLoS 
Biology, 7, e1000148.

Matsuda, N., Ikeda, K., Kurosaka, M., 

Takashina, T., Isuzugawa, K., & Endo, T., 
et al. (2009). Early flowering phenotype 
in transgenic pears (Pyrus communis l.) 
expressing the cift gene. Journal of the 
Japanese Society for Horticultural Science, 
78, 410–416.

Melzer, S., Lens, F., Gennen, J., Vanneste, S.,  

Rohde, A., & Beeckman, T. (2008). 
Flowering-time genes modulate meristem 
determinacy and growth form in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Nature Genetics, 40, 1489–1492.

Menzel, G., Apel, K., & Melzer, S. (1996). 

Identification of two MADS box genes that 
are expressed in the apical meristem of the 
long-day plant Sinapis alba in transition to 
flowering. Plant Journal, 9, 399–408.
Michaels, S. D. (2009). Flowering time 

regulation produces much fruit. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 12, 75–80.

Michaels, S. D., & Amasino, R. M. (1999). 

FLOWERING LOCUS C encodes a 
novel MADS domain protein that acts as 
a repressor of flowering. Plant Cell, 11, 
949–956.

Michaels, S. D., Ditta, G., Gustafson-Brown, C.,  

Pelaz, S., Yanofsky, M., & Amasino, R. M.  
(2003). AGL24 acts as a promoter of 
flowering in Arabidopsis and is positively 
regulated by vernalization. Plant Journal, 33, 
867–874.

Michaels, S. D., Himelblau, E., Kim, S. Y., 

Schomburg, F. M., & Amasino, R. M. 
(2005). Integration of flowering signals in 
winter-annual Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 
137, 149–156.

Monselise, S. P., & Goldschmidt, E. E. (1982). 

Alternate bearing in fruit trees. Horticultural 
Reviews, 4, 128–173.

Moon, J., Suh, S. S., Lee, H., Choi, K. R., 

Hong, C. B., & Paek, N. C., et al. (2003). 
The SOC1 MADS-box gene integrates 
vernalization and gibberellin signals for 
flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 35, 
613–623.

Moreno-Alias, I., Rapoport, H. F., Leon, L., & 
de la Rosa, R. (2010). Olive seedling first-
flowering position and management. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 124, 74–77.

Nave, N., Katz, E., Chayut, N., Gazit, S. 

Samach, A. (2010). Flower development in 
the passion fruit Passiflora edulis requires 
a photoperiod-induced systemic graft-
transmissible signal. Plant Cell Environment 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3040.2010.02206.x.

Neilsen, J. C., & Dennis, F. G. J. (2000). 
Effects of seed number, fruit removal, 
bourse shoot length and crop density on 
flowering in “Spencer Seedless” apple. Acta 
Horticulturae, 527, 137–146.

Ohto, M., Onai, K., Furukawa, Y., Aoki, E., 

Araki, T., & Nakamura, K. (2001). Effects of 
sugar on vegetative development and floral 
transition in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 
127, 252–261.

Oparka, K. J., & Cruz, S. S. (2000). THE 

GREAT ESCAPE: Phloem transport and 

401

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

unloading of macromolecules. Annual 
Review of Plant Physiology and Plant 
Molecular Biology, 51, 323–347.

Orlandi, F., Vazquez, L. M., Ruga, L.,  

Bonofiglio, T., Fornaciari, M., & Garcia-
Mozo, H., et al. (2005). Bioclimatic 
requirements for olive flowering in two 
Mediterranean regions located at the same 
latitude (Andalucia, Spain and Sicily, Italy). 
Annals of Agricultural and Environmental 
Medicine, 12, 47–52.

Paltiel, J., Amin, R., Gover, A., Ori, N., 
& Samach, A. (2006). Novel roles for 
GIGANTEA revealed under environmental 
conditions that modify its expression in 
Arabidopsis and Medicago truncatula. 
Planta, 224, 1255–1268.

Pelaz, S., Gustafson-Brown, C., Kohalmi, S. 

E., Crosby, W. L., & Yanofsky, M. F. (2001). 
APETALA1 and SEPALLATA3 interact to 
promote flower development. Plant Journal, 
26, 385–394.

Pena, L., Martin-Trillo, M., Juarez, J., Pina, J. A.,  

Navarro, L., & Martinez-Zapater, J. M.  
(2001). Constitutive expression of 
Arabidopsis LEAFY or APETALA1 genes 
in citrus reduces their generation time. 
Nature Biotechnology, 19, 263–267.

Pnueli, L., Carmel-Goren, L., Hareven, D., 
Gutfinger, T., Alvarez, J., & Ganal, M.,  
et al. (1998). The SELF-PRUNING gene of 
tomato regulates vegetative to reproductive 
switching of sympodial meristems and is the 
ortholog of CEN and TFL1. Development, 
125, 1979–1989.

Pnueli, L., Gutfinger, T., Hareven, D.,  

Ben-Naim, O., Ron, N., & Adir, N., et al. 
(2001). Tomato SP-interacting proteins 
define a conserved signaling system that 
regulates shoot architecture and flowering. 
Plant Cell, 13, 2687–2702.

Poethig, R. S. (2003). Phase change and the 

regulation of developmental timing in plants. 
Science, 301, 334–336.

Poethig, R. S. (2009). Small RNAs and 

developmental timing in plants. Current 
Opinion in Genetics & Development, 19, 
374–378.

Proveniers, M., Rutjens, B., Brand, M., & 
Smeekens, S. (2007). The Arabidopsis 
TALE homeobox gene ATH1 controls floral 
competency through positive regulation of 
FLC. The Plant Journal, 52, 899–913.

Purwestri, Y. A., Ogaki, Y., Tamaki, S., Tsuji, H.,  

& Shimamoto, K. (2009). The 14-3-3 
protein GF14c acts as a negative regulator 
of flowering in rice by interacting with the 
florigen Hd3a. Plant and Cell Physiology, 
50, 429–438.

Putterill, J., Robson, F., Lee, K., Simon, R., & 

Coupland, G. (1995). The CONSTANS 
gene of Arabidopsis promotes flowering and 
encodes a protein showing similarities to 
zinc finger transcription factors. Cell, 80, 
847–857.

Ramon, M., & Rolland, F. (2007). Plant 
development: Introducing trehalose 
metabolism. Trends in Plant Science, 12, 
185–188.

Ratcliffe, O., Kumimoto, R. W., Wong, B. J.,  

& Riechmann, J. L. (2003). Analysis 
of Arabidopsis MADS AFFECTING 
FLOWERING gene family: MAF2 prevents 

402

vernalization by short periods of cold. The 
Plant Cell, 15, 1159–1169.

Ratcliffe, O. J., Amaya, I., Vincent, C. A., 

Rothstein, S., Carpenter, R., & Coen, E. S.,  
et al. (1998). A common mechanism 
controls the life cycle and architecture of 
plants. Development, 125, 1609–1615.

Ratcliffe, O. J., Nadzan, G. C., Reuber, T. L., 

& Riechmann, J. L. (2001). Regulation 
of flowering in Arabidopsis by an FLC 
homologue. Plant Physiology, 126, 
122–132.

Redei, G. P. (1962). Supervital mutants of 

Arabidopsis. Genetics, 47, 443–460.

Reeves, P. H., & Coupland, G. (2001). Analysis 
of flowering time control in Arabidopsis by 
comparison of double and triple mutants. 
Plant Physiology, 126, 1085–1091.

Roldan, M., Gomez-Mena, C., Ruiz-Garcia, L.,  

Salinas, J., & Martinez-Zapater, J. M. 
(1999). Sucrose availability on the aerial 
part of the plant promotes morphogenesis 
and flowering of Arabidopsis in the dark. 
Plant Journal, 20, 581–590.

Rottmann, W. H., Meilan, R., Sheppard, L. A., 

Brunner, A. M., Skinner, J. S., & Ma, C.,  
et al. (2000). Diverse effects of 
overexpression of LEAFY and PTLF, a 
poplar (Populus) homolog of LEAFY/
FLORICAULA, in transgenic poplar and 
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 22, 235–245.
Samach, A., & Coupland, G. (2000). Time 

measurement and the control of flowering in 
plants. BioEssays, 22, 38–47.

Samach, A., Onouchi, H., Gold, S. E., Ditta, G. 
S., Schwarz-Sommer, Z., & Yanofsky, M. F., 
et al. (2000). Distinct roles of CONSTANS 
target genes in reproductive development of 
Arabidopsis. Science, 288, 1613–1616.

Santner, A., & Estelle, M. (2010). The 

ubiquitin-proteasome system regulates plant 
hormone signaling. The Plant Journal, 61, 
1029–1040.

Santos-Antunes, F., Leon, L., de la Rosa, R., 

Alvarado, J., Mohedo, A., & Trujillo, I., et al. 
(2005). The length of the juvenile period in 
olive as influenced by vigor of the seedlings 
and precocity of the parents. HortScience, 
40, 1213–1215.

Sauer, N. (2007). Molecular physiology of 
higher plant sucrose transporters. FEBS 
Letters, 581, 2309–2317.

Schmid, M., Uhlenhaut, N. H., Godard, F., 

Demar, M., Bressan, R., & Weigel, D.,  
et al. (2003). Dissection of floral induction 
pathways using global expression analysis. 
Development, 130, 6001–6012.

Schonrock, N., Bouveret, R., Leroy, O.,  

Borghi, L., Kohler, C., & Gruissem, W.,  
et al. (2006). Polycomb-group proteins 
repress the floral activator AGL19 in the 
FLC-independent vernalization pathway. 
Genes & Development, 20, 1667–1678.

Schwab, R., Ossowski, S., Riester, M., 

Warthmann, N., & Weigel, D. (2006). 
Highly specific gene silencing by artificial 
MicroRNAs in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 18, 
1121–1133.

Schwab, R., Palatnik, J. F., Riester, M., 

Schommer, C., Schmid, M., & Weigel, D. 
(2005). Specific effects of MicroRNAs on 
the plant transcriptome. Developmental Cell, 
8, 517–527.

Scortecci, K., Michaels, S. D., & Amasino,  

R. M. (2003). Genetic interactions between 
FLM and other flowering-time genes in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 52, 915–922.

Scortecci, K. C., Michaels, S. D., & Amasino, 

R. M. (2001). Identification of a MADS-
box gene, FLOWERING LOCUS M, that 
represses flowering. Plant Journal, 26, 
229–236.

Searle, I., He, Y., Turck, F., Vincent, C., 

Fornara, F., & Krober, S., et al. (2006). The 
transcription factor FLC confers a flowering 
response to vernalization by repressing 
meristem competence and systemic signaling 
in Arabidopsis. Genes & Development, 20, 
898–912.

Shannon, S., & Meeks-Wagner, D. R. (1991). A 
mutation in the Arabidopsis tfl1 gene affects 
inflorescence meristem development. Plant 
Cell, 3, 877–892.

Sheldon, C. C., Burn, J. E., Perez, P. P.,  

Metzger, J., Edwards, J. A., & Peacock, W. J.,  
et al. (1999). The FLF MADS box gene: 
A repressor of flowering in Arabidopsis 
regulated by vernalization and methylation. 
Plant Cell, 11, 445–458.

Sivitz, A. B., Reinders, A., Johnson, M. E., 

Krentz, A. D., Grof, C. P., & Perroux, J. M.,  
et al. (2007). Arabidopsis sucrose 
transporter AtSUC9. High-affinity transport 
activity, intragenic control of expression, 
and early flowering mutant phenotype. Plant 
Physiology, 143, 188–198.

Smeekens, S., Ma, J., Hanson, J., & Rolland, 

F. (2010). Sugar signals and molecular 
networks controlling plant growth. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 13, 273–278.
Smith, H. M. S., Boschke, I., & Hake, S. 
(2002). Selective interaction of plant 
homeodomain proteins mediates high DNA-
binding affinity. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 99, 9579–9584.

Smith, H. M. S., Campbell, B. C., & Hake, S. 

(2004). Competence to respond to floral 
inductive signals requires the homeobox 
genes PENNYWISE and POUND-
FOOLISH. Current Biology, 14, 812–817.
Smyth, D. R., Bowman, J. L., & Meyerowitz, 
E. M. (1990). Early flower development in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 2, 755–767.

Soppe, W. J., Jacobsen, S. E., Alonso-Blanco, 

C., Jackson, J. P., Kakutani, T., &  
Koornneef, M., et al. (2000). The late 
flowering phenotype of fwa mutants is 
caused by gain-of- function epigenetic alleles 
of a homeodomain gene. Molecular Cell, 6, 
791–802.

Stutte, G. W., & Martin, G. C. (1986). Effect 
of killing the seed on return bloom of olive. 
Scientia Horticulturae, 29, 107–111.

Suarez-Lopez, P., Wheatley, K., Robson, F., 

Onouchi, H., Valverde, F., & Coupland, G. 
(2001). CONSTANS mediates between the 
circadian clock and the control of flowering 
in Arabidopsis. Nature, 410, 1116–11120.

Sung, S., & Amasino, R. M. (2004). 

Vernalization in Arabidopsis thaliana is 
mediated by the PHD finger protein VIN3. 
Nature, 427, 159–164.

Sung, S. -K., Yu, G. -H., & An, G. (1999). 

Characterization of MdMADS2, a member 

Control of flowering

C H A P T E R   2 5

of the SQUAMOSA subfamily of genes, in 
apple. Plant Physiology, 120, 969–978.

Swiezewski, S., Crevillen, P., Liu, F., Ecker, J. R.,  

Jerzmanowski, A., & Dean, C. (2007). 
Small RNA-mediated chromatin silencing 
directed to the 3' region of the Arabidopsis 
gene encoding the developmental regulator, 
FLC. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
104, 3633–3638.

Tabata, R., Ikezaki, M., Fujibe, T., Aida, M., 

Tian, C. E., & Ueno, Y., et al. (2010). 
Arabidopsis auxin response factor6 and 8 
regulate jasmonic acid biosynthesis and floral 
organ development via repression of class 1 
KNOX genes. Plant and Cell Physiology, 51, 
164–175.

Takada, S., & Goto, K. (2003). TERMINAL 
FLOWER2, an Arabidopsis homolog of 
HETEROCHROMATIN PROTEIN1, 
counteracts the activation of FLOWERING 
LOCUS T by CONSTANS in the vascular 
tissues of leaves to regulate flowering time. 
Plant Cell, 15, 2856–2865.

Tamaki, S., Matsuo, S., Wong, H. L., Yokoi, S., 
& Shimamoto, K. (2007). Hd3a protein is a 
mobile flowering signal in rice. Science, 316, 
1033–1036.

Teper-Bamnolker, P., & Samach, A. (2005). 

The flowering integrator FT regulates 
SEPALLATA3 and FRUITFULL 
accumulation in Arabidopsis leaves. Plant 
Cell, 17, 2661–2675.

Tiwari, S. B., Shen, Y., Chang, H. C., Hou, Y., 
Harris, A., & Ma, S. F., et al. (2010). The 
flowering time regulator CONSTANS is 
recruited to the FLOWERING LOCUS T 
promoter via a unique cis-element. The New 
Phytologist, 187, 57–66.

Todesco, M., Rubio-Somoza, I., Paz-Ares, J., 

& Weigel, D. (2010). A collection of target 
mimics for comprehensive analysis of 
microRNA function in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
PLoS Genetics, 6, e1001031.

Tournois, J. (1914). Etudes sur la sexualite du 

houblon. Annals des Sciences Naturelles, 19, 
49–191.

Trevaskis, B., Hemming, M. N., Peacock, W. J., 

& Dennis, E. S. (2006). HvVRN2  
responds to daylength, whereas HvVRN1 
is regulated by vernalization and 
developmental status. Plant Physiology, 140, 
1397–1405.

Tromp, J. (2000). Flower-bud formation in 
pome fruits as affected by fruit thinning. 
In Plant Growth Regulation (Vol. 31, pp. 
27–34). Netherlands: Springer.

Turck, F., Fornara, F., & Coupland, G. (2008). 

Regulation and identity of florigen: 
FLOWERING LOCUS T moves center 
stage. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 59, 
573–594.

Turck, F., Roudier, F., Farrona, S., Martin-

Magniette, M. L., Guillaume, E., & Buisine, 
N., et al. (2007). Arabidopsis TFL2/LHP1 
specifically associates with genes marked by 
trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27. PLoS 
Genetics, 3, e86.

Turgeon, R., & Wolf, S. (2009). Phloem 

transport: Cellular pathways and molecular 
trafficking. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 
60, 207–221.

Valantin, M., Gary, C., Vassiere, B. E. & 

Frossard, J. S. (1999). Effect of fruit load 
on partitioning of dry matter and Energy 
in cantaloupe (Cucumis melo L.). Annals of 
Botany., 84(2), 173–181.

Valverde, F., Mouradov, A., Soppe, W., 

Ravenscroft, D., Samach, A., & Coupland, G.  
(2004). Photoreceptor regulation of 
CONSTANS protein in photoperiodic 
flowering. Science, 303, 1003–1006.
van Dijken, A. J., Schluepmann, H., & 

Smeekens, S. C. (2004). Arabidopsis 
trehalose-6-phosphate synthase 1 is essential 
for normal vegetative growth and transition 
to flowering. Plant Physiology, 135, 969–977.

Veley, K. M., & Michaels, S. D. (2008). 

Functional redundancy and new roles for 
genes of the autonomous floral-promotion 
pathway. Plant Physiology, 147, 682–695.
Voinnet, O. (2009). Origin, biogenesis, and 
activity of plant MicroRNAs. Cell, 136, 
669–687.

Wada, M., Cao, Q. F., Kotoda, N., Soejima, J.,  

& Masuda, T. (2002). Apple has two 
orthologues of FLORICAULA/LEAFY 
involved in flowering. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 49, 567–577.

Wagner, D., Sablowski, R. W., & Meyerowitz, 

E. M. (1999). Transcriptional activation 
of APETALA1 by LEAFY. Science, 285, 
582–584.

Wang, J. W., Czech, B., & Weigel, D. (2009a). 
miR156-regulated SPL transcription factors 
define an endogenous flowering pathway in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Cell, 138, 738–749.

Wang, R., Farrona, S., Vincent, C., Joecker, A.,  

Schoof, H., & Turck, F., et al. (2009b). 
PEP1 regulates perennial flowering in Arabis 
alpina. Nature, 459, 423–427.

Weigel, D., Alvarez, J., Smyth, D. R., Yanofsky, 

M. F., & Meyerowitz, E. M. (1992). 
LEAFY controls floral meristem identity in 
Arabidopsis. Cell, 69, 843–859.
Weigel, D., & Nilsson, O. (1995). A 

developmental switch sufficient for flower 
initiation in diverse plants. Nature, 377, 
495–500.

Wellensiek, S. J. (1962). Dividing cells as 

the locus for vernalization. Nature, 195, 
307–308.

Wenkel, S., Turck, F., Singer, K., Gissot, L., Le 
Gourrierec, J., & Samach, A., et al. (2006). 
CONSTANS and the CCAAT box binding 
complex share a functionally important 
domain and interact to regulate flowering of 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 18, 2971–2984.

Werner, J. D., Borevitz, J. O., Warthmann, N., 

Trainer, G. T., Ecker, J. R., & Chory, J.,  
et al. (2005). Quantitative trait locus 
mapping and DNA array hybridization 
identify an FLM deletion as a cause for 
natural flowering-time variation. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 102, 2460–2465.
Wigge, P. A., Kim, M. C., Jaeger, K. E., Busch, 

W., Schmid, M., & Lohmann, J. U., et al. 
(2005). Integration of spatial and temporal 
information during floral induction in 
Arabidopsis. Science, 309, 1056–1059.

Wu, G., Park, M. Y., Conway, S. R., Wang, J. W.,  

Weigel, D., & Poethig, R. S. (2009). 
The sequential action of miR156 and 

miR172 regulates developmental timing in 
Arabidopsis. Cell, 138, 750–759.

Wu, G., & Poethig, R. S. (2006). Temporal 

regulation of shoot development in 
Arabidopsis thaliana by miR156 and its 
target SPL3. Development, 133, 3539–3547.
Xie, K., Wu, C., & Xiong, L. (2006). Genomic 

organization, differential expression, and 
interaction of SQUAMOSA promoter-
binding-like transcription factors and 
microRNA156 in rice. Plant Physiology, 
142, 280–293.

Yakir, E., Hilman, D., Kron, I., Hassidim, M., 

Melamed-Book, N., & Green, R. M. (2009). 
Posttranslational regulation of CIRCADIAN 
CLOCK ASSOCIATED1 in the circadian 
oscillator of Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 
150, 844–857.

Yamaguchi, A., Kobayashi, Y., Goto, K., Abe, M., 
& Araki, T. (2005). TWIN SISTER OF FT 
(TSF) acts as a floral pathway integrator 
redundantly with FT. Plant and Cell 
Physiology, 46, 1175–1189.

Yan, L., Fu, D., Li, C., Blechl, A., Tranquilli, G.,  

& Bonafede, M., et al. (2006). The wheat 
and barley vernalization gene VRN3 is 
an orthologue of FT. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 19581–19586.

Yan, L., Loukoianov, A., Blechl, A., Tranquilli, G.,  

Ramakrishna, W., & SanMiguel, P., et al. 
(2004). The wheat VRN2 gene is a flowering 
repressor down-regulated by vernalization. 
Science, 303, 1640–1644.

Yan, L., Loukoianov, A., Tranquilli, G., 

Helguera, M., Fahima, T., & Dubcovsky, J.  
(2003). Positional cloning of the wheat 
vernalization gene VRN1. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 100, 6263–6268.

Yano, M., Katayose, Y., Ashikari, M., 

Yamanouchi, U., Monna, L., & Fuse, T., 
et al. (2000). Hd1, a major photoperiod 
sensitivity quantitative trait locus in rice, is 
closely related to the Arabidopsis flowering 
time gene CONSTANS. Plant Cell, 12, 
2473–2484.

Yano, M., Kojima, S., Takahashi, Y., Lin, H., 
& Sasaki, T. (2001). Genetic control of 
flowering time in rice, a short-day plant. 
Plant Physiology, 127, 1425–1429.

Yoo, S. K., Chung, K. S., Kim, J., Lee, J. H., 
Hong, S. M., & Yoo, S. J., et al. (2005). 
CONSTANS activates SUPPRESSOR OF 
OVEREXPRESSION OF CONSTANS 
1 through FLOWERING LOCUS T to 
promote flowering in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiology, 139, 770–778.

Yu, H., Xu, Y., Tan, E. L., & Kumar, P. P. 

(2002). AGAMOUS-LIKE 24, a dosage-
dependent mediator of the flowering signals. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 99, 
16336–16341.

Zeevaart, J. A. (1962). Physiology of flower 

formation. Science, 137, 723–731.

Zhang, X., Clarenz, O., Cokus, S., 

Bernatavichute, Y. V., Pellegrini, M., 
& Goodrich, J., et al. (2007). Whole-
genome analysis of histone H3 Lysine 27 
Trimethylation in Arabidopsis. PLoS Biology, 
5, e129.

403

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Zhang, X., Germann, S., Blus, B. J., 

Khorasanizadeh, S., Gaudin, V., & Jacobsen, 
S. E. (2007). The Arabidopsis LHP1 
protein colocalizes with histone H3 Lys27 

trimethylation. Nature Structural & 
Molecular Biology, 14, 869–871.

Zhang, Y., Primavesi, L. F., Jhurreea, D., 

Andralojc, P. J., Mitchell, R. A., & Powers, S. 

J., et al. (2009). Inhibition of SNF1-related 
protein kinase1 activity and regulation of 
metabolic pathways by trehalose-6-phosphate. 
Plant Physiology, 149, 1860–1871.

404

Biotechnological approaches for 
phytoremediation

Om Parkash Dhankher1  Elizabeth A.H. Pilon-Smits2 
Richard B. Meagher3  Sharon Doty4
1University of Massachusetts Amherst, Massachusetts
2Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado
3University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia
4Sharon Doty, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

20

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 309

Overview of results from biotechnological  
approaches for different pollutants  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .311
Organic pollutants  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .317
Future Prospects   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 323
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 323

Introduction

Plants  can  be  used  in  various  ways  to  prevent  or  remediate 
environmental  pollution  (Figure  20.1;  for  reviews  see  also 
Pilon-Smits,  2005;  Doty  2008).  In  some  cases  plants  can 
degrade  pollutants  inside  their  tissues;  this  method  is  called 
phytodegradation  and  is  mostly  suitable  for  organic  pollut-
ants,  since  inorganics  can  only  be  moved  and  not  degraded. 
When  degradation  happens  in  the  rhizosphere  this  method 
is  called  rhizodegradation,  and  when  it  involves  microbes  it 
is also called phytostimulation. In some cases the pollutant is 
immobilized  in  the  root  zone,  which  is  called  phytostabiliza-
tion. The combined rhizosphere (root zone) processes contrib-
uting  to  phytoremediation  are  also  termed  rhizoremediation. 
Phytoextraction  is  the  term  used  for  the  accumulation  of 
pollutants  in  harvestable  plant  tissues,  particularly  shoot  tis-
sues,  and  this  method  is  mostly  used  for  inorganics.  If  plant 
accumulation/adsorption  is  mainly  by  plant  roots  in  hydro-
ponic systems the technique is called rhizofiltration. The same 
principle can be used on a large scale in constructed wetlands. 
Some  pollutants  can  also  be  volatilized  by  plants,  such  as 
volatile  organic  compounds  (VOCs)  and  certain  metal(loid)s  
such  as  mercury  (Hg)  and  selenium  (Se);  this  is  called 
phytovolatilization.

Different  plant  processes  are  important  for  different 
remediation  strategies;  for  instance,  rhizoremediation  may 
be  facilitated  by  root-released  compounds,  as  well  as  by 

volatilization

accumulation

modification,
degradation,
detoxification

release back to soil

translocation

mobilization,
uptake

rhizo-
degradation

Figure 20.1 l Overview of plant–pollutant interactions and 
the possible fates of the pollutant (represented as circles) 
l Degradation of certain organic pollutants in the rhizosphere can 
be facilitated by root-released compounds. Some root-released 
compounds can also mobilize pollutants from soil particles and 
affect uptake. Pollutants can be taken up into the root symplast and 
translocated via the xylem (apoplast) to the shoot, in the transpiration 
stream. In the shoot the pollutant can be taken up into the shoot 
symplast. There it may be further modified (assimilated, degraded, side 
groups attached, conjugate/chelator attached) and either sequestered 
in vacuole or cell wall, or volatilized. From leaves pollutants may be 
remobilized via the phloem to reproductive tissues. Pollutants (or their 
downstream products) may also be returned to the soil after leaf drop. 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00020-1

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

species-specific, root-associated microbial, flora. When pollut-
ants are taken up into the root symplast, and either accumu-
lated  in  root  cells  or  exported  and  translocated  to  the  shoot 
via  the  dead  xylem  in  the  transpiration  stream,  this  process 
may  involve  plant  membrane  transporters  (more  so  for  inor-
ganics  than  organics).  Moreover,  root-shoot  translocation  is 
driven by transpiration from the plant shoot, as regulated by 
stomatal opening. In the shoot, the pollutant can be taken up 
from the xylem into leaf cells, which again may involve mem-
brane  transporter  proteins.  Inside  cells  the  pollutant  may  be 
further  modified  enzymatically  (assimilated,  degraded,  side 
groups  attached,  conjugate/chelator  attached)  and  either 
sequestered (often in vacuoles or cell wall, by means of trans-
porter  proteins)  or  enzymatically  mineralized  or  volatilized. 
From leaves, pollutants may also be remobilized via the living 
phloem to young leaves, roots, or reproductive organs, a proc-
ess that may again involve membrane transporters. Pollutants 
or their downstream products may also be returned to the soil 
after  leaf  drop.  As  may  be  clear  from  the  active  plant  proc-
esses involved, plant species differ in their ability to remedi-
ate  different  pollutants,  depending  on  their  abundance  of 
transporters and enzymes, their microbial partners, and their 
transpiration  rate.  In  addition,  some  general  properties  of  a 
good  phytoremediator  species  are  fast  growth  and  high  bio-
mass,  hardiness,  and  tolerance  to  pollutants.  It  is  an  added 
bonus  if  a  plant  species  has  economic  value.  All  of  these 

biological  properties  important  for  phytoremediation  may 
potentially  be  ameliorated  using  genetic  engineering.  In  this 
chapter, we focus on biotechnological approaches to improve 
plants’  ability  to  tolerate  pollutants  and  phytoremediation 
efficiency.

As  mentioned  earlier,  different  pollutants  have  different 
fates  in  plant-substrate  systems,  so  they  have  different  rate-
limiting  factors  for  phytoremediation  that  may  be  targeted 
using genetic engineering (Figure 20.2). For instance, remedia-
tion of hydrophobic organics may be limited by their release 
from soil particles, which may be improved by enhanced pro-
duction of biosurfactants by roots or root-associated microbes. 
Similarly,  certain  metals  may  be  made  more  bioavailable  by 
root excretion of metal chelators and protons. In the case of 
rhizodegradation,  the  secretion  of  degrading  enzymes  from 
roots may be upregulated, as can the secretion of compounds 
that stimulate microbial density or activity. Uptake and trans-
port  into/inside  plants  may  be  limited  by  the  abundance  of 
membrane  transporters,  particularly  for  inorganics,  which 
depend  on  uptake  on  transporter  proteins.  Organics,  when 
moderately hydrophobic, can often pass membranes passively 
and do not need transporters. If it is known which transport-
ers mediate pollutant uptake and translocation, these may be 
overproduced in plants. Plant tolerance, in turn, may be lim-
ited  by  the  abundance  of  enzymes  that  modify,  degrade,  or 
chelate pollutants, or general antioxidant enzymes. Depending 

volatilization

accumulation, 
remobilization

• Enhanced levels of phloem 

chelators

• Enhanced expression of 

transporters into shoot 
symplast, vacuole, cell wall

• Enhanced levels of leaf 

chelators

modification,
degradation,
detoxification

• Enhanced levels of  

enzymes that modify, 
conjugate, degrade

translocation

• Enhanced expression of 

transporter out of root vacuole 
and from root symplast to xylem 

• Enhanced levels of root and 

xylem chelators (acids, NA, GSH)

mobilization,
uptake

• Enhanced excretion of 

chelators (acids)

• Enhanced expression of  

transporter into root symplast

Figure 20.2 l Overview of biotechnological approaches that may enhance various rate-limiting steps in phytoremediation. 
l Excreted compounds may facilitate mobilization, and enhanced expression of transporters in the root cell membrane may facilitate 
import into the root symplast. Enhanced expression of exporters out of the root vacuole and out of the root symplast into the xylem may 
facilitate translocation to the shoot. Increased levels of root and xylem chelators (acids, GSH) may enhance plant tolerance to the pollutant 
and pollutant mobilization in the xylem. Uptake into the leaf symplast may be enhanced by increased expression of transporters in the 
mesophyll cell membrane. Inside leaf cells, enhanced levels of enzymes that modify, conjugate, or degrade pollutants can facilitate tolerance, 
degradation, sequestration, or volatilization. Tolerance and sequestration are also enhanced by higher levels of leaf chelators or transporter 
proteins that export pollutants out of the cytosol and into the vacuole or cell wall. Enhanced levels of phloem chelators may facilitate 
remobilization to reproductive tissues. 

310

Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

C H A P T E R   2 0

on  the  suspected  limiting  factors,  any  such  enzymes  may  be 
over-expressed to enhance phytoremediation capacity. In addi-
tion  to  boosting  the  expression  of  existing  genes,  novel  genes 
may be introduced from other plant species or any organism. In 
this way, a totally new phytoremediation capacity may be intro-
duced into a suitable plant species for phytoremediation. All of 
these approaches have been used successfully. In the next sec-
tion we describe representative cases in more detail.

Overview of results from biotechnological 
approaches for different pollutants

Inorganic pollutants
Inorganic  pollutants  include  metals/metalloids  (e.g.,  As,  Cd, 
Cu, Hg, Mn, Se, Zn), radionuclides (e.g., Cs, P, U), and plant 
fertilizers (e.g., nitrate, phosphate). All occur in nature mainly 
as  positively  or  negatively  charged  ions  and  depend  on  plant 
transporters  for  uptake  and  translocation.  Inorganics  can  be 
altered  (reduced/oxidized),  moved  into/inside  plants,  or 
in  some  cases  volatilized  (Hg,  Se),  but  cannot  be  degraded. 
Thus,  phytoremediation  methods  available  for  inorganics 
include  immobilization  (phytostabilization),  sequestration  in 
harvestable  plant  tissues  (phytoextraction  or  rhizofiltration) 
and,  in  exceptional  cases,  phytovolatilization.  As  reviewed 
by  Pilon-Smits  (2005)  and  Doty  (2008),  biotechnologi-
cal  approaches  that  have  successfully  altered  the  capacity  of 
plants  for  phytoremediation  of  inorganics  have  focused  on 
both  tolerance  and  accumulation.  Genes  targeted  include 
metal transporter genes, as well as genes that facilitate chela-
tor production. Also, in the case of elements that can be vola-
tilized, genes that facilitate conversion to volatile forms were 
over-expressed.  In  the  next  section  we  highlight  three  inor-
ganics As, Hg, and Se.

Arsenic
Arsenic pollution and toxicity
Arsenic  (As)  contamination  in  soil  and  water  is  a  growing 
problem  worldwide,  and  millions  of  people  face  the  risk  of 
cancer  and  poisoning  due  to  As  in  their  drinking  water  and 
food  supplies.  Arsenic  is  both  a  carcinogen  and  a  toxin,  and 
is  damaging  to  most  human  organs  (Kaiser,  2001).  Arsenic 
contamination  of  groundwater  used  for  domestic  water  sup-
plies has been reported from over 70 countries, affecting the 
health of an estimated 150 million people (Ravenscroft et al., 
2009).  This  situation  is  worse  in  Bangladesh  and  the  West 
Bengal  state  of  India,  and  the  World  Health  Organization 
dubbed  this  as  the  “worst  mass  poisoning”  event  in  human 
history.  Arsenic-contaminated  ground  waters,  apart  from  use 
for drinking, are widely used for irrigation of many crops, par-
ticularly rice (Oryza sativa), adding more than 1000 tons of 
As  per  year  to  the  agricultural  soils  in  Bangladesh  alone  (Ali 
et al., 2003). Arsenic species are non-biodegradable and they 
remain  in  the  surface  and  subsurface  of  agricultural  soils 
(Juhasz et al., 2003). Significantly high levels of arsenic in the 
edible crops grown in contaminated soils have been reported 
in  many  countries  (Larsen  et al.,  1992;  Das  et al.,  2004; 
Williams  et al.,  2005).  Tens  of  thousands  of  Superfund  sites 

in the United States and other countries are listed as having 
unacceptably high levels of As and other toxic metals (http://
www.epa.gov/superfund/sites/npl/index.htm) and are recom-
mended for clean up.

3, referred to as AsV) and arsenite (AsO3

Inorganic  species  of  As,  particularly  the  oxyanions  arsenate 
3, referred to 
(AsO4
as AsIII), are prevalent in the environment and are often more 
toxic than its organic forms (Bentley and Chasteen, 2002). AsV 
is the predominant species in aerobic soils, whereas AsIII pre-
dominates in anaerobic environments such as submerged soils. 
In  addition,  organic  forms  of  arsenicals  such  as  monomethyl-
arsenate (MMA) and dimethylarsenate (DMA) are also present 
in the environment. Organic forms of As are generally less toxic 
than the inorganic As species (Chen et al., 2005). Arsenic tox-
icity in a cell depends to a large extent on the type of As spe-
cies.  AsIII  is  highly  thiol-reactive  and  thus  has  a  high  affinity 
to the sulfhydryl group of the amino acid cysteine. Binding of 
AsIII  to  Cys  residues  disrupts  protein  structure  and  function, 
thus affecting many key metabolic processes in the cell, such as 
oxidative phosphorylation, glutathione production, ATP synthe-
sis, fatty acid metabolism, and gluconeogenesis (Hughes, 2002; 
Carey et al., 2010). Additionally, the binding ability of AsIII to 
the  non-protein  thiol  glutathione  can  deplete  this  important 
antioxidant, which leads to increased levels of reactive oxygen 
species  (ROS),  and  thus  oxidative  stress  (Castlehouse  et al., 
2003). AsV, being a phosphate analog, can substitute for inor-
ganic  phosphate  in  many  biochemical  processes,  which  is  evi-
dent from the formation of glucose-6-arsenate (Lagunas, 1980) 
and  ADP-arsenate  (Gresser,  1981),  inhibiting  the  formation 
of ATP.

Arsenic in foods and implications for human health
Rice  is  the  most  important  staple  food  for  over  half  of  the 
world’s  population  (Fageria,  2007),  and  it  is  grown  widely  in 
areas  where  As  contamination  is  widespread.  Almost  30–50% 
of  the  areas  of  Bangladesh  and  West  Bengal  (India)  are  irri-
gated  with  As-contaminated  groundwater  to  grow  paddy  rice 
(Meharg and Rahman, 2003). In the flooded paddy fields that 
create a reducing environment paddy rice accumulates high lev-
els of AsIII (Meharg, 2004; Williams et al., 2007; Meharg et al., 
2009).  In  U.S.-grown  rice,  considerably  higher  levels  of  total 
As were found where organic As species constituted the major 
fraction  of  arsenic  in  the  grains  (Williams  et al.,  2005;  Zavala 
and Duxbur 2008). Additionally, rice straw is used as forage in 
many countries, including the United States, India, China, and 
Bangladesh. High As concentrations in straw may have adverse 
health effects on cattle and may result in an increased As expo-
sure in humans via the plant–animal–human pathway (Abedin 
et al., 2002). Therefore, there is a significant concern regarding 
accumulation of As in meat and dairy products, and agricultural 
crops and vegetables grown in arsenic-affected areas.

Inorganic  As  species  are  phytotoxic  and  the  elevated  con-
centration  of  As  in  the  soil  causes  a  significant  reduction  in 
crop  yield  (Marin  et al.,  1993;  Meharg,  2004;  Zhu  et al., 
2008). Rice yield decreases by 10% at 25 mg/kg soil As con-
centrations  (Xiong  et al.,  1987;  Marin  et al.,  1993).  Due  to 
severe  surface  water  shortage,  more  and  more  farmers  are 
using recycled water and sewage sludge that further contrib-
utes to the As buildup in agricultural lands. Additionally, AsV, 

311

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

being  a  phosphate  analog,  competes  with  phosphate  uptake 
and  thus  causes  the  inhibition  of  phosphate  and  other  nutri-
ent uptake (Meharg and Macnair, 1992; Abedin et al., 2002; 
Dhankher  et al.,  2006).  The  phytotoxic  effects  suffered  by 
crops  grown  in  soil  with  As  residues  could  be  overcome  by 
developing  crops  resistant  to  As  uptake.  Biotechnological 
approaches may help achieve this goal.

Mechanism of As uptake and detoxification in 
microbes and plants
Mechanisms  of  As  detoxification  have  been  well  character-
ized  in  bacteria  and  yeast.  Because  of  its  similarity  to  phos-
phate,  AsV  enters  yeast  cells  via  phosphate  transporters.  A 
common  mechanism  by  which  these  microorganisms  achieve 
tolerance to As is by the reduction of AsV to AsIII, and then 
the exclusion of toxic AsIII oxyanions from the cell by induc-
ible  and  selective  transporters  (Rosen,  2002;  Mukhopadhyay 
and  Rosen,  2002).  In  Escherichia  coli,  arsenate  reductase, 
ArsC, reduces AsV to AsIII (Chen et al., 1986) and the latter 
is subsequently transported out of the cell by an AsIII export 
pump,  ArsAB  (Cervantes  et al.,  1994;  Rosen,  2002),  thus 
conferring  As  resistance.  Another  important  detoxification 
pathway in prokaryotes involves removal of As by converting 
inorganic As to volatile organic compounds such as trimethyl 
arsine  through  a  series  of  methylation  reactions  catalyzed  by 
S-adenosylmethionine methyltransferases (Qin et al., 2006).

AsIII  has  been  shown  to  enter  bacterial,  yeast,  and  mam-
malian  cells  via  aquaglyceroporins  (Sanders  et al.,  1997; 
Wysocki  et al.,  2001;  Liu  et al.,  2002),  which  belong  to  the 
major intrinsic protein (MIP) superfamily. In E. coli, a glycerol 
uptake facilitator, GlpF, has been identified as an AsIII trans-
porter  (Sanders  et al.,  1997).  Yeast  Fps1p,  a  GlpF  homolog, 
has  been  shown  to  facilitate  the  uptake  of  metalloids  AsIII 
and antimonite (SbIII) in yeast (Wysocki et al., 2001).

The mechanisms of As uptake and detoxification in plants 
have  recently  been  reviewed  in  depth  (Tripathi  et al.,  2007; 
Zhao et al., 2009, 2010). Several studies support the conten-
tion that AsV, being a phosphate analog, is taken up in plants 
via  phosphate  uptake  systems  (Meharg  and  Macnair,  1992). 
Phosphate  transporter  PHT1;1  has  been  shown  to  be  impli-
cated  in  AsV  uptake  in  Arabidopsis  thaliana  (Shin  et al., 
2004;  Catarecha  et al.,  2007).  Furthermore,  AsV  represses 
genes involved in the phosphate starvation response, suggest-
ing that AsV interferes with phosphate sensing and alters the 
phosphate  signaling  mechanism  (Catarecha  et al.,  2007).  In 
A.  thaliana  there  are  nine  high-affinity  phosphate  transport-
ers  (PHT),  and  different  PHTs  may  vary  in  their  affinity  for 
arsenate.  Further  studies  are  needed  to  identify  the  relative 
affinities  of  various  PHTs  for  AsV  and  phosphate.  While  the 
molecular  mechanisms  of  As  detoxification  and  tolerance 
in  plants  remain  to  be  fully  determined,  it  has  been  shown 
that  plants  detoxify  As  by  reducing  AsV  to  AsIII,  which  is 
subsequently  detoxified  via  forming  complexes  with  thiol-
reactive  peptides  such  as  γ-glutamylcysteine  (γ-EC),  glu-
tathione  (GSH),  and  phytochelatins  (PCs;  Pickering  et al., 
2000;  Dhankher  et al.,  2002;  Vatamaniuk  et al.,  2002).  The 
AsIII-thiol  complexes  are  then  suggested  to  be  sequestered 
into  vacuoles  of  both  root  and  shoot  cells  by  glutathione-
conjugating  pumps  and  GCPs  (Dhankher  et al.,  2002;  Wang 

et al.,  2002),  although  direct  evidence  of  this  remains  elu-
sive. Several studies suggested the reduction of AsV to AsIII 
by  endogenous  arsenate  reductases  inside  plant  cells:  genes 
encoding  plant  arsenate  reductases  have  recently  been  iso-
lated  and  characterized  from  Arabidopsis,  rice,  Holcus  lana-
tus,  and  Pteris  vittata  (Dhankher  et al.,  2006;  Bleeker  et al., 
2006;  Ellis  et al.,  2006;  Duan  et al.,  2007).  The  Arabidopsis 
ACR2 gene complemented the function of arsenate reductase 
in E. coli strains deficient in arsenate reductase, ArsC. In addi-
tion, Arabidopsis lines silenced for ACR2 expression by RNAi 
showed a clear arsenate-dependent phenotype, which translo-
cated 10- to 15-fold higher levels of As from roots to above-
ground tissues (Dhankher et al., 2006).

Recent studies have shown that members of plant aquapor-
ins belonging to the MIP superfamily transport AsIII in rice. 
Plant  MIPs  are  grouped  into  four  major  subfamilies:  the 
plasma membrane intrinsic proteins (PIPs); tonoplast intrinsic 
proteins (TIPs); nodulin 26-like intrinsic proteins (NIPs); and 
small  and  basic  intrinsic  proteins  (SIPs;  Weig  et al.,  1997). 
Ma  et al.  (2008)  have  shown  that  a  silicon  (Si)  transporter 
Lsi1  (OsNIP2;1),  which  is  a  member  of  the  NIP  subfamily, 
played  a  major  role  for  the  entry  of  AsIII  into  rice  roots.  A 
mutation in Lsi1 resulted in a nearly 60% reduction in AsIII 
influx  in  rice  roots.  A  second  Si  efflux  carrier,  Lsi2  (another 
rice  NIP  subfamily  member)  has  been  shown  to  be  respon-
sible  for  loading  AsIII  in  the  xylem,  and  a  T-DNA  insertion 
in  Lsi2  locus  resulted  in  almost  50%  reduction  in  As  accu-
mulation  in  shoot  (Ma  et al.,  2008).  Heterologous  expres-
sion  of  Arabidopsis  NIP5;1,  NIP6;1,  and  NIP7;1  in  yeast 
showed  AsIII  permeability  (Bienert  et al.,  2008;  Isayenkov 
and  Maathuis,  2008).  Suppression  of  an  Arabidopsis  NIP7;1 
expression in T-DNA insertion lines also resulted in decreased 
uptake  of  AsIII  (Isayenkov  and  Maathuis,  2008).  Although 
significant  progress  has  been  made  in  understanding  the 
mechanism  of  AsIII  uptake  and  transport  in  plants,  there  is 
still  more  to  unravel  here.  Apart  from  the  role  of  Si  efflux 
protein  Lsi2  in  translocation  of  AsIII  from  root  to  shoot  tis-
sues,  the  exact  mechanism  of  xylem  or  phloem  loading  of 
AsIII in root tissues and unloading in the shoot tissues is not 
known.  Further  studies  are  needed  to  identify  transporters 
that either exclusively transport AsIII or AsIII co-transporters  
to  reduce  As  uptake  without  significantly  affecting  other 
essential nutrient uptake in plants.

Biotechnological approaches for As remediation and 
reducing As in food crops
Arsenic phytoremediation
The Chinese brake fern (P. vittata) has an exceptional ability 
to hyperaccumulate very high levels of As (Ma et al., 2001), 
and thrives in tropical and subtropical places. Thus, P. vittata 
could  be  highly  useful  for  phytoremediation  of  As  in  those 
regions.  In  contrast  to  other  land  plants,  AsIII  is  the  main 
form of accumulated As in P. vittata, where As is transported 
from  rhizome  to  the  frond  region  and  stored  as  free  AsIII 
(Zhao  et al.,  2003).  A  gene,  PvACR3,  encoding  a  protein 
weakly  homologous  to  the  yeast  ACR3  arsenite  effluxer,  has 
been shown to be localized to the vacuolar membrane in the 
fern gametophyte, indicating that it likely effluxes AsIII into 
the  vacuole  for  sequestration  (Indriolo  et al.,  2010).  Similar 

312

Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

C H A P T E R   2 0

genes  from  higher  plants  are  yet  to  be  identified.  Since  this 
fern  has  such  a  unique  As  hyperaccumulation  mechanism,  it 
could also serve as an ideal source of genes to biotechnologi-
cally enhance As hyperaccumulation in other plants. Although 
this plant demonstrates considerable potential for As extrac-
tion from soil in greenhouse studies, there are several limita-
tions for using  P. vittata for As remediation in the field. The 
molecular mechanism of As detoxification in this hyperaccu-
mulating fern is largely unknown, and its perennial growth is 
restricted  to  the  tropical  or  subtropical  areas.  Furthermore, 
the  fern  could  be  invasive  and  its  introduction  to  non- 
indigenous areas should be evaluated carefully with regard to 
potential ecological consequences.

An  often  explored  alternative  to    P.  vittata  has  been  the 
development  of  genetics-based,  cost-effective,  portable  strat-
egies  for  cleaning  up  As  polluted  soil  and  water  that  can  be 
transferred to any plant species adapted to various geo-climatic 
regions.  Different  strategies  of  genetic  manipulation  may  be 
pursued  depending  on  the  desired  outcome;  for  example, 
increased  tolerance  to  better  withstand  an  As-contaminated 
environment,  increased  uptake  and  tolerance  for  phytoex-
traction,  decreased  uptake,  and/or 
increased  methylation 
for  improved  food  safety  (Tripathi  et al.,  2007,  Zhao  et al., 
2009). A number of transgenic plants have been engineered for 
increased  As  tolerance  and  accumulation.  Over-expression  of 
genes involved in the synthesis of PCs or their precursor GSH 
significantly  enhanced  As  tolerance  but  failed  to  significantly 
enhance  As  accumulation  (Li  et al.,  2004,  2005;  Gasic  and 
Korban,  2007).  These  studies  indicated  that  increasing  GSH 
and  PC  synthesis  alone  is  insufficient  to  achieve  enhanced  As 
accumulation in the shoots. Co-expression of both γ-ECS and 
PCS in Arabidopsis produced a greater effect on As tolerance 
and  accumulation  than  over-expression  of  either  gene  alone 
(Guo  et al.,  2008).  Therefore,  modifying  the  levels  of  GSH 
and  PCs  in  plants  is  an  effective  approach  for  increasing  the 
As tolerance of plants, and could be used for producing novel 
plants with strong phytoremediation potential.

Transgenic plants with strong tolerance to As and enhanced 
As accumulation in the shoots were developed by co-express-
ing  two  bacterial  genes  (Dhankher  et al.,  2002).  The  E.  coli 
arsenate  reductase,  arsC,  gene  was  expressed  in  leaves  as 
driven  by  a  light-induced  soybean  RuBisCo  small  subunit  1 
(SRS1)  promoter.  In  addition,  the  E.  coli  γ-glutamylcysteine 
synthatase,  γ-ECS,  was  expressed  in  both  roots  and  shoots, 
driven  by  a  strong  constitutive  Actin2  promoter  (Dhankher 
et al.,  2002).  The  double  transgenic  plants  were  highly  tol-
erant  as  compared  to  the  plants  expressing  γ-ECS  alone. 
Further,  these  double  transgenic  plants  attained  almost 
17-fold  higher  biomass  and  hyperaccumulated  three-fold 
more  As  in  the  aboveground  biomass  than  wild-type  plants 
when  grown  on  125 μM  sodium  arsenate.  This  work  was 
a  significant  proof-of-concept 
for  phytoremediation  of 
As-contaminated  soil  and  water  by  transgenic  plants.  The 
leaf-specific expression of arsC presumably enhances arsenate 
reduction, whereas γ-ECS over-expression enhanced the bio-
synthesis of thiol-rich peptides for AsIII complexation. These 
results  imply  that  plants  over-expressing  the  γ-ECS  sink 
peptides  can  tolerate  the  increased  AsIII  generated  by  ArsC 
activity  in  leaves  and  thus  provide  increased  AsV  tolerance, 

which  may  have  the  effect  of  driving  more  As  accumulation 
in  shoots.  This  novel  strategy  demonstrated  that  stacking 
traits  into  transgenic  plants  with  multiple  transgenes  can  be 
used  to  get  a  synergistic  effect  that  transcends  what  either 
gene  could  accomplish  on  its  own.  However,  in  contrast  to 
P.  vittata  where  most  of  the  As  is  hyperaccumulated  in  the 
aboveground  frond,  most  angiosperms  retained  a  major  frac-
tion  (~95%)  of  As  in  the  roots  and  only  a  small  amount  of 
total  As  extracted  was  translocated  to  the  shoot  (Pickering 
et al., 2000; Dhankher et al., 2002). The speciation of As by 
X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) of shoots and roots 
of  wild-type  plants  revealed  that  most  of  the  As  was  in  the 
form  of  arsenite-glutathione  complexes,  As(GS)3  (Dhankher 
et al.,  2002).  Therefore,  these  plants  appeared  to  have  high 
levels of endogenous arsenate reductase activity that convert 
AsV  into  AsIII  in  roots,  immobilizing  this  toxic  AsIII  below 
ground (Dhankher et al., 2002; Dhankher, 2005).

Addressing  this  proposed  problem  of  endogenous  arse-
nate  reductase  reducing  the  mobility  of  arsenate  from  roots 
to  shoots,  Dhankher  et al.  (2006)  focused  their  efforts  on 
identifying and blocking arsenate reductase activity. The goal 
was  to  further  enhance  translocation  and  hyperaccumulation 
of  As  in  the  aboveground  tissues.  The  endogenous  arsenate 
reductase designated as AtACR2 from Arabidopsis was cloned 
and  characterized  (Dhankher  et al.,  2006).  The  knockdown 
of  AtACR2  by  RNAi  in  Arabidopsis  caused  translocation  of 
significantly  higher  As  levels  from  roots  to  shoots.  Various 
AtACR2  RNAi  knockdown  lines  translocated  10-  to  16-fold 
more As to shoots and retained slightly less As in their roots 
than wild-type. These results suggested that blocking AtACR2 
function  in  roots  enhances  arsenate  transport  from  roots  to 
shoots.  Bleeker  et al.  (2006)  also  characterized  the  AtACR2 
(Arath  CDC25)  using  T-DNA  insertion  lines  and  showed 
that  mutant  lines  were  sensitive  to  AsV,  further  confirming 
the functional role of this enzyme. Additionally, an arsenate-
activated  glutaredoxin  from  P.  vittata  (PvGRX5)  was  impli-
cated in As metabolism, and its heterologous over-expression 
in Arabidopsis increased As tolerance and decreased As accu-
mulation in shoots (Sundaram et al., 2008).

So  far  there  have  been  few  studies  that  indicate  the  fea-
sibility of manipulating one or two genes for the phytoreme-
diation  of  As-contaminated  environments.  In  the  future,  for 
successful  field  phytoremediation,  efforts  should  be  focused 
on  combining  the  various  genetic  elements  controlling  traits 
such as As uptake in roots, tolerance, translocation from roots 
to shoot, thiol complexation of AsIII, sequestration into vacu-
oles,  methylation  of  As  species,  and  eventually  volatilization 
into  high-biomass,  non-food  fast  growing  plant  species  with 
low  agronomic  inputs.  So  far  no  field  trials  for  As  phytore-
mediation  using  the  genetically  modified  plants  have  been 
conducted.  However,  with  careful  selection  of  non-food  and 
non-invasive  plant  species  and  integration  of  multiple  path-
ways of As uptake and metabolism, As phytoremediation may 
be  effective  and  acceptable  to  the  public  as  an  environmen-
tally friendly green remediation approach.

Preventing arsenic uptake in food crops
As  discussed  in  previous  sections,  As  accumulation  in  food 
crops  such  as  rice  and  vegetables  is  a  significant  health 

313

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

concern.  Through  a  biotechnological  approach,  it  is  possible 
to  engineer  crops  with  enhanced  tolerance  to,  and  reduced 
uptake  of,  As  for  human  consumption.  There  are  several 
options  that  may  be  highly  effective  in  this  endeavor.  One 
option,  reduced  accumulation  of  As  in  the  aboveground  tis-
sues and seeds, could be achieved by enhancing the reduction 
of AsV to AsIII in roots and increased AsIII-thiol complexa-
tion  by  over-expression  of  genes  encoding  arsenate  reduct-
ases  and  PC  biosynthetic  pathway  proteins  in  roots  only  by 
means  of  root-specific  promoters.  Enhanced  PC  production 
in roots could restrict As translocation to shoots through the 
formation  of  AsIII-PC  complexes  and  vacuolar  sequestration 
in  roots.  Secondly,  uptake  of  AsV  in  roots  could  be  blocked 
by  manipulating  the  PHTs  that  have  higher  affinity  for  AsV 
than phosphate. Thirdly, accumulation of AsIII in crops such 
as  rice  could  be  reduced  by  knocking  down  the  expression 
of  Lsi1  that  mediates  AsIII  uptake  in  roots  and  Lsi2,  which 
transports AsIII from roots to shoots. Fourthly, conversion of 
inorganic  As  to  methylated  organic  As  forms  will  reduce  As 
toxicity  and  further  volatilization  of  methylated  As  species 
such  as  MMA  and  DMA  to  the  gaseous  form  trimethylars-
ine  (TMA)  by  over-expression  of  bacterial  or  algal  As  (III- 
S-adenosyl methyltransferase, ArsM; Qin et al., 2006, 2009), 
or  plant  genes  coding  for  As  methyltransferases  once  they 
have  been  identified.  However,  the  toxicity  of  TMA  in  the 
paddy  field  remains  to  be  studied.  Fifthly,  As  accumulation 
in food crops could be decreased by amendments of soil with 
phosphate  and  Se,  which  are  known  to  inhibit  As  uptake  in 
plants. This may be achieved by over-expression of PHT genes 
specialized for only phosphate transport, or transporter genes 
that mediate Se uptake as described in the selenium section.

Developing  novel  strategies  for  phytoremediation  as  well 
as preventing As contamination in the food chain will require 
a  comprehensive  understanding  of  As  uptake,  detoxification, 
and  sequestration  in  plants  and  microbes,  as  well  as  better 
knowledge  about  genes  and  gene  networks  involved  in  As 
metabolism.  Recently,  a  genome-wide  transcriptome  analysis 
identified numerous genes differentially expressed in response 
to As treatment in Arabidopsis, rice, and Crambe abyssinica 
(Abercrombie  et al.,  2008;  Ahsan  et al.,  2008;  Paulose  et al., 
2010).  These  genes  and  gene  networks  in  plants,  once  char-
acterized,  may  be  transferred  to  high-biomass,  fast-growing 
plant  species  to  enhance  As  uptake  phytoremediation  effi-
ciency or to prevent As accumulation in food crops.

Mercury
Mercury pollution and toxicity
Mercury  is  a  highly  toxic  pollutant  and  its  widespread  con-
tamination  in  the  soil  and  water  is  threatening  human  and 
environmental  health  (Dean  et al.,  1972;  Kraemer  and 
Chardonnens,  2001).  Mercury  is  usually  released  into  the 
environment  in  inorganic  forms,  either  elemental  metal-
lic  (Hg(0))  or  ionic  (Hg(II))  forms.  Hg(II)  tends  to  bind 
strongly to soil components, which reduces its availability and 
absorption. Organic forms of Hg, particularly methylmercury, 
dimethylmercury,  and  phenylmercury,  are  highly  toxic  and 
get  accumulated  in  membrane-bound  organelles  where  these 
compounds  inhibit  essential  oxidative  and  photosynthetic 

pathways.  Methylmercury  (CH3Hg)  is  particularly  toxic  and 
the greatest danger to humans and the environment, because 
of  its  efficient  biomagnifications  in  the  food  web  (Meagher 
and  Rugh,  1998;  Patra  and  Sharma,  2000).  The  world  first 
became  aware  of  the  extreme  dangers  of  methylmercury 
in  the  1950s  after  a  large,  tragic  incident  of  human  Hg  poi-
soning  at  Minamata  Bay,  Japan  (Harada,  1995).  Because  the 
various forms of Hg are immutable to biological processes and 
many  bind  tightly  to  organic  materials,  the  vast  majority  of 
large  Hg-polluted  sites  remain  contaminated  indefinitely  and 
remain an environmental threat.

Natural  Hg  emissions  have  led  to  the  distribution  of  Hg 
throughout  the  globe.  Several  natural  processes  such  as  vol-
canoes, fires, and biological processes such as electrochemical 
reduction  to  Hg(0)  can  all  serve  as  the  primary  vehicles  for 
Hg distribution in the environment (WHO, 2003). In addition 
to  the  natural  Hg  emissions,  anthropogenic  activities  such  as 
burning of fossil fuels; mining of gold, coal, and silver (Nriagu, 
1993); and various industrial activities have increased the Hg 
emission several fold more than the natural emissions (WHO, 
2003).  Once  in  the  atmosphere,  elemental  Hg  oxidizes  into 
ionic Hg, which is more efficiently deposited in the environ-
ment,  causing  elevated  Hg  levels.  Anaerobic  sulfate-reducing 
bacteria  that  are  particularly  active  in  wetland  environments 
convert  inorganic  Hg(II)  to  methylmercury.  The  most  seri-
ous Hg pollution involves methylmercury produced by these 
native  bacteria  at  nearly  all  Hg-contaminated  wetland  sites 
(Kannan  et al.,  1998).  In  the  aquatic  environment,  methyl-
mercury-contaminated  bacteria  are  consumed  by  protozo-
ans, protozoans by small invertebrates, invertebrates by small 
fish, small fish by big fish, and finally fish by aquatic birds and 
humans  at  the  top  of  the  food  web.  Because  of  methylmer-
cury’s relatively high solubility in gut and neural membranes it 
is more concentrated in each step of the food chain than ionic 
Hg, which may pass through the digestive system of many of 
these organisms. Thus, methylmercury is biomagnified in food 
webs  and  poses  a  significant  threat  to  the  health  of  humans 
and other animals (Boischio and Henshel, 1996; Keating et al., 
1997). Consumption of Hg-contaminated fish and other sea-
food  is  known  to  be  the  major  source  of  Hg  in  the  human 
diet. Because of the resulting current Hg levels, the U.S. EPA 
cautions pregnant women and young children against frequent 
consumption of fish.

Mercury detoxification in bacteria and plants
Bacteria  mediate  resistance  to  organomercurial  and  inorganic 
mercuric salts by metabolic conversion to non-toxic elemental 
mercury Hg(0). The bacterial genes responsible for Hg resist-
ance are organized in the mer operon. The mer operons among 
different  bacteria  vary  in  structure.  In  narrow-spectrum 
Hg  resistance  the  mer  operon  is  constituted  by  genes  that 
encode  the  functional  proteins  for  regulation  (merR),  trans-
port  (merT,  merP  and/or  merC,  merF),  and  electrochemical 
reduction (merA; Summers, 1992). Bacteria with broad-spec-
trum  Hg  resistance  carry  the  additional  gene  encoding  merB 
that  confers  resistance  to  many  organomercurials,  such  as 
methylmercury  and  phenylmercury.  MerB,  organomercury 
lyase, catalyzes the protonolytic conversion of R-Hg to Hg(II) 
and  reduced  R-H,  where  R  can  be  a  wide  variety  of  organic 

314

Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

C H A P T E R   2 0

moieties  such  as  a  methyl  or  phenyl  group.  MerA,  mercu-
ric  ion  reductase,  catalyzes  the  electrochemical  reduction  of 
Hg(II) to Hg(0). Hg(0) has orders of magnitude lower toxic-
ity relative to ionic Hg or to organic forms of Hg (Summers, 
1992; Osborn et al., 1997). Metallic Hg is relatively inert, has 
very  low  solubility,  and  is  gaseous  at  standard  temperatures, 
allowing its diffusion from the bacteria that produce it. Under 
some  circumstances  metallic  Hg  will  rapidly  evaporate  from 
the  bacterial  habitat  and  be  diluted  to  apparently  harmless 
levels in the atmosphere.

In plants as in animals, Hg(II) tends to cause problems at 
the  plasma  membrane,  where  it  damages  membrane  trans-
porters such as aquaporins, affecting nutrient and water trans-
port  (Zhang  and  Tyerman,  1999).  Because  of  its  extremely 
high  thioreactivity,  Hg(II)  becomes  toxic  to  numerous 
enzyme  systems  when  it  is  at  high  enough  concentrations. 
Organomercurials have been reported to rapidly enter mem-
brane-rich  plastids  where  they  accumulate  and  disrupt  elec-
tron transport and oxygen evolution (Bernier and Carpentier, 
1995),  photophosphorylation,  chlorophyll  content,  and  chlo-
rophyll fluorescence (Kupper et al., 1996; Sinha et al., 1996). 
Plants  have  no  requirement  for  Hg  and  typically  play  a  rela-
tively passive role in the biogeochemistry of Hg compounds. 
To  date  no  naturally  occurring  plant  species  with  significant 
capabilities  for  accumulation,  degradation,  or  removal  of 
Hg  have  been  identified.  Several  plant  species  convert  mod-
est  amounts  of  Hg(II)  to  Hg(0)  by  the  activities  of  several 
redox enzymes such as catalase and peroxidase (Heaton et al., 
1998). Hg(0) is released into the soil from roots or into the 
atmosphere from shoots. On the other hand, Hg(II) is highly 
reactive,  tends  to  bind  sulfhydryl  groups  of  sulfur  contain-
ing enzymes, and forms particularly stable chemical products 
with reduced thiols. Although reaction with thiols of various 
enzymes and proteins may destroy their activity, proteins and 
protein complexes with thiol-bound Hg(II) are relatively non-
toxic and may be sequestered in vacuoles.

Biotechnological approaches for Hg transformation 
and phytoremediation
The plants examined cannot successfully detoxify or convert 
highly toxic methylmercury to less toxic inorganic forms. As 
discussed  previously,  the  genes  encoding  bacterial  mercury 
transformations  have  been  well  characterized  (Smith  et al., 
1998),  laying  the  molecular  genetic  groundwork  for  enhanc-
ing Hg tolerance in plants. A strategy to develop plants with 
improved abilities for Hg removal and detoxification was initi-
ated in the early 1990s by Richard Meagher and co-workers. 
They  made  use  of  the  two  bacterial  genes  discussed  above 
from  the  well-characterized  mer  operon,  merA,  and  merB, 
to  engineer  an  Hg  transformation  and  remediation  system 
in plants (Rugh et al., 1996, 1998; Bizily et al., 1999, 2000). 
Diverse plant species such as A. thaliana (Rugh et al., 1996), 
tobacco  (Heaton  et al.,  2005),  yellow  poplar  (Rugh  et al., 
1998),  cottonwood  (Che  et al.,  2003),  and  rice  (Heaton 
et al.,  2003)  constitutively  expressing  modified  merA  were 
resistant to at least ten times greater concentrations of Hg(II) 
than those that kill non-transgenic controls. These transgenic 
plants showed significant levels of Hg(0) volatilization relative 
to controls. The ability of genetically engineered deep-rooted 

yellow poplar and cottonwood to grow on increased concen-
trations  of  ionic  Hg(II)  may  demonstrate  the  potential  for 
phytovolatilization  methods  of  Hg  remediation  in  wetlands. 
In  a  pot  soil  experiment  study,  transgenic  plants  expressing 
merA  outperformed  wild-type  plants  on  Hg-contaminated 
soil (Heaton et al., 1998). However, the movement of Hg(0) 
from  the  roots  of  these  plants  to  the  soil  and  to  the  atmos-
phere has not been examined.

As discussed earlier, methylmercury is more toxic than ionic 
or metallic mercury and is efficiently biomagnified up the food 
chain,  while  ionic  and  metallic  Hg  species  are  not  biomagni-
fied.  Methylmercury,  thus,  poses  an  immediate  and  serious 
threat  to  human  populations.  Because  merA  only  converts 
Hg(II)  to  Hg(0)  and  thus  cannot  detoxify  and  protect  plants 
against  the  more  toxic  and  environmentally  relevant  methyl-
mercury, both the merA and merB genes are needed to protect 
cells  from  methylmercury.  MerB  catalyzes  the  protonolysis 
of the carbon-mercury bond, removing the organic ligand and 
releasing Hg(II), which is a more reactive and less mobile Hg 
species. Plants were engineered by over-expressing a modified 
bacterial organomercury lyase gene (merB) to transform meth-
ylmercury  to  ionic  Hg  (Bizily  et al.,  1999,  2000).  Transgenic 
A. thaliana plants expressing merB grew vigorously on a wide 
range  of  concentrations  of  monomethylmercuric  chloride 
and  phenylmercuric  acetate  as  compared  to  non-transformed 
plants, which were severely inhibited or died at the same orga-
nomercurial concentrations (Bizily et al., 1999). These results 
showed  that  expression  of  merB  alone  is  sufficient  to  confer 
methylmercury  tolerance,  probably  because  of  the  extreme 
toxicity  of  methylmercury  to  most  eukaryotic  cells.  These 
transgenic plants manage to outgrow the environmentally rel-
evant concentrations of methylmercury by converting methyl-
mercury  to  Hg(II),  which  accumulates  in  these  plants.  In  an 
attempt  to  more  efficiently  detoxify  methylmercury,  plants 
were engineered to co-express merA and merB. The resulting 
transgenic  plants  carry  out  the  two-step  conversion  of  meth-
ylmercury to volatile Hg0 and are tolerant to 50 times greater 
concentrations of methylmercury than are required to kill con-
trol plants, and five times greater than the concentrations that 
kill  merB  plants  (Bizily  et al.,  2000).  Transgenic  Eastern  cot-
tonwood trees expressing both merB and merA genes were also 
highly tolerant to organic mercury (Lyyra et al., 2007). These 
results  demonstrated  that  plants  (trees,  shrubs,  and  grasses) 
can  be  engineered  to  detoxify  the  most  abundant  forms  of 
ionic  and  organic  mercury  found  at  polluted  sites,  and  it  is 
likely that a number of phytoremediation strategies that block 
its flow into the environment can be adopted.

The  chloroplast  and  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)  have 
been shown to be significant targets for Hg poisoning (Bernier 
and  Carpentier,  1995;  Bizily  et al.,  2003).  Therefore,  engi-
neering  Hg  detoxification  systems  in  chloroplasts  or  ER  may 
offer high levels of Hg tolerance and detoxification. Ruiz et al. 
(2003)  used  chloroplast  engineering  for  Hg  detoxification 
by integrating the merA and merB genes into the chloroplast 
genome.  Transgenic  tobacco  plants  exhibited  high  levels  of 
tolerance  to  the  organomercurial  compound  phenylmercuric 
acetate  (PMA)  and  accumulated  100-  and  4-fold  more  Hg 
in the shoot in the presence of PMA or HgCl2 than untrans-
formed plants, respectively (Hussein et al., 2007). Therefore, 

315

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

SeO4

2–

SeO4

2–

SeO4

2–

ATP sulfurylase

ATP

APSe

SeO3

2–

Se2–

OAS

SeCys

DMDSe

methyl-SeCys

SeCys methyltransferase

Cystathionine-γ-synthase

OPH
Secystathionine

Sehomocysteine

SeMet

SeCys lyase

Se0

Ala

proteins

chloroplast

cytosol

SeCys

proteins

SehomoCys

SeMet

methyl-SeMet

DMSe

Figure 20.3 l Schematic overview of Se metabolism in plants, showing (in italics) enzymes that were used to alter plant 
properties with respect to Se tolerance, accumulation, and/or volatilization. APSe: adenosine phosphoselenate; OAS: O-acetylserine; 
OPH: O-phosphohomoserine; SeCys: selenocysteine; SeMet: selenomethionine; DMSe: dimethylselenide; DMDSe: dimethyldiselenide.

chloroplast  engineering  may  prove  a  beneficial  approach  for 
Hg phytoremediation as well.
Mercury hyperaccumulation
Mercury  detoxification  and  complete  volatilization  is  an  ideal 
strategy in certain situations where immediate removal of Hg 
is needed. However, there is a certain amount of public resist-
ance  and  criticism  concerning  this  technology:  some  people 
argue that the volatilized Hg(0), although less toxic, will even-
tually  be  deposited  on  the  earth’s  surface.  Therefore,  addi-
tional  strategies  that  can  trap  and  hyperaccumulate  Hg(II) 
aboveground in plant parts for later harvest are needed to pre-
vent  the  release  of  Hg(0)  in  air.  In  an  initial  step  forward  in 
this direction, plants were engineered that combine the expres-
sion of merB, which catalyzes the conversion of methylmercury 
to  Hg(II)  and  enzymes  that  enhance  the  synthesis  of  phyto-
chelatins that bind Hg(II) (Li and Meagher, unpublished data). 
These  plants  accumulate  more  Hg  and  are  more  resistant  to 
methylmercury  than  plants  expressing  either  transgene  alone. 
Future genetic manipulations to improve the phytoremediation 
of  Hg  need  to  include  enhanced  Hg  uptake  into  roots,  trans-
port to shoot, and sequestration into aboveground tissues.

In conclusion, Hg is a neurotoxin and its widespread con-
tamination  poses  significant  human  health  concerns.  Taking 
advantage  of  two  bacterial  genes,  merB  and  merA,  vari-
ous  plant  species  have  been  engineered  for  detoxification  of 
highly toxic methylmercury to the less toxic volatile form of 
mercury,  Hg(0).  Although  these  engineered  plants  showed 

significant  potential  for  Hg  detoxification  in  laboratory  and 
greenhouse  conditions,  the  effectiveness  of  these  plants  in 
the  natural  environment  needs  to  be  proven.  Future  efforts 
should be focused on engineering plants native to various cli-
matic  regions  where  Hg  contamination  is  widespread.  As  an 
alternative to Hg(0) volatilization, there is a need to develop 
strategies  for  reduction  of  methylmercury  to  Hg(II)  and 
eventual  sequestration  of  Hg(II)  in  the  aboveground  tissues. 
Additionally,  engineering  the  Hg  detoxification  enzymes  in 
subcellular compartments such as ER and chloroplast will be 
advantageous.

Selenium
Overview of Se metabolism in plants
Selenium is an essential nutrient for many organisms including 
humans,  but  is  toxic  at  elevated  levels.  Selenium  deficiency 
and  toxicity  are  problems  worldwide.  There  is  no  evidence 
that  Se  is  essential  for  higher  plants,  but  due  to  its  similar-
ity to sulfur Se is readily taken up and assimilated by plants 
via sulfur transporters and biochemical pathways. Plants accu-
mulate Se in all organs including seeds, and can also volatilize 
Se into the atmosphere. Some species can even hyperaccumu-
late Se up to 1% of their dry weight. The ability of plants to 
accumulate and volatilize Se may be used for phytoremedia-
tion. Biotechnology has proven useful to obtain better insight 
into the genetic and biochemical mechanisms that control Se 
tolerance,  accumulation,  and  volatilization  in  plants,  and  the 

316

Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

C H A P T E R   2 0

resulting  transgenics  with  enhanced  levels  of  these  processes 
show  promise  for  use  in  phytoremediation  and  as  fortified 
food.  Next  we  present  an  overview  of  plant  Se  metabolism 
with a focus on biotechnological advances.

As  summarized  in  Figure  20.3,  plants  readily  take  up 
selenate  (SeVI)  or  selenite  (SeIV)  from  their  environment 
and incorporate it into organic compounds using sulfate assim-
ilation enzymes (for reviews see Terry et al., 2000; Sors et al., 
2005;  Pilon-Smits  and  Quinn,  2010).  The  toxicity  of  Se  is 
thought to be due to non-specific incorporation of the result-
ing  amino  acids,  selenocysteine  (SeCys)  and  selenomethio-
nine (SeMet), into proteins. To prevent this, plants may break 
down SeCys into relatively innocuous elemental Se (Se0) or 
methylate it to relatively non-toxic methyl-SeCys, which may 
be accumulated or further methylated to volatile dimethyldis-
elenide (DMDSe). SeMet can also be methylated to form vol-
atile dimethylselenide (DMSe). Methylation of SeCys occurs 
primarily in Se hyperaccumulators, and is thought to be a key 
mechanism for their Se tolerance (Neuhierl et al., 1999).

Plant  Se  accumulation  and  volatilization  are  both  use-
ful  for  Se  phytoremediation.  Moreover,  species  that  accu-
mulate  selenocompounds  with  anticarcinogenic  properties, 
particularly  methyl-SeCys,  may  be  useful  as  fortified  foods 
(Bañuelos,  2009).  Examples  of  such  species  are  broccoli, 
garlic,  and  the  hyperaccumulators  two-grooved  milkvetch 
(Astragalus  bisulcatus),  and  prince’s  plume  (Stanleya  pin-
nata). Sulfur-loving plants such as Brassica and Allium species 
(mustards,  cabbages,  onion,  garlic)  typically  also  accumulate 
Se well (0.01–0.1% of dry weight) and have been called (sec-
ondary)  accumulator  species.  Hyperaccumulators  are  unique 
in  that  they  preferentially  take  up  Se  over  S,  can  hyperac-
cumulate  and  tolerate  Se  up  to  1%  of  dry  weight  under 
field  conditions,  and  accumulate  methyl-SeCys  (Neuhierl 
et al.,  1999).  Selenium  hyperaccumulators  are  only  found 
on  seleniferous  soils,  perhaps  because  they  depend  on  Se  as 
a  defense  compound  against  herbivores  or  pathogens  (Pilon-
Smits and Quinn, 2010).

Biotechnological approaches to study and 
manipulate Se metabolism in plants
In a first approach to manipulate plant Se tolerance, accumu-
lation,  and/or  volatilization,  genes  involved  in  sulfur/selenium 
assimilation  and  volatilization  were  over-expressed.  Brassica 
juncea (Indian mustard) over-expressing ATP sulfurylase (APS), 
involved  in  selenate-to-selenite  conversion,  showed  enhanced 
selenate  reduction,  judged  from  the  finding  that  transgenic 
APS  plants  supplied  with  selenate  accumulated  an  organic 
form of Se while wild-type plants accumulated selenate (Pilon-
Smits et al., 1999). The APS transgenics accumulated two- to 
three-fold  more  Se  than  wild-type,  and  1.5-fold  more  sulfur. 
The APS plants tolerated the accumulated Se better than wild-
type, perhaps because of the organic form of Se accumulated. 
Selenium volatilization rate was not affected in the APS trans-
genics.  Indian  mustard  over-expressing  cystathionine  gamma 
synthase (CgS, the first enzyme in the conversion of SeCys to 
SeMet)  showed  two-  to  three-fold  higher  volatilization  rates 
compared to untransformed plants (Van Huysen et al., 2003). 
They accumulated 40% less Se in their tissues than wild-type, 
presumably  as  a  result  of  their  enhanced  volatilization.  The 

CgS  transgenics  were  also  more  Se  tolerant  than  wild-type 
plants, perhaps due to their lower tissue Se levels.

from  these  various  transgenics, 

A  second  approach  to  manipulate  plant  Se  metabolism 
focused  on  the  prevention  of  SeCys  incorporation  into  pro-
teins. In one strategy, selenocysteine lyase (SL) was expressed 
in  A.  thaliana  and  Indian  mustard,  initially  using  a  mouse 
SL  (Pilon  et al.,  2003;  Garifullina  et al.,  2003),  and  subse-
quently an A. thaliana homolog called cpNifS (Van Hoewyk 
et al.,  2005).  SeCys  lyase  breaks  down  SeCys  into  alanine 
and Se(0). The transgenics showed reduced Se incorporation 
into  proteins,  enhanced  Se  tolerance,  and  about  a  two-fold 
enhanced  Se  accumulation  compared  to  wild-type  plants.  In 
another strategy to prevent SeCys incorporation into proteins, 
SeCys  methyltransferase  (SMT)  from  hyperaccumulator 
A.  bisulcatus  was  over-expressed  in  A.  thaliana  or  B.  juncea 
(Ellis et al., 2004; LeDuc et al., 2004). The SMT transgenics 
showed  enhanced  Se  tolerance  and  enhanced  Se  accumula-
tion, in the form of methyl-SeCys. The SMT plants also had 
increased  rates  of  Se  volatilization  in  the  form  of  DMDSe. 
Double-transgenic  Indian  mustard  plants  (over)expressing 
both  APS  and  SMT  even  showed  up  to  nine-fold  higher  Se 
accumulation compared to wild-type (LeDuc et al., 2006).
Selenium phytoremediation field studies
The  results 
including 
enhanced  Se  tolerance,  up  to  nine-fold  higher  Se  accumula-
tion and up to three-fold faster Se volatilization, are promis-
ing  for  phytoremediation  but  all  obtained  under  laboratory 
conditions.  To  better  determine  the  transgenics’  potential 
for  phytoremediation,  they  were  tested  for  their  capacity 
to  accumulate  Se  from  naturally  seleniferous  soil  and  from 
Se-contaminated  sediment.  On  seleniferous  soil  in  a  green-
house  pot  experiment,  the  APS  transgenics  accumulated  Se 
to three-fold higher levels than wild-type Indian mustard, and  
the CgS transgenics contained 40% lower Se levels than wild-
type (Van Huysen et al., 2004), all in agreement with the lab-
oratory results. Plant growth was the same for all plant types 
in this experiment. Similarly, when growing in the field on Se 
(selenate)-contaminated  sediment  in  the  San  Joaquin  Valley 
in California, the APS transgenics accumulated Se to a four-
fold  higher  level  than  wild-type  Indian  mustard  (Bañuelos 
et al.,  2005).  In  a  second  field  experiment  on  the  same 
Se-polluted  sediment,  the  SL  and  SMT  transgenics  showed 
two-fold higher Se accumulation than wild-type Indian mus-
tard,  also  in  agreement  with  earlier  laboratory  experiments 
(Bañuelos  et al.,  2007).  In  both  field  experiments  biomass 
production  was  comparable  for  the  different  plant  types. 
Therefore,  the  results  obtained  using  naturally  seleniferous 
or Se-contaminated soils in greenhouse or field are similar to 
those  obtained  under  controlled  laboratory  conditions.  The 
various  transgenics  showed  enhanced  Se  accumulation,  vola-
tilization, and/or tolerance, all promising traits for use in phy-
toremediation or as Se-fortified foods.

Organic pollutants

Phytoremediation of organic pollutants offers the potential for 
complete degradation of the pollutant if the chemical can be 
taken up by the plant and if all the necessary biodegradation 

317

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

genes are present. Most of the organic pollutants do have phy-
totoxic  effects  that  must  be  overcome  for  phytoremediation 
to  be  effective.  Another  limiting  factor  includes  the  solubil-
ity of the pollutant that can hinder the ability of the plant to 
uptake the chemical. There are several classes of organic pol-
lutants:  solvents  (i.e.,  trichloroethylene);  explosives  such  as 
trinitrotoluene  (TNT)  and  cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine  or 
Research  Department  Explosive  (RDX);  polycyclic  aromatic 
hydrocarbons  (i.e.,  naphthalene,  pyrene);  petroleum  prod-
ucts  including  benzene,  toluene,  ethylbenzene,  and  xylene 
(BTEX);  polychlorinated  biphenyls  (PCBs);  and  herbicides/
pesticides  (i.e.,  atrazine,  chlorpyrifos,  2,4-D).  In  general, 
plants  use  a  three-step  pathway  for  the  detoxification  of 
organic  pollutants.  In  the  first  phase,  a  reactive  group,  such 
as  a  hydroxyl,  amino,  or  sulfhydryl  group,  is  added  to  the 
xenobiotic.  In  the  second  phase,  another  compound  such  as 
a sugar moiety, is conjugated via the reactive group. Finally, in 
the  third  phase  the  conjugated  pollutant  is  sequestered  into 
the vacuole or integrated into cell wall components, thus ren-
dering the compound less toxic. Efforts to increase the effec-
tiveness  of  phytoremediation  of  organic  pollutants  involve 
either the over-expression of the plant genes involved in any 

of  these  steps,  introduction  of  microbial  genes  known  to  be 
involved in pollutant biodegradation, or the inoculation of the 
plant with pollutant-degrading endophytes (reviewed in Doty, 
2008; Dowling and Doty, 2009; Weyens et al., 2009b). In the 
next section we will summarize the results from these various 
approaches for different classes of pollutants (Table 20.1).

Solvents
Environmental  pollution  from  solvents  is  often  caused  by 
dumping of the used solvent directly on the ground, eventually 
leading to contamination of the groundwater. One of the most 
widespread  of  the  organic  pollutants  is  the  solvent  trichlo-
roethylene  (TCE).  Engineering  methods  for  remediation  of 
TCE  include  air  sparging  where  the  contaminated  water  is 
pumped  through  a  cylinder  into  which  air  is  blown,  causing 
the TCE to volatilize and enter the atmosphere. Another com-
mon  engineering  method  is  the  addition  of  oxidants  such  as 
potassium permanganate or hydrogen peroxide that react with 
the TCE. Bioremediation of TCE using anaerobic bacteria is a 
popular biological remediation strategy. The site is first made 
anaerobic by the addition of large quantities of substrates such 

Table 20.1  Summary of transgenic plants for phytoremediation of organic pollutants

Compound

Atrazine

Gene

bphC

Plant

Tobacco

Arabidopsis, 
alfalfa

Tobacco

Rice

Poplar

Tobacco

Tobacco

Reference

Wang et al. (2005)

Bode et al. (2004)

Kawahigashi et al. (2006)

Doty et al. (2007)

James et al. (2008)

Francova et al. (2003)

hCYP1A1/A2

hCYP1A1/2B6/2C19

rCYP2E1

hCYP2E1

bphC

bphA, bphE, bphF, bphG

Tobacco

Mohammadi et al. (2007)

bphC

xplA

xplA, xplB

hCYP2E1

rCYP2E1

rCYP2E1

PETNr

nfsI

pnrA

UGTs

Tobacco

Arabidopsis

Arabidopsis

Tobacco

Novakova et al. (2009)

Rylott et al. (2006)

Jackson et al. (2007)

Doty et al. (2000)

Atropa belledonna

Banerjee et al. (2002)

Poplar

Tobacco

Tobacco

Poplar

Doty et al. (2007)

French et al. (1999)

Hannink et al. (2001)

van Dillewijn et al. (2008)

Arabidopsis

Gandia-Herrero et al. (2008)

Atrazine

Atrazine

Benzene

Benzene

PCBs

PCBs

PCBs

RDX

RDX

TCE

TCE

TCE

TNT

TNT

TNT

TNT

Toluene

hCYP2E1

Tobacco

James et al. (2008)

318

Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

C H A P T E R   2 0

as molasses, vegetable oil, or lactate. The area is then bioaug-
mented with a consortia of bacteria that degrade TCE to cis-
DCE,  vinyl  chloride,  and  finally  to  harmless  ethane.  All  of 
these  engineering  methods  are  effective  ways  of  remediating 
TCE-contaminated sites, which can usually be achieved within 
a few years. However, all of these methods are very expensive, 
challenging,  and  can  sometimes  lead  to  worse  environmen-
tal situations. Air sparging results in the contamination of the 
air  with  the  pollutant,  which  is  not  an  ideal  solution  for  the 
neighboring  communities.  The  use  of  potassium  permanga-
nate  often  results  in  purple  residue  because  of  the  difficulty 
in dispersing the oxidant precisely in the required location and 
at the proper quantity to react with the TCE. Anaerobic bio-
degradation of TCE frequently stalls at vinyl chloride (VC), a 
highly toxic metabolite known to cause cancer. Although spe-
cific  strains  of  Dehalococcoides  bacteria  are  able  to  degrade 
the  VC  to  ethane,  the  strains  are  sensitive  to  the  low  pH 
that results from the original substrates used to make the site 
anaerobic.  Addition  of  buffers  often  leads  to  fouling  of  the 
pipes and increased expense. Although these methods are able 
to  remediate  TCE-contaminated  sites,  the  expense  and  diffi-
culties in practice make them out of the realistic realm for the 
many sites with low-level or widespread contamination.

Phytoremediation of solvents including TCE is effective for 
sites with shallow groundwater within the range of tree roots. 
Poplar  trees  are  especially  well  suited  for  phytoremediation 
of TCE as they are deep-rooted, and a variety of herbaceous 
species  (tobacco,  Leucaena  leucocephala,  Arabidopsis)  also 
have  the  genetic  capability  to  degrade  TCE  (Shang  et al., 
2001;  Doty  et al.,  2003;  Doty,  2008).  Plants  seem  to  utilize 
a  TCE  degradation  pathway  similar  to  mammals,  since  both 
result in the metabolite trichloroethanol (Shang et al., 2001). 
However,  phytoremediation  of  TCE  is  limited  by  the  appar-
ent low expression of the cytochrome P450 enzyme that acti-
vates TCE prior to its degradation. The metabolism of TCE in 
plants is often considered too slow and may lead to phytovola-
tilization of the pollutant.

Strategies  to  improve  phytoremediation  of  TCE  include 
genetic  engineering  or  endophyte-assisted  phytoremedia-
tion  (Doty,  2008;  James  and  Strand,  2009).  Over-expression 
of  the  mammalian  cytochrome  P450  CYP2E1  in  transgenic 
tobacco (Doty et al., 2000) and poplar (Doty et al., 2007) led 
to a strong increase in the metabolism of TCE. There was an 
increase in TCE removal rate both from the liquid and from 
air by the transgenic poplar. Although only the first gene in the  
pathway was over-expressed in the transgenics, dozens of other 
genes with homology to pollutant degradation genes were also 
upregulated in response to TCE in the transgenic poplar (Kang 
et al.,  2010).  These  genes  included  those  involved  in  pollut-
ant  activation,  conjugation  to  sugars,  and  transport.  Field  tri-
als  of  the  transgenic  poplar  are  in  progress  using  a  simulated 
pump and treat system (James et al., unpublished). As in the 
lab  studies,  the  CYP2E1  transgenic  plants  had  more  of  the 
TCE metabolite, trichloroethanol, than did the vector-control  
plants.  There  was  also  an  elevated  level  of  chloride  ions  in 
the  test  beds  with  the  transgenic  plants,  indicating  dechlo-
rination  of  the  TCE.  However,  the  concentration  of  TCE  in 
the effluent was not further reduced by the transgenic plants 
compared to the controls. Therefore, the plants may be more 

suitable for contaminated water as simulated in the lab stud-
ies (Doty et al., 2007) rather than for pump and treat systems 
that have a continuous source of TCE.

The  second  approach  to  improving  phytoremediation  of 
TCE  is  through  the  use  of  endophytes  that  can  metabolize 
TCE. In this strategy, it is thought that the plant and bacteria 
work  together,  with  the  plant  effectively  taking  up  the  pol-
lutant,  and  the  endophytic  bacteria  known  to  colonize  the 
vascular  tissues  and  intercellular  spaces  degrading  the  pol-
lutant  (Doty,  2008;  Weyens  et al.,  2009b).  A  well-studied 
aerobic  TCE-degrading  bacterium  is  the  Burkholderia  strain 
G4  that  has  a  large,  self-transmissible,  degradative  plasmid, 
TOM  (Shields  et al.,  1995).  This  bacterium  co-metabolizes 
TCE  using  a  toluene  ortho-monooxygenase  encoded  by  an 
operon  of  tom  genes,  resulting  in  harmless  metabolites.  The 
plasmid,  or  a  mutant  version  with  constitutive  expression  of 
the  tom  genes,  can  be  transferred  to  native  endophytes  of 
poplar (Taghavi et al., 2005). Poplar trees were inoculated in 
situ  with  the  modified  endophytic  strain  containing  pTOM-
Bu61  to  improve  phytoremediation  of  TCE  (Weyens  et al., 
2009a). Although no increased uptake of TCE was reported, 
there was a reduction in the phytovolatilization of TCE from 
an  average  of  0.07 ng cm2 h1  for  the  uninoculated  plants 
to  an  average  of  about  0.01 ng cm2 h1  from  the  inoculated 
plants.  Since  most  contaminated  sites  have  both  inorganic 
and  organic  pollutants,  the  endophyte  approach  was  then 
used  to  determine  if  inoculation  could  improve  tolerance  to 
both classes of pollutants (Weyens et al., 2010). Yellow lupine 
plants  were  inoculated  with  a  Burkholderia  strain  contain-
ing  both  the  tom  genes  and  the  ncc-nre  Ni  resistance  genes. 
Although  there  was  no  increase  in  shoot  mass  after  inocula-
tion, root mass was increased by 30% in the inoculated plants 
exposed  to  nickel  and  TCE  relative  to  unexposed  plants. 
While  there  was  a  decrease  in  phytotranspiration  of  TCE  in 
the inoculated plants, the difference was not statistically sig-
nificant.  Overall,  endophyte-assisted  phytoremediation  of 
TCE has led to some improvements, but so far no changes in 
TCE removal have been reported.

Explosives
At  military  training  ranges  there  is  a  need  for  remediation 
of  the  nitroaromatic  explosives,  TNT  and  RDX  (hexahydro-
1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine), to prevent the spread into neigh-
boring  communities.  TNT  causes  anemia  and  liver  damage, 
while  RDX  affects  the  central  nervous  system,  causing  con-
vulsions.  Extensive  areas  are  contaminated  with  these  pol-
lutants,  approximately  40  million  acres  in  the  United  States 
alone  (U.S.  Defense  Science  Board  Task  Force,  1998;  Rylott 
and  Bruce,  2008).  Nitroaromatic  explosives  contain  an  aro-
matic  ring  with  attached  nitro  (-NO2)  groups.  A  difficulty 
in phytoremediation of TNT is the toxicity of this pollutant, 
and its concentration on sites can be as high as 87,000 mg kg1 
(Talmage et al., 1999). RDX is less toxic but its high solubil-
ity in water gives it a higher potential of leaving the site and 
entering the water table. Hot spots of RDX can be nearly as 
high as those for TNT.

Some plant species are able to tolerate relatively low levels 
of TNT, transforming it to an aminodinitrotoluene that is then 

319

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

conjugated to sugars or glutathione, and then probably stored 
in the vacuole or cell walls, or secreted. Microarray and other 
gene expression assays have revealed several important classes 
of  enzymes  involved  in  the  plant  responses  to  nitroaromatics 
(Gandia-Herrero  et al.,  2008).  In  A.  thaliana,  a  small  fam-
ily  of  oxophytodienoate  reductases  (OPRs)  is  upregulated  in 
response  to  TNT  (Mezzari  et al.,  2005).  In  Chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii  and  in  Populus  trichocarpa,  glutathione-S-trans-
ferases (GSTs) are also upregulated. Comparisons of plant gene 
expression responses to TNT and RDX revealed little commo-
nality; therefore there seems to be little overlap in the detoxi-
fication pathways for these two explosives. Similarly, different 
bacteria  metabolize  TNT  and  RDX  using  different  genes. 
Although some microorganisms are able to degrade the nitroar-
omatics, they seem to lack the necessary mass to significantly 
remediate the contaminated sites (Rylott and Bruce, 2008).

Transgenic  model  plants  expressing  these  bacterial  genes 
for the degradation of TNT and RDX have successfully over-
come the phytotoxic effects, removing more of these pollut-
ants (recently reviewed in Rylott and Bruce, 2008; van Aken, 
2009).  The  pentaerythritol  tetranitrate  (PETN)  reduct-
ase  gene  from  Enterobacter  cloacae  strain  PB2  encodes  an 
enzyme  that  removes  nitrate  from  TNT,  allowing  the  bac-
teria  to  use  TNT  as  a  nitrogen  source.  Expression  of  this 
gene  in  transgenic  tobacco  resulted  in  improved  tolerance 
to  TNT  (French  et al.,  1999).  Transgenic  tobacco  contain-
ing a bacterial nitroreductase gene (nfsI) from the same bac-
terium  metabolized  TNT  at  much  faster  rates  than  control 
plants  (Hannink  et al.,  2001).  Not  only  do  the  transgen-
ics  have  improved  TNT  remediation  abilities,  they  also  help 
restore  the  rhizospheric  community  by  reducing  the  soil 
toxicity  (Travis  et al.,  2007).  Expression  of  a  nitroreductase 
gene  (pnrA)  from  a  Pseudomonas  strain  in  transgenic  poplar 
resulted in increased uptake of TNT from water and soil (van 
Dillewijn et al., 2008). The transgenic poplar were tolerant to 
more than five times as high a concentration of TNT in hydro-
ponics, and twice as high in soils, compared to the non-trans-
genic poplar. Following the first phase of plant detoxification 
of xenobiotics, plants generally conjugate the activated mole-
cule and sequester it in the vacuole. Since microarray analysis 
revealed increased expression of genes involved in conjugation 
(Gandia-Herrero et al., 2008), phytoremediation of TNT may 
be  improved  by  upregulating  genes  involved  not  only  in  the 
nitroreductase step, but also in the conjugation step. Indeed, 
over-expression  of  two  uridine  glycosyltransferases  from 
Arabidopsis  that  had  been  identified  by  microarray  analysis 
resulted in increased conjugate production and TNT detoxifi-
cation (Gandia-Herrero et al., 2008).

RDX  can  be  degraded  and  used  as  a  source  of  nitrogen 
by  several  bacterial  strains  isolated  from  contaminated  sites 
(Crocker  et al.,  2006).  The  xplA  gene  responsible  for  RDX 
biodegradation encodes a novel, fused flavodoxin-cytochrome 
P450  enzyme  (Rylott  et al.,  2006).  Transgenic  Arabidopsis 
plants  expressing  xplA  (CYP177)  from  Rhodococcus  rho-
dochrous  11Y  tolerated  and  removed  high  levels  of  RDX, 
whereas  non-transgenic  plants  did  not  take  up  any  signifi-
cant  amount.  The  xplA  transgenics  grew  in  soils  containing 
2000 mg kg1, a level nearly ten times higher than non-trans-
genic  plants  could  tolerate.  In  recent  studies,  co-expression 

of  both  xplA  and  xplB  in  transgenic  plants  resulted  in  even 
greater  improvements  in  RDX  removal  rates,  30-fold  higher 
than  with  xplA  alone  (Jackson  et al.,  2007).  Since  military 
sites  are  co-contaminated  with  both  TNT  and  RDX,  plants 
with  the  ability  to  detoxify  both  types  of  explosives  would 
be desirable. Poplar plants with nfsI and xplA have increased 
removal  of  both  TNT  and  RDX,  and  triple  transform-
ants  with  xplA,  xplB,  and  nfsI  are  being  constructed  (Doty, 
unpublished).

Although  there  are  no  reports  of  endophyte-assisted  phy-
toremediation  of  explosives,  there  are  indications  that  this 
could be an alternative approach. A natural endophyte of pop-
lar, Methylobacterium sp. Strain BJ001, is capable of degrad-
ing TNT, RDX, and HMX, mineralizing 60% of the chemicals 
in about two months (van Aken et al., 2004). Characterization 
of  the  xplA/xplB  systems  of  a  variety  of  bacterial  strains 
revealed  that  the  genes  are  on  a  plasmid  that  can  be  conju-
gatively  transferred  (Andeer  et al.,  2009).  Adding  the  ability 
to degrade RDX to natural endophytes of high biomass plants 
such as poplar and willow could result in improved phytore-
mediation of this class of pollutants.

BTEX, PAHs, and PCBs
Improved phytoremediation using biotechnology is also being 
pursued  for  BTEX,  PAHs,  and  PCBs.  Petroleum  pollutants, 
including  hydrocarbon  chains,  and  the  aromatics  benzene, 
toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene (BTEX) can be remediated 
using  plants  if  the  concentrations  are  low.  Plants  growing  on 
sites contaminated with these pollutants often contain petro-
leum-degrading  bacteria  in  the  roots  or  in  the  rhizosphere 
(Siciliano  et al.,  2003).  Poplar  trees  growing  on  a  BTEX-
contaminated  site  harbored  a  few  dozen  endophytes  with 
pollutant-degrading capabilities that may improve phytoreme-
diation (Moore et al., 2006). To increase phytoremediation of 
BTEX  chemicals,  the  genes  for  degrading  the  BTEX  compo-
nent,  toluene,  were  transferred  to  an  endophytic  strain  and 
inoculated  onto  lupine  (Barac  et al.,  2004).  The  inoculated 
plants  were  able  to  tolerate  levels  of  toluene  ten  times  the 
normally phytotoxic levels. When the original toluene-degrad-
ing  strain  was  inoculated  into  the  more  suitable  remediation 
plant, poplar, the strain conjugatively transferred the plasmid 
in planta to the native endophytes, resulting in increased tol-
erance to toluene (Taghavi et al., 2005). The presence of the 
endophyte also reduced the phytotranspiration of the chemi-
cal.  Furthermore,  transgenic  plants  expressing  mammalian 
cytochrome P450 2E1 had greatly increased rates of removal 
of  toluene  and  benzene  (James  et al.,  2008).  Toluene  was 
removed from the hydroponic solution within two days, at a 
rate  ten  times  faster  than  the  vector-control  plants.  Benzene 
was nearly completely removed within three days by CYP2E1 
transgenic  tobacco,  while  the  vector-control  plants  removed 
benzene no better than the unplanted controls.

Phytoremediation  of  PAHs  has  had 

limited  success 
due  to  the  high  toxicity  of  this  class  of  pollutants.  Many  of 
these  ring-structured  compounds  are  strong  carcinogens, 
formed  from  the  incomplete  combustion  of  fossil  fuels. 
Naphthalene,  a  low  molecular  weight  PAH,  is  one  of  the 
most  common  pollutants  on  the  National  Priorities  List  of 

320

Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

C H A P T E R   2 0

the  United  States  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (U.S. 
EPA).  It  is  phytotoxic,  causing  growth  inhibition,  reduced 
transpiration,  chlorosis,  and  wilting  (Germaine  et al.,  2009). 
Thygesen  and  Trapp  (2002)  exposed  hydroponically  grown 
willow  plants  to  a  variety  of  PAHs.  Although  phenanthrene 
and  benzo(a)  pyrene  did  not  affect  willow  growth,  naphtha-
lene (325 mg L1) killed the plants. In a similar study, willow 
plants  readily  took  up  low  levels  of  naphthalene  but  uptake 
of  pyrene  and  phenanthrene  stalled  after  three  days  with 
phytotoxic effects (Khan and Doty, unpublished). Therefore, 
different  willow  species  may  have  different  PAH  tolerance 
capacities.

Improving  phytoremediation  of  PAHs  using  endophytes 
is  a  promising  approach.  Several  PAH-degrading  endophytes 
were  isolated  from  poplar  and  willow  that  can  utilize  PAHs 
as the sole carbon source (Doty, 2008). Experiments to deter-
mine  if  the  PAH-degrading  endophyte,  PD1,  can  improve 
phytoremediation  in  willow  are  now  underway.  Using  conju-
gative transfer of a plasmid conferring PAH degradation into 
an endophytic Pseudomonas putida strain, Germaine and col-
leagues (2009) effectively reduced phytotoxicity of naphtha-
lene. The native endophyte did not reduce phytotoxicity, nor 
did  the  non-endophytic  P.  putida  PAH-degrading  strain.  The 
endophyte  with  pNAH7,  however,  protected  the  inoculated 
peas, resulting in significantly higher germination rates in soil 
containing  30 mg  naphthalene  per  kg  soil,  from  20%  germi-
nation  of  the  uninoculated  plants  to  80%  in  the  inoculated 
seeds.  At  very  high  levels  of  naphthalene  up  to  100 mg kg1, 
none of the uninoculated seeds germinated while 20% of the 
inoculated ones germinated. Inoculated pea plants had higher 
transpiration  rates,  up  to  35%  higher  than  the  uninoculated 
controls in hydroponics containing naphthalene. Plant growth 
was also improved with the PAH-degrading endophyte. Mass 
of  the  plants  after  two  weeks  of  naphthalene  treatment  was 
significantly  greater  in  the  inoculated  plants.  In  terms  of 
potential  phytoremediation  improvements,  the  inoculated 
plants strongly reduced the amount of naphthalene remaining 
in  soils,  removing  37%  more  of  the  PAH  than  the  uninocu-
lated pea plants. Therefore, PAH-degrading endophytes have 
the  potential  to  provide  the  means  for  large  biomass  plants 
such  as  poplar  and  willow  to  effectively  remove  this  impor-
tant class of pollutants.

Polychlorinated  biphenyls  are  chlorinated  aromatic  com-
pounds  that  are  toxic,  highly  persistent  xenobiotics,  and 
are  listed  as  U.S.  EPA  Priority  Pollutants.  PCBs  were  used 
extensively  in  a  variety  of  industrial  applications  due  to  their 
thermal  stability.  Some  microorganisms  can  degrade  PCBs 
aerobically  or  non-aerobically  under  a  variety  of  conditions 
(reviewed  in  Borja  et al.,  2005;  Pieper  and  Seeger,  2008). 
Anaerobic reductive dechlorination of PCBs is usually achieved 
by a consortia of bacteria including Dehalococcoides (Abraham 
et al.,  2002),  the  genera  used  extensively  in  bioremediation 
of  TCE.  To  date,  none  of  the  genes  involved  in  PCB  anaero-
bic  dechlorination  have  been  cloned.  Aerobic  degradation  of 
lower chlorinated PCBs is via co-metabolism by dioxygenases, 
resulting  in  ring  cleavage  and  possibly  complete  mineraliza-
tion.  One  of  the  most  effective  PCB  degraders  characterized 
is Burkholderia xenovorans strain LB400. Two operons of genes 
(bph) for aerobic PCB degradation have been identified.

Phytoremediation  of  PCBs  was  recently  reviewed  (van 
Aken  et al.,  2010).  Plants  can  assist  in  microbial  remedia-
tion in several ways: by releasing root exudates that stimulate 
microbial  growth;  by  secreting  phenolics  necessary  for  PCB 
co-metabolism;  by  increasing  soil  oxygen;  and  by  releasing 
surfactants  that  help  release  soil-bound  PCBs.  In  a  test  with 
7  different  plant  species,  38%  of  extractable  PCBs  remained 
in the soil compared to 82% remaining in the unplanted con-
trol  soil  (Chekol  et al.,  2004).  In  a  study  with  nine  differ-
ent  plant  species  in  PCB-contaminated  soil,  even  some  of 
the  higher  chlorinated  congeners  of  PCBs  were  translocated 
within  the  plant  to  the  shoot  tissues  (Zeeb  et al.,  2006). 
However,  in  studies  with  hybrid  poplar,  only  the  lower  chlo-
rinated  PCBs  were  translocated,  with  the  tetrachlorinated 
PCBs  adsorbed  on  plant  roots  (Liu  and  Schnoor,  2008). 
Using  axenic  plant  cultures,  it  was  demonstrated  that  a  vari-
ety  of  plants  are  able  to  metabolize  the  PCBs  directly  (Lee 
and Fletcher, 1992; Wilken et al., 1995; Mackova et al., 1997; 
Kucerova et al., 2000; Harms et al., 2003; Rezek et al., 2007). 
In general, plant metabolism appears limited to tetra chlorin-
ated and lower congeners with slow degradation rates in field 
trials.  Furthermore,  the  PCB  metabolism  in  plants  involves 
cytochrome  P450s  that  result  in  toxic  intermediates  that  are 
not  fully  degraded,  whereas  some  of  the  bacterial  pathways 
result in ring cleavage and complete degradation of the PCBs. 
Therefore, engineering plants with genes for the bacterial path-
way may offer a more effective strategy for remediation of this 
recalcitrant pollutant. To this end, some of the bph genes have 
been introduced into transgenic plants and functional enzymes 
were produced (Sylvestre et al., 2009; van Aken et al., 2010). 
The effect of expression of bphC in transgenic tobacco plants 
on  PCB  remediation  was  only  recently  assessed  (Novakova 
et al.,  2009).  In  this  study,  one  of  the  transgenic  plant  lines 
had higher tolerance than the wild-type plants. It may be that 
transfer of the complete operons for PCB metabolism will be 
necessary  to  achieve  more  effective  PCB  phytoremediation 
(Sylvestre et al., 2009). Chloroplast engineering allows for the 
transfer of entire operons from bacteria into transgenic plants 
for  high  expression  of  enzymes  to  improve  phytoremediation 
(Ruiz et al., 2003) and may be useful for this particularly chal-
lenging pollutant. Another approach is to engineer plant-asso-
ciated bacteria. By transferring a plasmid with the bph operon 
into  Sinorhizobium  meliloti  and  inoculating  alfalfa  with  the 
modified  strain,  degradation  of  2,3,4-trichlorobiphenyl  was 
doubled  compared  with  plants  inoculated  with  the  wild-type 
strain (Chen et al., 2005). In a related study, the bph operon 
was  chromosomally  inserted  into  Pseudomonas  fluorescens 
strains, and these were inoculated into the rhizosphere of wil-
low  plants  (de  Carcer  et al.,  2007).  After  six  months,  there 
was  significantly  more  degradation  of  the  PCBs  in  the  rhizo-
sphere containing the modified strains. As of yet, the approach 
of  modifying  endophytes  with  PCB-degrading  genes  has  not 
been tested (van Aken et al., 2010).

Pesticides
Since  pesticides  can  cause  chronic  abnormalities  in  humans 
and they generally lead to reduced environmental quality, mul-
tiple methods including incineration and land filling have been 

321

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

used  to  remove  this  class  of  pollutants;  however,  these  physi-
cal methods are expensive and inefficient. Bioremediation using 
microorganisms  capable  of  degrading  the  polluting  pesticide 
and  enhanced  phytoremediation  of  pesticides  using  transgenic 
plants are emerging as more effective solutions (Hussain et al., 
2009).  The  topic  of  biodegradation  of  pesticides,  including 
herbicides,  is  large;  therefore,  this  review  will  focus  primarily 
on  only  three:  the  pesticide  chlorpyrifos  and  the  herbicides 
atrazine,  and  2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic  acid  (2,4-D).  For 
a  more  thorough  review  of  remediation  of  a  wide  range  of 
pesticides,  see  the  recent  review  by  Hussain  and  colleagues 
(2009).  Chlorpyrifos,  a  common  organophosphate  pesticide, 
can  be  degraded  by  certain  strains  of  bacteria  isolated  from 
contaminated  environments  (Singh  et al.,  2006).  A  strain  of 
Stenotrophonomonas  sp.  isolated  from  contaminated  sludge 
degraded  chlorpyrifos  at  a  faster  rate  than  uninoculated  soils 
(Yang et al., 2006). A Klebsiella strain, also isolated from sludge 
from a waste water treatment plant, was shown to biodegrade 
the  pesticide  (Ghanum  et al.,  2007).  Chlorpyrifos  is  also 
degraded  by  cultures  of  plant  pathogenic  fungi  (Al-Mihanna 
et al., 1998) and other fungi (Bumpus et al., 1993). Atrazine, a 
non-acidic pesticide that has become a common contaminating 
herbicide  in  surface  water,  can  be  biodegraded  as  well  (Topp, 
2001;  Wackett  et al.,  2002;  Satsuma,  2006;  Chirnside  et al., 
2007). In some of these cases, the genes necessary for the bio-
degradation  have  been  cloned  (Shapir  et al.,  2002;  Sajjaphan 
et al., 2004). Atrazine degradation involves hydrolases, ureases, 
dehalogenases,  and  cytochrome  P450s  encoded  by  atzABC-
DEF, trzND, and psbA1 (Hussain et al., 2009). The herbicide 
2,4-D  can  be  degraded  by  a  strain  of  Pseudomonas  (Musarrat 
et al., 2000). As with atrazine degradation, many of the neces-
sary genes have been identified and cloned (Itoh et al., 2002). 
One  advantage  of  bioremediation  over  mechanical  methods  is 
that it is a natural system that can cause less of a disturbance to 
the environment. As described earlier, there have been success-
ful isolations of bacteria and fungi that are capable of degrad-
ing these pesticides. However, bioremediation of pesticides as 
a  technology  is  still  under  development.  Several  environmen-
tal  factors  affect  the  success  of  bioremediation  of  pesticides, 
including  soil  pH,  organic  matter  content,  temperature,  aera-
tion,  and  moisture  levels.  Although  the  soil  organic  content 
affected degradation of atrazine (Boivin et al., 2005), it did not 
affect  the  biodegradation  of  chlorpyrifos  (Singh  et al.,  2006). 
Degradation  of  organophosphate  pesticides,  including  chlo-
rpyrifos, was slower in low pH soils compared to in neutral or 
alkaline soils (Singh et al., 2006). In addition to maintaining a 
suitable environment for bioremediation, another problem with 
bioremediation  of  pesticides  is  that  some  microbes  produce 
toxic  intermediates  that  can  be  more  toxic  or  persistent  than 
the parent compound (Hussain et al., 2009).

Another  approach  for  remediation  of  pesticides  is  to  add 
the  purified  enzyme  responsible  for  biodegradation.  This 
direct  approach  to  remediation  is  limited  by  the  ability  of 
the enzyme to function in less than ideal conditions, in pure 
form without co-factors, and it must have a cheap source of 
isolation (Sutherland et al., 2004). In one case study, 84,000 L 
of  methyl-parathion-contaminated  waste  water  was  treated 
with purified microbial enzymes with a ten-fold reduction in 
contaminant  level  in  just  10   minutes  (Russell  et al.,  2001). 

Chlorpyrifos  can  be  detoxified  with  mammalian  paraoxo-
nase, PON1, an enzyme that can be produced in culture and 
purified for use in treatment of exposed individuals (Stevens 
et al.,  2008).  It  can  also  be  produced  as  a  stable  foam  for 
emergency  treatment  of  pesticide  spills  in  the  environment 
(C. Furlong, personal communication). Development of inex-
pensive, large-scale production of PON1 using tobacco chloro-
plast engineering is underway (Doty, unpublished).

Phytoremediation  of  pesticides  can  be  effective  on  sev-
eral  levels  including  reduction  of  chemical  leaching,  aerating 
the soil, and providing nutrients for microbial biodegradation, 
as  well  as  direct  uptake  and  phytodegradation  of  the  pollut-
ants  (Hussain  et al.,  2009).  A  naturally  tolerant  plant  spe-
cies,  Lolium  multiflorum,  was  able  to  germinate  and  grow 
in  high  levels  of  atrazine  (Merini  et al.,  2009).  This  ability 
was  strongly  inhibited  by  the  P450  inhibitor  1-aminobenzo-
triazole,  suggesting  that  a  cytochrome  P450  is  responsible 
for  the  high  tolerance  in  this  species.  It  was  demonstrated 
that  poplar  cuttings  can  take  up  atrazine  and  metabolize  it 
through  hydrolysis  and  dealkylation  (Chang  et al.,  2005). 
Aquatic plants in a constructed wetland were able to remove 
and  retain  about  25%  of  influent  chlorpyrifos  (Moore  et al., 
2002).  The  ability  of  plants  to  uptake  and  translocate  pesti-
cides  from  roots  to  shoots  varies  among  different  plant  spe-
cies, even in hydroponics without the effects of soil binding. 
For  example,  atrazine  was  taken  up  better  by  Juncus  effuses 
(soft  rush)  than  Ludwigia  peploides  in  which  it  was  seques-
tered  in  roots  rather  than  translocated  to  shoots  (Bouldin 
et al., 2006). In a separate study J. effuses took up both atra-
zine and chlorpyrifos; however, it was better able to take up 
and degrade the chlorpyrifos (Lytle and Lytle, 2000). In this 
study,  chlorpyrifos  was  rapidly  taken  up  within  24  hours  by 
this prominent wetland species. In recent research with chlor-
pyrifos, it was shown that poplar and willow trees are able to 
remove  and  metabolize  this  common  organophosphate  pesti-
cide (Lee et al., 2010). These riparian species have the poten-
tial  to  remove  agricultural  pollutants  before  they  enter  the 
waterways.

Transgenic  plant  technology  is  investigated  to  improve 
remediation of pesticides. In research by Wang and colleagues 
(2005),  the  atzA  gene  encoding  the  first  enzyme,  atrazine 
chlorohydrolase, of a 6-step pathway was expressed in trans-
genic plants. The transgenic tobacco, Arabidopsis, and alfalfa 
actively  expressed  atzA,  resulting  in  increased  tolerance  to 
a  wide  range  of  atrazine  concentrations.  The  pesticide  was 
dechlorinated  to  hydroxyatrazine  in  all  of  the  plant  organs. 
In another approach, the mammalian cytochrome P450 genes 
CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 were expressed in a transgenic tobacco 
cell  culture,  resulting  in  increased  metabolism  of  atrazine 
(Bode  et al.,  2004).  Profound  enhancement  of  metabolism 
of  a  broad  range  of  herbicides  including  atrazine  and  metol-
achlor  was  achieved  in  transgenic  rice  plants  co-expressing 
CYP1A1, CYP2B6, and CYP2C19 (Kawahigashi et al., 2006). 
The  transgenic  plants  had  strong  tolerance  to  eight  different 
herbicides. Whereas control plants were killed with atrazine, 
which  inhibits  photosynthesis,  the  growth  of  the  transgenic 
plants  was  unaffected.  In  terms  of  remediation  of  contami-
nated surface water, the transgenic rice plants removed twice 
as much of the herbicides after one week than did the control 

322

Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

C H A P T E R   2 0

plants. The transgenics also removed significantly more of the 
atrazine from soil than did the controls. Methods to improve 
remediation  of  chlorpyrifos  using  mammalian  CYP2B6  and 
PON1 in transgenic poplar are currently underway (Lee et al., 
unpublished).

Endophyte-assisted  phytoremediation  of  pesticides  is  also 
showing  promising  results.  In  pioneering  work  by  Germaine 
and colleagues (2006), remediation of the systemic herbicide 
2,4-D  was  improved  through  inoculation  with  a  GFP-tagged 
2,4-D  degrading  endophyte  .  The  endophyte,  a  strain  of  P. 
putida,  effectively  colonized  the  pea  plants  and  led  to  a  sig-
nificant increase in plant growth that correlated with the level 
of colonization. Uninoculated plants showed severe root tox-
icity  effects  in  response  to  the  2,4-D  application,  while  the 
inoculated plants maintained a healthy root system. The inoc-
ulated pea plants removed more of the herbicide and, unlike 
the control plants, did not accumulate the herbicide in aerial 
tissues, indicating that the herbicide was degraded within the 
plant by the P. putida endophyte.

Future Prospects

In  the  past  decade  there  has  been  a  tremendous  increase  in 
our knowledge of plant processes involved in, and limiting for 
phytoremediation  of  a  wide  variety  of  inorganic  and  organic 

pollutants. This knowledge has been obtained in part through 
plant  biotechnology  and  conversely  has  led  to  plant  biotech-
nological approaches to enhance the phytoremediation poten-
tial of plants. In some cases, as described earlier, natural plant 
processes  involved  in  uptake,  assimilation,  or  detoxification 
were  manipulated,  while  in  other  cases  entirely  new  proc-
esses  were  introduced,  often  by  introducing  bacterial  genes 
or  even  entire  bacterial  endophytes.  Results  from  field  stud-
ies  are  starting  to  come  in  and  tend  to  confirm  results  from 
initial  lab  and  greenhouse  trials.  Clearly,  plant  biotechnologi-
cal  approaches  have  played  an  important  role  in  moving  the 
field  of  phytoremediation  forward.  For  better  acceptance  in 
the  remediation  industry,  it  is  important  that  new  transgen-
ics  continue  to  be  tested  in  the  field.  In  that  context  it  will 
be helpful if regulatory restrictions can be regularly re-evalu-
ated to make the use of transgenics for phytoremediation less 
cumbersome.

Acknowledgments

National Science Foundation grant #IOS-0817748 to EAHPS 
and a grant (#GO12026-273) from the Consortium of Plant 
Biotech  Research  (CPBR)  to  OPD  supported  the  writing  of 
this manuscript.

References

Abedin, M. J., Cotyter-Howells, J., & 

Meharg, A. A. (2002). Arsenic uptake and 
accumulation in rice (Oryza sativa L.) 
irrigated with contaminated water. Plant and 
Soil, 240, 311–319.

Abercrombie, J. M., Halfhill, M. D., Ranjan, 

P., Rao, M. R., Saxton, A. M., & Yuan, J. S., 
et al. (2008). Transcriptional responses of 
Arabidopsis thaliana plants to AsV stress. 
BMC Plant Biology, 8, 87.

Abraham, W. R., Nogales, B., Golyshin, P. N., 

Pieper, D. H., & Timmis, K. N. (2002). 
Polychlorinated biphenyl-degrading microbial 
communities in soils and sediments. Current 
Opinion in Microbiology, 5, 246–253.

Ahsan, N., Lee, D. -G., & Alam, I. (2008). 
Comparative proteomic study of arsenic-
induced differentially expressed proteins 
in rice roots reveals glutathione plays a 
central role during As stress. Proteomics, 8, 
3561–3576.

Al-Mihanna, A. A., Salama, A. K., & Abdalla, 

M. Y. (1998). Biodegradation of chlorpyrifos 
by either single or combined cultures of 
some soilborne plant pathogenic fungi. 
Journal of Environmental Science and 
Health, 33, 693–704.

Ali, M. A., Badruzzaman, A. B. M., Jalil, M. 

A., Hossain, M. D., & Ahmed, M. F., et al. 
(2003). Fate of arsenic extracted with 
groundwater. In M. F. Ahmed (Ed.), Fate 
of arsenic in the environment (pp. 7–20). 
Dhaka: ITN Int. Train. Netw.

Andeer, P. F., Stahl, D. A., Bruce, N. C., & 
Strand, S. E. (2009). Lateral transfer of 

genes for hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-
triazine (RDX) degradation. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 75, 3258–
3262.

Banerjee, S., Shang, Q. T., Wilson, A. M., 
Moore, A. L., Strand, S. E., & Gordon, 
M. P., et al. (2002). Expression of active 
mammalian P450 2E1 in hairy root cultures. 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 77, 
462–466.

Bañuelos, G., LeDuc, D. L., Pilon-Smits, E. 
A. H., Tagmount, A., & Terry, N. (2007). 
Transgenic Indian mustard overexpressing 
selenocysteine lyase or selenocysteine 
methyltransferase exhibit enhanced 
potential for selenium phytoremediation 
under field conditions. Environmental 
Science & Technology, 41, 599–605.

Bañuelos, G., Terry, N., LeDuc, D. L., Pilon-

Smits, E. A. H., & Mackey, B. (2005). 
Field trial of transgenic Indian mustard 
plants shows enhanced phytoremediation 
of selenium contaminated sediment. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 39, 
1771–1777.

Bañuelos, G. S. (2009). Phytoremediation 

of selenium-contaminated soil and water 
produces biofortified products and new 
agricultural byproducts. In G. S. Banuelos 
& Z. -Q. Lin (Eds.), Biofortification and 
development of new agricultural products 
(pp. 57–60). Boca Roca, FL: CRC Press.

Barac, T., Taghavi, S., Borremans, B., Provoost, 

A., Oeyen, L., & Colpaert, J. V., et al. 
(2004). Engineered endophytic bacteria 

improve phytoremediation of water-
soluble, volatile, organic pollutants. Nature 
Biotechnology, 22, 583–588.

Bentley, R., & Chasteen, T. G. (2002). 

Microbial methylation of metalloids: 
Arsenic, antimony, and bismuth. 
Microbiology and Molecular Biology 
Reviews, 66, 250–271.

Bernier, M., & Carpentier, R. (1995). The 

action of mercury on the binding of extrinsic 
polypeptides associated with water oxidizing 
complex of photosystem II. FEBS Letters, 
360, 251–254.

Bienert, G. P., Thorsen, M., Schüssler, M. 

D., Nilsson, H. R., Wagner, A., & Tamás, 
M. J., et al. (2008). A subgroup of plant 
aquaporins facilitate the bi-directional 
diffusion of As (OH)3 and Sb(OH)3 across 
membranes. BMC Biology, 6, 26.

Bizily, S., Rugh, C. C., & Meagher, R. B. 

(2000). Phytoremediation of hazardous 
organomercurials by genetically engineered 
plants. Nature Biotechnology, 18, 213–217.

Bizily, S., Rugh, C. C., Summers, A. O., & 

Meagher, R. B. (1999). Phytoremediation of 
methylmercury pollution: MerB expression 
in Arabidopsis thaliana plants confer 
resistance to organomercurial. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 96, 6808–6813.

Bizily, S. P., Kim, T., Kandasamy, M. K., & 

Meagher, R. B. (2003). Subcellular targeting 
of methylmercury lyase enhances its specific 
activity for organic mercury detoxification in 
plants. Plant Physiology, 131, 463–471.

323

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Bleeker, P. M., Hakvoort, H. W., Bliek, M., 

Souer, E., & Schat, H. (2006). Enhanced 
arsenate reduction by a CDC25-like 
tyrosine phosphatase explains increased 
phytochelatin accumulation in arsenate-
tolerant Holcus lanatus. Plant Journal, 45, 
917–929.

Bode, M., Stobe, P., Thiede, B., Schuphan, I., 

& Schmidt, B. (2004). Biotransformation of 
atrazine in transgenic tobacco cell culture 
expressing human P450. Pest Management 
Science, 60, 49–58.

Boischio, A. A., & Henshel, D. S. (1996). 
Mercury contamination in the Brazilian 
Amazon. Environmental and occupational 
aspects. Water Air Soil Pollution, 80 
109–107.

Boivin, A., Cherrier, R., & Schiavon, M. (2005). 

A comparison of five pesticides adsorption 
and desorption processes in thirteen 
contrasting field soils. Chemosphere, 61, 
668–676.

Borja, J., Taleon, D. M., Auresenia, J., & 
Gallardo, S. (2005). Polychlorinated 
biphenyls and their biodegradation. Process 
Biochemistry, 40, 1999–2013.

Bouldin, J., Farris, J., Moore, M. T., SJr, Smith, 

& Cooper, C. M. (2006). Hydroponic 
uptake of atrazine and lambda-dyhalothrin 
in Juncus effusus and Ludwigia peploides. 
Chemosphere, 65, 1049–1057.

Bumpus, J. A., Kakar, S. N., & Coleman, 

R. D. (1993). Fungal degradation of 
organophosphorous insecticides. Applied 
Biochemistry and Biotechnology, 39, 
715–726.

Carey, A. -M., Scheckel, K. G., Lombi, E., 
Newville, M., & Choi, Y., et al. (2010). 
Grain unloading of arsenic species in rice. 
Plant Physiology, 152, 309–319.

Castlehouse, H., Smith, C., Raab, A., Deacon, 
C., Meharg, A. A., & Feldmann, J. (2003). 
Biotransformation and accumulation of 
arsenic in soil amended with seaweed. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 37, 
951–957.

Catarecha, P., Segura, M. D., Franco-Zorrilla, 

J. M., Garcia-Ponce, B., & Lanza, M., 
et al. (2007). A mutant of the Arabidopsis 
phosphate transporter PHT1;1 displays 
enhanced arsenic accumulation. Plant Cell, 
19, 1123–1133.

Cervantes, C., Ji, G., Ramirez, J. L., & Silver, 

S. (1994). Resistance to arsenic compounds 
in microorganisms. FEMS Microbiology 
Reviews, 15, 355–367.

Chang, S. W., Lee, S. J., & Je, C. H. (2005). 

Phytoremediation of atrazine by poplar 
trees: Toxicity, uptake, and transformation. 
Journal of Environmental Science and 
Health, 40, 801–811.

Che, D., Meagher, R. B., Heaton, A. C., Lima, 

A., Rugh, C. L., & Merkle, S. A. (2003). 
Expression of mercuric ion reductase in 
Eastern cottonwood (Populus deltoides) 
confers mercuric ion reduction and 
resistance. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 1, 
311–319.

Chekol, T., Vough, L. R., & Chaney, 

R. L. (2004). Phytoremediation of 
polychlorinated biphenyl-contaminated 
soils: The rhizosphere effect. Environment 
International, 30, 799–804.

324

Chen, C. M., Misra, T. K., Silver, S., & Rosen, 

B. P. (1986). Nucleotide sequence of the 
structural genes for an anion pump. The 
plasmid-encoded arsenical resistance operon. 
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 261, 
15030–15038.

Chen, Y. Q., Adam, A., Toure, O., & Dutta, S. 

K. (2005). Molecular evidence of genetic 
modification of Sinorhizobium meliloti: 
Enhanced PCB bioremediation. Journal of 
Industrial Microbiology & Biotechnology, 32, 
561–566.

Chen, Z., Zhu, Y. G., Liu, W. J., & Meharg, A. 
(2005). Direct evidence showing the effect 
of root surface iron plaque on arsenite and 
arsenate uptake into rice (Oryza sativa) 
roots. New Phytologist, 165, 91–97.

Chirnside, A. E. M., Ritter, W. F., & Radosevich, 

M. (2007). Isolation of a selected microbial 
consortium from a pesticide-contaminated 
mix-load site soil capable of degrading the 
herbicides atrazine and alachlor. Soil Biology 
and Biochemistry, 39, 3056–3065.

Crocker, F. H., Indest, K. J., & Fredrickson, 

H. L. (2006). Biodegradation of the cyclic 
nitramine explosives RDX, HMX, and CL-
20. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 
73, 274–290.

Das, H. K., Mitra, A. K., Sengupta, P. K., 
Hossain, A., Islam, F., & Rabbani, G. 
H. (2004). Arsenic concentrations in 
rice, vegetables, and fish in Bangladesh: 
A preliminary study. Environmental 
International, 30, 383–387.

de Carcer, D. A., Martin, M., Mackova, M., 

Macek, T., Karlson, U., & Rivilla, R. (2007). 
The introduction of genetically modified 
microorganisms designed for rhizoremediation 
induces changes on native bacteria in the 
rhizosphere but not in the surrounding soil. 
The ISME Journal, 1, 215–223.

Dean, J. G., Bosqui, F. L., & Lanouette, V. H. 

(1972). Removing heavy metals from waste 
water. Environmental Science & Technology, 
6, 518–522.

Dhankher, O. P. (2005). Arsenic metabolism 
in plants: An inside story. New Phytologist, 
168, 503–505.

Dhankher, O. P., Li, Y., Rosen, B. P., Shi, J., 
Salt, D., & Senecoff, J. F., et al. (2002). 
Engineered tolerance and hyperaccumulation 
of arsenic in plants by combining arsenate 
reductase and γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase 
expression. Nature Biotechnology, 20, 
1140–1145.

Dhankher, O. P., Rosen, B. P., McKinney, E. C., 
& Meagher, R. B. (2006). Enhanced arsenic 
uptake in Arabidopsis plants by suppressing 
endogenous arsenate reductase AtACR2 
gene. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
103, 5413–5418.

Doty, S. L. (2008). Tansley Review: Enhancing 

phytoremediation through the use 
of transgenics and endophytes. New 
Phytologist, 179, 318–333.

Doty, S. L., James, C. A., Moore, A. L., 

Vajzovic, A., Singleton, G. L., & Ma, C., 
et al. (2007). Enhanced phytoremediation 
of volatile environmental pollutants with 
transgenic trees. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 104, 16816–16821.

Doty, S. L., Shang, Q. T., Wilson, A. M., 

Moore, A. L., Newman, L. A., & Strand, 
S. E., et al. (2003). Metabolism of the soil 
and groundwater contaminants, ethylene 
dibromide and trichloroethylene, by 
the tropical leguminous tree, Leucaena 
leucocephala. Water Research, 37, 441–449.

Doty, S. L., Shang, Q. T., Wilson, A. M., 

Tangen, J., Westergreen, A., & Newman, 
L. A., et al. (2000). Enhanced metabolism 
of halogenated hydrocarbons in transgenic 
plants containing mammalian P450 2E1. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 97, 
6287–6291.

Dowling, D. N., & Doty, S. L. (2009). 

Improving phytoremediation through 
biotechnology. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 20, 204–206.

Duan, G. -L., Zhou, Y., Tong, Y. P., 

Mukhopadhyay, R., Rosen, B. P., & Zhu,  
Y. G. (2007). A CDC25 homologous from 
rice functions as an arsenate reductase. New 
Phytologist, 174, 31–321.

Ellis, D. R., Gumaelius, L., Indriolo, E., 

Pickering, I. J., Banks, J. A., & Salt, D. E. 
(2006). A novel arsenate reductase from 
the arsenic hyperaccumulating fern Pteris 
vittata. Plant Physiology, 141, 1544–1554.

Ellis, D. R., Sors, T. G., Brunk, D. G., Albrecht, 

C., Orser, C., & Lahner, B., et al. (2004). 
Production of Se-methylselenocysteine in 
transgenic plants expressing selenocysteine 
methyltransferase. BMC Plant Biology, 4, 
1–11.

Fageria, N. K. (2007). Yield physiology of rice. 

Journal of Plant Nutrition, 30, 843–879.

Francova, K., Sura, M., Macek, T., Szekeres, M., 
Bancos, S., & Demnerova, K., et al. (2003). 
Preparation of plants containing bacterial 
enzyme for degradation of polychlorinated 
biphenyls. Fresenius Environment Bulletin, 
12, 309–313.

French, C. E., Rosser, S. J., Davies, G. J., Nicklin, 

S., & Bruce, N. C. (1999). Biodegradation 
of explosives by transgenic plants expressing 
pentaerythritol tetranitrate reductase. Nature 
Biotechnology, 17, 491–494.

Gandia-Herrero, F., Lorenz, A., Larson, T., 
Graham, I. A., Bowles, D. J., & Rylott, 
E. L., et al. (2008). Detoxification of 
the explosive 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene in 
Arabidopsis: Discovery of bifunctional 
O-and C-glucosyltransferases. The Plant 
Journal, 56, 963–974.

Garifullina, G. F., Owen, J. D., Lindblom,  

S. -D., Tufan, H., Pilon, M., & Pilon-Smits, 
E. A. H. (2003). Expression of a mouse 
selenocysteine lyase in Brassica juncea 
chloroplasts affects selenium tolerance and 
accumulation. Physiologia Plantarum, 118, 
538–544.

Gasic, K., & Korban, S. S. (2007). Transgenic 

Indian mustard (Brassica juncea) plants 
expressing an Arabidopsis phytochelatin 
synthase (AtPCS1) exhibit enhanced As and 
Cd tolerance. Plant Molecular Biology, 64, 
361–369.

Germaine, K. J., Keogh, E., Ryan, D., 
& Dowling, D. N. (2009). Bacterial 
endophyte-mediated naphthalene 
phytoprotection and phytoremediation. 
FEMS Microbiology Letters, 296, 226–234.

Germaine, K. J., Liu, X., Cabellos, G. G., 

Hogan, J. P., Ryan, D., & Dowling, D. N. 
(2006). Bacterial endophyte-enhanced 
phytoremediation of the organochlorine 
herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid. 
FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 57, 302–310.
Ghanum, I., Orfi, M., & Shamma, M. (2007). 
Biodegradation of chlorpyrifos by Klebsiella 
sp. isolated from an activated sludge sample 
of waste water treatment plant in Damascus. 
Folia Microbiologica, 52, 423–427.

Gresser, M. J. (1981). ADP-arsenate formation 

by submitochondrial particles under 
phosphorylating conditions. Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, 256, 5981–5983.
Guo, J. B., Dai, X. J., Xu, W. Z., & Ma, M. 

(2008). Overexpressing GSH1 and AsPCS1 
simultaneously increases the tolerance and 
accumulation of cadmium and arsenic in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Chemosphere, 72, 
1020–1026.

Hannink, N., Rosser, S. J., French, C. E., 

Basran, A., Murray, J. A. H., & Nicklin, S., 
et al. (2001). Phytodetoxification of TNT 
by transgenic plants expressing a bacterial 
nitroreductase. Nature Biotechnology, 19, 
1168–1172.

Harada, M. (1995). Minamata disease: 

Methylmercury poisoning in Japan caused by 
environmental pollution. Critical Reviews in 
Toxicology, 25, 1–24.

Harms, H., Bokern, M., Kolb, M., & Bock, 

C. (2003). Transformation of organic 
contaminants by different plant systems. 
In S. C. McCutcheon & J. L. Schnoor 
(Eds.), Phytoremediation. Transformation 
and control of contaminants (pp. 285–316). 
Hoboken, NJ: John Whiley.

Heaton, A. C., Rugh, C. C., Kim, T., & 

Meagher, R. B. (2003). Toward detoxifying 
mercury-polluted aquatic sediments with 
rice genetically engineered for mercury 
resistance. Environmental Toxicology and 
Chemistry, 22, 2940–2947.

Heaton, A. C. P., Rugh, C. L., Wang, N. J., 
& Meagher, R. B. (2005). Physiological 
responses of transgenic merA tobacco 
(Nicotiana tabacum) to foliar and root 
mercury exposure. Water, Air, & Soil 
Pollution, 161, 137–155.

Heaton, A. C. P., Rugh, C. L., Wang, N., & 

Meagher, R. B. (1998). Phytoremediation 
of mercury – and methylmercury – polluted 
soils using genetically engineered plants. 
Journal of Soil Contamination, 7, 497–510.

Hughes, M. F. (2002). Arsenic toxicity and 

potential mechanisms of action. Toxicology 
Letters, 133, 1–16.

Hussain, S., Siddique, T., Arshad, M., & 

Saleem, M. (2009). Bioremediation and 
phytoremediation of pesticides: Recent 
advances. Critical Reviews in Environmental 
Science and Technology, 39, 843–907.

Hussein, H., Ruiz, O. N., Terry, N., & Daniell, 

H. (2007). Phytoremediation of mercury 
and organomercurials in chloroplast 
transgenic plants: Enhanced root uptake, 
translocation to shoots and volatilization. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 41, 
8439–8446.

Indriolo, E., Na, G. N., Ellis, D., Salt, D. E., 
& Banks, J. A. (2010). A vacuolar arsenite 
transporter necessary for arsenic tolerance 

Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

C H A P T E R   2 0

in the arsenic hyperaccumulating fern Pteris 
vittata is missing in flowering plants. Plant 
Cell, 22, 2045–2057.

Isayenkov, S. V., & Maathuis, F. J. M. (2008). 
The Arabidopsis thaliana aquaglyceroporin 
AtNIP7;1 is a pathway for arsenite uptake. 
FEBS Letters, 582, 1625–1628.

Itoh, K., Kanda, R., Sumita, Y., Kim, H., 

Kamagata, Y., & Suyama, K., et al. (2002). 
tfdA-like genes in 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic 
acid-degrading bacteria belonging to the 
Bradyrhizobium-Agromonas-Nitrobacter-
Afipia cluster in alpha-Proteobacteria. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
68, 3449–3454.

Jackson, R. G., Rylott, E. L., Fournier, D., 

Hawari, J., & Bruce, N. C. (2007). Exploring 
the biochemical properties and remediation 
applications of the unusual explosive-
degrading P450 system XplA/B. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 104, 16822–
16827.

James, C. A., & Strand, S. E. (2009). 
Phytoremediation of small organic 
contaminants using transgenic plants. 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 20, 
237–241.

James, C. A., Xin, G., Doty, S. L., & Strand, 

S. E. (2008). Degradation of low molecular 
weight volatile organic compounds by 
plants genetically modified with mammalian 
cytochrome P450 2E1. Environmental 
Science & Technology, 42, 289–293.

Juhasz, A. L., Naidu, R., Zhu, Y. G., Wang, L. 

S., Jiang, J. Y., & Cao, Z. H. (2003). Toxicity 
issues associated with geogenic arsenic in the 
grondwater–soil–plant–human continuum. 
Bulletin of Environmental Contamination 
and Toxicology, 71, 1100–1107.

Kaiser, J. (2001). Second look at arsenic finds 

higher risk. Science, 293, 2189.

Kang, J. W., Wilkerson, H. W., Farin, F. M., 

Bammler, T. K., & Beyer, R. P., et al. (2010). 
Mammalian cytochrome CYP2E1 triggered 
differential gene regulation in response to 
trichloroethylene (TCE) in a transgenic 
poplar. Functional & Integerative Genomics, 
10, 417–424.

Kannan, K., Smith, R. G., Lee, R. F., Windom, 

H. L., Heimuller, P. T., & Macauley, J. M., 
et al. (1998). Distribution of total mercury 
and methyl mercury in water, sediment and 
fish from South Florida estuaries. Archives 
of Environmental Contamination and 
Toxicology, 34, 109–118.

Kawahigashi, H., Hirose, S., Ohkawa, H., & 
Ohkawa, Y. (2006). Phytoremediation of 
the herbicides atrazine and metolachlor by 
transgenic rice plants expressing human 
CYP1A1, CYP2B6, and CYP2C19. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 54, 
2985–2991.

Keating, M.H., Mahaffey, K.R., Schoeny, R., 
Rice, G.E., Bullock, O.R., Ambrose, R.B., 
et al., (1997). Mercury Study Report to 
Congress (1–51). EPA452/R-9-003. US 
Environmental Protection Agency.

Kraemer, U., & Chardonnens, A. N. (2001). 

The use of transgenic plants in the 
bioremediation of soil contaminated with 
trace elements. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 55, 661–672.

Kucerova, P., Mackova, M., Chroma, L., 

Burkhard, J., Triska, J., & Demnerova, K., 
et al. (2000). Metabolism of polychlorinated 
biphenyls by Solanum nigrum hairy 
root clone SNC-9O and analysis of 
transformation products. Plant and Soil, 
225, 109–115.

Kupper, H., Kupper, F., & Spiller, M. (1996). 

Environmental relevance of heavy metal 
substituted chlorophylls using the example 
of water plants. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 47, 259–266.

Lagunas, R. (1980). Sugar-arsenate esters: 

Thermodynamics and biochemical behavior. 
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
205, 67–75.

Larsen, E. H., Moseholm, L., & Nielsen, M. M. 

(1992). Atmospheric deposition of trace 
elements around point sources and human 
healthy risk assessment: II. Uptake of 
arsenic and chromium by vegetables grown 
near a wood preservation factory. Science of 
the Total Environment, 126, 263–275.
LeDuc, D. L., AbdelSamie, M., Montes-

Bayón, M., Wu, C. P., Reisinger, S. J., & 
Terry, N. (2006). Overexpressing both 
ATP sulfurylase and selenocysteine 
methyltransferase enhances selenium 
phytoremediation traits in Indian mustard. 
Environmental Pollution, 144, 70–76.

LeDuc, D. L., Tarun, A. S., Montes-Bayon, M., 

Meija, J., Malit, M. F., & Wu, C. P., et al. 
(2004). Overexpression of selenocysteine 
methyltransferase in Arabidopsis and Indian 
mustard increases selenium tolerance and 
accumulation. Plant Physiology, 135, 377–383.

Lee, I., & Fletcher, J. S. (1992). Involvement 

of mixed-function oxidase systems in 
polychlorinated biphenyl metabolism by 
plant cells. Plant Cell Reports, 11, 97–100.

Lee, K.Y., Strand, S.E., Doty, S.L. (2012). 

Phytoremediation of chlorpyrifos 
by Populus and Salix. International 
Journal of Phytoremediation, 14(1), 
48–61. Available online 2 Aug. 2011, DOI: 
10.1080/15226514.2011.560213.

Li, Y., Dhankher, O., Carreira, L., Balish, R., 
& Meagher, R. (2005). Engineered over-
expression of γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase 
in plants confers high levels arsenic and 
mercury tolerance. Environmental Toxicology 
& Chemistry, 24, 1376–1386.

Li, Y. J., Dhankher, O. P., Carreira, L., Lee, D., 
& Chen, A., et al. (2004). Overexpression of 
phytochelatin synthase in Arabidopsis leads 
to enhanced arsenic tolerance and cadmium 
hypersensitivity. Plant and Cell Physiology, 
45, 1787–1797.

Liu, J. Y., & Schnoor, J. L. (2008). Uptake 
and translocation of lesser-chlorianted 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in whole 
hybrid poplar plants after hydroponic 
exposure. Chemosphere, 73, 1608–1616.

Liu, Z., Shen, J., Carbrey, J. M., 

Mukhopadhyay, R., Agre, P., & Rosen, B. P. 
(2002). Arsenite transport by mammalian 
aquaglyceroporins AQP7 and AQP9. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 99, 
6053–6058.

Lytle, J. S., & Lytle, T. F. (2000). Uptake 
and loss of chlorpyrifos and atrazine by 

325

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Juncus effusus L. in a mesocosm study with 
a mixture of pesticides. Environmental 
Toxicology and Chemistry, 21, 1817–1825.
Lyyra, S., Meagher, R. B., Kim, T., Heaton, A., 
Montello, P., & Balish, R. S., et al. (2007). 
Coupling two mercury resistance genes in 
Eastern cottonwood enhances the processing 
of organomercury. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 5, 254–262.

Ma, J. F., Yamaji, N., Mitani, N., Xu, X. Y., 

Su, Y. H., & McGrath, S. P., et al. (2008). 
Transporters of arsenite in rice and their 
role in arsenic accumulation in rice grain. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
105, 9931–9935.

Ma, L. Q., Komar, K. M., Tu, C., Zhang, W. 
H., Cai, Y., & Kennelley, E. D. (2001). A 
fern that hyperaccumulates arsenic: A hardy 
versatile fast-growing plant helps to remove 
arsenic from contaminated soils. Nature, 
409 579–579.

Mackova, M., Macek, T., Ocenaskova, J., 

Burkhard, J., Demnerova, K., & Pazlarova, J. 
(1997). Biodegradation of polychlorinated 
biphenyls by plant cells. International 
Biodeterioration & Biodegradation, 39, 
317–325.

Marin, A. R., Masscheleyn, P. H., & Patrik, W. 

H., Jr. (1993). Soil redox-pH stability of 
arsenic and its influence on arsenic uptake in 
rice. Plant & Soil, 152, 245–253.

Meagher, R.B. Rugh, C.L. (1998). 

Phytoremediation of heavy metal 
pollution: Ionic and methyl mercury. In 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development Document: Biotechnology for 
Water Use and Conservation. The Mexico 
’96 Workshop, Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development, Paris, pp. 
305–321.

Meharg, A. A. (2004). Arsenic in rice: 

Understanding a new disaster for South-East 
Asia. Trends in Plant Science, 9, 415–417.

Meharg, A. A., & Macnair, M. R. (1992). 

Suppression of the high-affinity phosphate-
uptake system: A mechanism of arsenate 
tolerance in Holcus lanatus L. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 43, 519–524.

Meharg, A. A., & Rahman, M. (2003). Arsenic 

contamination of Bangladesh paddy field 
soils: Implications for rice contribution to 
As consumption. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 37, 229–234.

Meharg, A. A., Williams, P. N., Adomako, E., 
Lawgali, Y. Y., Deacon, D., & Villada, A., 
et al. (2009). Geographical variation in total 
and inorganic As content of polished (white) 
rice. Environmental Science & Technology, 
43, 1612–1617.

Merini, L. J., Bobillo, C., Cuadrado, V., 

Corach, D., & Giulietti, A. M. (2009). 
Phytoremediation potential of the novel 
atrazine tolerant Lolium multiflorum and 
studies on the mechanisms involved. 
Environmental Pollution, 157, 3059–3063.

Mezzari, M. P., Walters, K., Jelinkova, M., Shih, 
M. -C., Just, C. L., & Schnoor, J. L. (2005). 
Gene expression and microscopic analysis 
of Arabidopsis exposed to chloroacetanilide 
herbicides and explosive compounds. 
A phytoremediation approach. Plant 
Physiology, 138, 858–869.

326

Mohammadi, M., Chalavi, V., Novakova-

Sura, M., Laliberte, J. F., & Sylvestre, M. 
(2007). Expression of bacterial biphenyl-
chlorobiphenyl dioxygenase genes in tobacco 
plants. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 97, 
496–505.

Moore, F.P., Barac, T., Borremans, B., Oeyen, L., 
Vangronsveld, J., van der, L.D., et al. (2006). 
Endophytic bacterial diversity in poplar trees 
growing on a BTEX-contaminated site: The 
characterisation of isolates with potential to 
enhance phytoremediation. Systematic and 
Applied Microbiology 29(7), 539–556.
Moore, M. T., Schulz, R., Cooper, C. M., 

Smith, S., Jr, & Rodgers, J. H., Jr. (2002). 
Mitigation of chlorpyrifos runoff using 
constructed wetlands. Chemosphere, 46, 
827–835.

Mukhopadhyay, R., & Rosen, B. P. (2002). 

The phosphatase C(X)5R motif is required 
for catalytic activity of the Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae Acr2p arsenate reductase. The 
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 28, 34738–
34742.

Musarrat, J., Bano, N., & Rao, R. A. K. 

(2000). Isolation and characterization of 
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid-catabolizing 
bacteria and their biodegradation efficiency 
in soil. World Journal of Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 16, 495–497.

Neuhierl, B., Thanbichler, M., Lottspeich, 

F., & Böck, A. (1999). A family of 
S-methylmethionine dependent thiol/
selenol methyltransferases. Role in selenium 
tolerance and evolutionary relation. Journal 
of Biological Chemistry, 274, 5407–5414.
Novakova, M., Mackova, M., Chrastilova, Z., 
Viktorova, J., Szekeres, M., & Demnerova, 
K., et al. (2009). Cloning the bacterial bphC 
gene into Nicotiana tabacum to improve 
the efficiency of PCB-phytoremediation. 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 102, 
29–37.

Nriagu, J. O. (1993). Legacy of Mercury. 

Nature, 363, 589.

Osborn, A. M., Bruce, K. D., Strike, P., & 

Ritchie, D. A. (1997). Distribution, diversity 
and evolution of the bacterial mercury 
resistance (mer) operon. FEMS Microbiology 
Reviews, 19, 239–262.

Patra, M., & Sharma, A. (2000). Mercury 
toxicity in plants. Botany Review, 66, 
379–422.

Paulose, B., Kandasamy, S., & Dhankher, O. 

P. (2010). Exprerssion profiling of Crambe 
abyssinica under arsenate stress identifies 
genes and gene networks involved in arsenic 
metabolism and detoxification. BMC Plant 
Biology, 10, 108.

Pickering, I. J., Prince, R. C., George, M. J., 
Smith, R. D., George, G. N., & Salt, D. 
E. (2000). Reduction and coordination of 
arsenic in Indian mustard. Plant Physiology, 
122, 1171–1177.

Pieper, D. H., & Seeger, M. (2008). Bacterial 
metabolism of polychlorinated biphenyls. 
Journal of Molecular Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 15, 121–138.

Pilon, M., Owen, J. D., Garifullina, G. 
F., Kurihara, T., Mihara, H., & Esaki, 
N., et al. (2003). Enhanced selenium 
tolerance and accumulation in transgenic 
Arabidopsis thaliana expressing a mouse 

selenocysteine lyase. Plant Physiology, 
131, 1250–1257.

Pilon-Smits, E. A. H. (2005). Phytoremediation. 

Annual review of Plant Biology, 56, 15–39.
Pilon-Smits, E. A. H., Hwang, S., Lytle, C. 

M., Zhu, Y., Tai, J. C., & Bravo, R. C., et al. 
(1999). Overexpression of ATP sulfurylase 
in Indian mustard leads to increased selenate 
uptake, reduction, and tolerance. Plant 
Physiology, 119, 123–132.

Pilon-Smits, E. A. H., & Quinn, C. F. (2010). 

Selenium Metabolism in Plants. In R. Hell & 
R. Mendel (Eds.), Cell biology of metals and 
nutrients (pp. 225–241). Berlin Heidelberg: 
Springer Press.

Qin, J., Lehr, C. R., Yuan, C. G., Le, X. 
C., McDermott, T. R., & Rosen, B. P. 
(2009). Biotransformation of arsenic by a 
Yellowstone thermoacidophilic eukaryotic 
alga. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
106, 5213–5217.

Qin, J., Rosen, B. P., Zhang, Y., Wang, G. 
J., Franke, S., & Rensing, C. (2006). 
Arsenic detoxification and evolution of 
trimethylarsine gas by a microbial arsenite 
S-adenosylmethionine methyltransferase. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
103, 2075–2080.

Ravenscroft, P., Brammer, H., & Richards, K. S. 
(2009). Arsenic pollution: A global synthesis. 
U.K: Wiley-Blackwell.

Rezek, J., Macek, T., Mackova, M., & Triska, J. 

(2007). Plant metabolites of polychlorinated 
biphenyls in hairy root culture of black 
nightshade Solanum nigrum SNC-90. 
Chemosphere, 69, 1221–1227.

Rosen, B. P. (2002). Biochemistry of arsenic 
detoxification. FEBS Letters, 529, 86–92.

Rugh, C. C., Summers, A. O., & Meagher, 

R. B. (1996). Mercuric ion reductase and 
resistance in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana 
expressing modified bacterial merA gene. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 93, 
3182–3187.

Rugh, C. L., Senecoff, J. F., Meagher, R. B., 

& Merkle, S. A. (1998). Development 
of transgenic yellow poplar for mercury 
phytoremediation. Nature Biotechnology, 16, 
925–928.

Ruiz, O. N., Hussein, H. S., Terry, N., & 
Daniell, H. (2003). Phytoremediation 
of organomercurials via the chloroplast 
genetic engineering. Plant Physiology, 132, 
1344–1352.

Russell, R. J., Sutherland, T. D., Horne, 

I., Oakeshott, J. G., Zachariou, M., & 
Nguyen, H. V., et al. (2001). Enzymatic 
biodegradation of chemical pesticides. 
Australasian Biotechnology, 11, 24–26.

Rylott, E. L., & Bruce, N. C. (2008). Plants 

disarm soil: Engineering plants for the 
phytoremediation of explosives. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 27, 73–81.

Rylott, E. L., Jackson, R. G., Edwards, J., 

Womack, G. L., Seth-Smith, H. M., 
& Rathbone, D. A., et al. (2006). An 
explosive-degrading cytochrome P450 
activity and its targeted application for 
the phytoremediation of RDX. Nature 
Biotechnology, 24, 216–219.

Biotechnological approaches for phytoremediation

C H A P T E R   2 0

Sajjaphan, K., Shapir, N., Wackett, L. P., Palmer, 

M., Blackmon, B., & Tomkins, J., et al. 
(2004). Arthrobacter aurescens TC1 atrazine 
catabolism genes trzN, atzB, and atzC are 
linked on a 160-kilobase region and are 
functional in Escherichia coli. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 70, 4402–4407.
Sanders, O. I., Rensing, C., Kuroda, M., Mitra, 

B., & Rosen, B. P. (1997). Antimonite is 
accumulated by the glycerol facilitator GlpF 
in Escherichia coli. Journal of Bacteriology, 
179, 3365–3367.

Sundaram, S., Rathinasabapathi, B., Ma, L. 
Q., & Rosen, B. P. (2008). An arsenate-
activated glutaredoxin from the arsenic 
hyperaccumulator fern Pteris vittata L. 
regulates intracellular arsenite. Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, 283, 6095–6101.
Sutherland, T. D., Horne, I., Weir, K. M., 

Coppin, C. W., Williams, M. R., & Selleck, 
M., et al. (2004). Enzymatic bioremediation: 
From enzyme discovery to applications. 
Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology & 
Physiology, 31, 817–821.

Satsuma, K. (2006). Characterization of new 

strains of atrazine-degrading Nocardiodes sp. 
isolated from Japanese riverbed sediment 
using naturally derived river ecosystem. Pest 
Management Science, 62, 340–349.

Sylvestre, M., Macek, T., & Mackova, M. 
(2009). Transgenic plants to improve 
rhizoremediation of polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCB’s). Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 20, 242–247.

Shang, Q. T., Doty, S. L., Wilson, A. M., 

Howald, W. N., & Gordon, M. P. (2001). 
Trichloroethylene oxidative metabolism 
in plants: The trichloroethanol pathway. 
Phytochemistry, 58, 1055–1065.

Shapir, N., Osborne, J. P., Johnson, G., 

Sadowsky, M. J., & Wackett, L. P. (2002). 
Purification, substrate range, and metal 
center of AtzC: The N-isopropylammelide 
aminohydrolase involved in bacterial atrazine 
metabolism. Journal of Bacteriology, 184, 
5376–5384.

Shields, MS, Reagin, MJ, Gerger, RR, 

Campbell, R, & Somerville, C. (1995). 
TOM, a new aromatic degradative 
plasmid from Burkholderia (Pseudomonas) 
cepacia G4. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 61, 1352–1356.

Shin, H., Shin, H. S., Dewbre, G. R., & 

Harrison, M. J. (2004). Phosphate transport 
in Arabidopsis: Pht1;1 and Pht1;4 play a 
major role in phosphate acquisition from 
both low- and high-phosphate environments. 
Plant Journal, 39, 629–642.

Siciliano, S. D., Germida, J. J., Banks, K., & 

Greer, C. W. (2003). Changes in microbial 
community composition and function 
during a polyaromatic hydrocarbon 
phytoremediation field trial. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 69, 483–489.

Singh, B. K., Walker, A., & Wright, D. J. (2006). 

Bioremedial potential of fenamiphos and 
chlorpyrifos degrading isolates: Influence 
of different environmental conditions. Soil 
Biology & Biochemistry, 38, 2682–2693.
Sinha, S., Gupta, M., & Chandra, P. (1996). 
Bioaccumulation and biochemical effects 
of mercury in the plant Bacopa monnieri 
(L). Environmental Toxicology and Water 
Quality, 11, 105–112.

Sors, T. G., Ellis, D. R., & Salt, D. E. (2005). 

Selenium uptake, translocation, assimilation 
and metabolic fate in plants. Photosynthesis 
Research, 86, 373–389.

Stevens, R. C., Suzuki, S. M., Cole, T. B., Park, 
S. S., Richter, R. J., & Furlong, C. E. (2008). 
Engineered recombinant human paraoxonase 
1 (rHuPON1) purified from Escherichia coli 
protects against organophosphate poisoning. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
105, 12780–12784.

Summers, A. (1992). Untwist and shout: A 

heavy metal-responsive transcriptional 
regulator. Journal of Bacteriology, 174, 
3097–3101.

Taghavi, S., Barac, T., Greenberg, B., 

Borremans, B., Vangronsveld, J., & van der 
Lelie, D. (2005). Horizontal gene transfer to 
endogenous endophytic bacteria from poplar 
improves phytoremediation of toluene. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
71, 8500–8505.

Talmage, S. S., Opresko, D. M., Maxwell, C. 
J., Welsh, C. J., Cretella, F. M., & Reno, P. 
H., et al. (1999). Nitroaromatic munition 
compounds: Environmental effects and 
screening values. Reviews of Environment 
Contamination and Toxicology, 161, 1–156.

Terry, N., Zayed, A. M., de Souza, M. P., & 
Tarun, A. S. (2000). Selenium in higher 
plants. Annual Review of Plant Physiology 
and Plant Molecular Biology, 51, 401–432.

Thygesen, R., & Trapp, S. (2002). Phytotoxicity 

of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to 
willow trees. Journal of Soils and Sediments, 
2, 77–82.

Topp, E. (2001). A comparison of tree atrazine-

degrading bacteria for soil bioremediation. 
Biology and Fertility of Soils, 33, 529–534.

Travis, E. R., Hannink, N. K., Van der Gast, C. 

J., Thompson, I. P., Rosser, S. J., & Bruce, 
N. C. (2007). Impact of transgenic tobacco 
on trinitrotoluene (TNT) contaminated 
soil community. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 41, 5854–5861.

Tripathi, R. D., Srivastava, S., Mishra, S., Singh, 
N., & Tuli, R., et al. (2007). Arsenic hazards: 
Strategies for tolerance and remediation by 
plants. Trends in Biotechnology, 25, 158–165.

US Defense Science Board Task Force,  

Unexploded ordnance (UXO) clearance, 
active range UXO clearance, and explosive 
ordnance disposal programs. Washington, 
D.C.: Office of the Undersecretary of 
Defense for Acquisition and Technology. Ref 
Type: Report.

van Aken, B. (2009). Transgenic plants for 

enhanced remediation of toxic explosives. 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 20, 
231–236.

van Aken, B., Correa, P. A., & Schnoor, 

J. L. (2010). Phytoremediation of 
polychlorinated biphenyls: New trends 
and promises. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 44, 2767–2776.

van Aken, B., Yoon, J. M., & Schnoor, J. L. 

(2004). Biodegradation of nitro-substituted 
explosives 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene, hexahydro-
1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine, and octahydro-
1,3,5,7-tetranitro-1,3,5-tetrazocine by 
a phytosymbiotic Methylobacterium sp. 

associated with poplar tissues (Populus 
deltoides x nigra DN34). Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 70, 508–517.

van Dillewijn, P., Couselo, J., Corredoira, 

E., Delgado, A., Wittich, R. -M., & 
Ballester, A., et al. (2008). Bioremediation 
of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene by bacterial 
nitroreductase expressing transgenic aspen. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 42, 
7405–7410.

Van Hoewyk, D., Garifullina, G. F., Ackley, 

A. R., Abdel-Ghany, S. E., Marcus, M. A., 
& Fakra, S., et al. (2005). Overexpression 
of AtCpNifS enhances selenium tolerance 
and accumulation in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiology, 139, 1518–1528.

Van Huysen, T., Abdel-Ghany, S., Hale, K. L., 
LeDuc, D., Terry, N., & Pilon-Smits, E. A. 
H. (2003). Overexpression of cystathionine-
γ-synthase in Indian mustard enhances 
selenium volatilization. Planta, 218, 
71–78.

Van Huysen, T., Terry, N., & Pilon-Smits, E. 

A. H. (2004). Exploring the Selenium 
phytoremediation potential of transgenic 
Brassica juncea overexpressing ATP 
sulfurylase or cystathionine γ-synthase. 
International Journal of Phytoremediation, 6, 
111–118.

Vatamaniuk, O. K., Bucher, E. A., & Rea, P. 

A. (2002). Worms take the “phyto” out of 
“phytochelatins”. Trends in Biotechnology, 
20, 61–64.

Wackett, L. P., Sadowsky, M. J., Martinez, B., 

& Shapir, N. (2002). Biodegradation of 
atrazine and related s-triazine compounds: 
From enzymes to field studies. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 58, 
39–45.

Wang, J., Zhao, F., Meharg, A. A., Raab, A., 
Feldmann, J., & McGrath, S. P. (2002). 
Mechanisms of arsenic hyperaccumulation in 
Pteris vittata. Uptake kinetics interactions 
with phosphate and arsenic speciation. Plant 
Physiology, 130, 1552–1561.

Wang, L., Samac, D. A., Shapir, N., Wackett, 

L. P., Vance, C. P., & Olszewski, N. E., 
et al. (2005). Biodegradation of atrazine 
in transgenic plants expressing a modified 
bacterial atrazine chlorohydrolase (atzA) 
gene. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 3, 
475–486.

Weig, A., Deswarte, C., & Chrispeels, M. J. 

(1997). The major intrinsic protein family of 
Arabidopsis has 23 members that form three 
distinct groups with functional aquaporins 
in each group. Plant Physiology, 114, 
1347–1357.

Weyens, N., Croes, S., Dupae, J., Newman, 
L., van der Lelie, D., & Carleer, R., et al. 
(2010). Endophytic bacteria improve 
phytoremediation of Ni and TCE co-
contamination. Environmental Pollution, 
158, 2422–2427.

Weyens, N., van der, L. D., Artois, T., Smeets, 

K., Taghavi, S., & Newman, L., et al. 
(2009). Bioaugmentation with engineered 
endophytic bacteria improves contaminant 
fate in phytoremediation. Environmental 
Science & Technology, 43, 9413–9418.
Weyens, N., van der, L. D., Taghavi, S., & 

Vangronsveld, J. (2009). Phytoremediation: 
Plant-endophyte partnerships take the 

327

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

International Journal of Phytoremediation, 8, 
199–221.

Zhang, W. H., & Tyerman, S. D. (1999). 

Inhibition of water channels by HgCl2 in 
intact wheat root cells. Plant Physiology, 
120, 849–858.

Zhao, F. J., Ma, J. F., Meharg, A. A., & 

McGrath, S. (2009). Arsenic uptake and 
metabolism in plants. New Phytologist, 181, 
777–794.

Zhao, F. J., McGrath, S. P., & Meharg, A. A. 

(2010). Arsenic as a food chain contaminant: 
Mechanisms of plant uptake and metabolism 
and mitigation strategies. Annual Review of 
Plant Biology, 61, 7–25.

Zhao, F. J., Wang, J. R., Barker, J. H. A., 

Schat, H., Bleeker, P. M., & McGrath, S. P. 
(2003). The role of phytochelatinsin arsenic 
tolerance in the hyperaccumulator Pteris 
vittata. New Phytologist, 159, 403–410.
Zhu, Y. G., Williams, P. N., & Meharg, A. 

(2008). Exposure to inorganic arsenic from 
rice: A global health issue? Environmental 
Pollution, 154, 169–171.

challenge. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 
20, 248–254.

Wilken, A., Bock, C., Bokern, M., & Harms, 

H. (1995). Metabolism of different 
PCB congeners in plant cell cultures. 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 
14, 2017–2022.

Williams, P. N., Price, A. H., Raab, A., Hossain, 

S. A., Feldmann, J., & Meharg, A. A. 
(2005). Variation in arsenic speciation 
and concentration in paddy rice related to 
dietary exposure. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 39, 5531–5540.

Williams, P. N., Villada, A., Deacon, C., 

Raab, A., Figuerola, J., & Green, A. J., 
et al. (2007). Greatly enhanced As shoot 
assimilation in rice leads to elevated grain 
levels compared to wheat and barley. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 41, 
6854–6859.

Wysocki, R., Chery, C. C., Wawrzycka, D., 
Hulle, M. V., Cornelis, R., & Thevelein, 
J. M., et al. (2001). The glycerol channel 
Fps1p mediates the uptake of arsenite and 
antimonite in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Molecular Microbiology, 40, 1391–1401.

Xiong, X. Z., Li, P. J., Wang, Y. S., Ten, 

H., Wang, L. P., & Song, S. H. (1987). 
Environmental capacity of arsenic in soil and 
mathematical model. Huanjing Kexue, 8, 
8–14.

Yang, C., Liu, N., Guo, X., & Qiao, C. (2006). 

Cloning of mpd gene from a chlorpyrifos-
degrading bacterium and use of this strain in 
bioremediation of contaminated soil. FEMS 
Microbiology Letters, 265, 118–125.

Zavala, Y. J., & Duxbury, J. M. (2008). Arsenic 

in rice: I. Estimating normal levels of total 
arsenic in rice grain. Environmental Science 
& Technology, 42, 3856–3860.

World Health Organization (WHO, 2003). 

Elemental mercury and inorganic mercury 
compounds: Human health aspects. Geneva, 
Switzerland.

Zeeb, B. A., Amphlett, J. S., Rutter, A., 
& Reimer, K. J. (2006). Potential for 
phytoremediation of polychlorinated 
biphenyl-(PCB) contaminated soil. 

328

Insects, nematodes, and other pests

Philip R. Watkins1  Joseph E. Huesing2  Venu Margam2 
Larry L. Murdock2  T.J.V. Higgins1
1CSIRO, Plant Industry, Canberra, Australia,
2Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana

23

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction — Genetically Modified Crops  
for Insect Resistance  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 353
History of B. thuringiensis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .353
Cry proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .354
Commercially Available Insect Protected Crops   .  .  .  .  .  .  . 354
Bt maize . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .354
Bt cotton  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .356
Discontinued Bt crops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .357
Bt Crops Under Development  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 357
Bt brinjal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .357
Bt rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .358
Other Bt crops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .358
Impact of Bt   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 359
Benefits of Bt crops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .359
Concerns about Bt crops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .359
Improving Bt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .360
Cowpea Trypsin Inhibitor  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 360
Novel Insecticidal Protection  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 361
VIP genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .361
Microorganism-derived toxins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .361
Plant-derived toxins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .361
Secondary metabolites  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .362
Other toxins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .363
RNAi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .363
Nematode-Resistant Crops  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 364
Recombinant Insecticides  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 364
Conclusion  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 364

Introduction — Genetically Modified 
Crops for Insect Resistance

Presently,  all  commercialized  bioengineered  insect-resistant 
crops  (with  one  exception)  contain  genes  derived  from  or 

based  on  the  soil-dwelling  bacterium  Bacillus  thuringien-
sis  (Bt)  (James  and  Choudhary,  2010).  To  guard  against  the 
potential  for  resistance  to  these  Bt  toxins  new  strategies 
have been developed to maintain transgenic insect protected 
plants. This involves a range of stewardship principles includ-
ing  rotating  the  type  of  modified  crop  to  ensure  insects  are 
exposed  to  different  toxins,  and  the  use  of  Bt  free  refugia. 
These  refuges  allow  populations  of  non-resistant  insects  to 
multiply and breed with any insects that may have developed 
resistance.

Pyramiding  resistance  genes,  modifying  the  Bt  genes  and 
using different promoters to alter the level and site of expres-
sion,  have  also  been  used  to  reduce  the  risk  of  development 
of insect resistance. Combined with the fact that not all plant 
pests are susceptible to Bt, other ways of modifying plants to 
resist  insects  have  been  under  investigation  for  some  time. 
Vegetative  insecticidal  protein  toxins  and  RNA  interfer-
ence  technologies  are  likely  candidates  for  near  to  medium-
term  commercial  release.  More  speculative  alternatives 
include  other  bacterial  toxins  (e.g.,  from  Photorhabdus  and 
Xenorhabdus), digestive enzyme inhibitors, plant lectins, chi-
tinases, invertebrate spider and scorpion toxins, and secondary 
metabolites (including volatiles).

History of B. thuringiensis

Bacillus  thuringiensis  was  first  discovered  by  Shigetane 
Ishiwatari  in  1901.  It  was  isolated  as  the  causative  agent  in 
the  death  of  large  numbers  of  silkworms  (Ishiwatari,  1901). 
In  1911,  the  bacteria  were  rediscovered  in  a  Mediterranean 
flour  moth  and  named  after  the  nearby  German  province 
of  Thuringia  (Berliner,  1911).  Commercial  production  of 
Bt as a spray began in France in 1938, and was introduced to 
the  United  States  in  1958  (Lambert  and  Peferoen,  1992). 
Originally  it  was  not  widely  used  due  to  the  availability  of 
effective  synthetic  insecticides  and  its  practical  limitations; 
it rapidly washes away in rain and is degraded by sunlight. By 
the  mid-1970s,  13  Bt  strains  effective  against  lepidopteran 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00023-7

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

(moths  and  butterflies)  had  been 

insects 
identified.  
In  1977  the  israelensis  subspecies,  which  is  toxic  to  dipteran 
insects (flies), was found (Goldberg and Margalit, 1977). This 
was  followed  by  the  discovery  of  the  tenebrionis  subspecies, 
which  is  toxic  to  coleopterans  (beetles;  Krieg  et  al.,  1983). 
Currently, thousands of strains of Bt have been discovered that 
contain toxins affecting many orders of insects and nematodes.

By the 1980s, insects were well known to develop resistance 
to synthetic pesticides and there was growing awareness of the 
environmental  effects  of  chemical  overuse.  Commercial  inter-
est  in  alternative  pest  management  technologies  grew,  leading 
to  increased  government  and  private  funding  for  alternatives 
including  Bt  research.  In  1984,  the  feasibility  of  genetically 
modified plants was established when foreign genetic material 
was  successfully  expressed  in  the  tobacco  plant  without  any 
observed loss of phenotype (Horsch et al., 1984). The first Bt 
gene  modified  to  express  well  in  plants  was  developed  soon 
after for tobacco (Vaeck et al., 1987). Bt maize and Bt cotton 
became the first commercialized transgenic crops to express a 
Bt gene in 1996. In 2009, 14 years after their initial commer-
cialization, over 50 million hectares of Bt crops were planted in 
23 countries (James, 2009).

Bt  genes  have  now  been  expressed  in  many  experimen-
tal systems from a variety of plant species (including various 
trees, cereals, legumes, and vegetables). The number of com-
mercialized  plants  is  much  lower,  in  part  due  to  intellectual 
property rights but mostly due to the extremely high cost of 
developing, testing (including regulatory studies), and releas-
ing  the  modified  plants  (Kalaitzandonakes  et  al.,  2007).  For 
these  reasons  the  present  commercialized  Bt  crops  consist 
of crops such as maize and cotton (Table 23.1), with Bt soy-
bean  expected  soon,  which  are  grown  on  very  large  produc-
tion  scales.  Field  trials  and  safety  tests  are  being  carried  out 
on many other Bt crops, with rice and brinjal closest to com-
mercialization currently over half the worldwide Bt field area 
consists of crops grown in the USA (see Figure 23.2).

The  Cry  proteins  are  organized  into  three  main  groups 
based on structure and function: the three-domain, the mos-
quitocidal-like, and the binary-like Cry toxins. Three-domain 
Cry proteins are the largest group and the majority of the Cry 
toxin  genes  used  to  transform  plants  to  impart  insect  resist-
ance belong to this group. The three-domain group is further 
divided  into  more  than  40  different  types  (Cry1  to  Cry55) 
with  many  different  subgroups  (Cry1Aa,  Cry1Ab,  Cry1Bb, 
Cry2Aa,  etc.;  Crickmore  et  al.,  1998).  New  three-domain 
Cry proteins are assigned to a group based primarily on their 
sequence. Domain I of the Cry protein is responsible for pore 
formation  and  the  other  two  domains  determine  the  insect 
specificity of the toxin.

The standard model for describing the sequence of events 
leading to larval intoxication and death is based on the three-
domain  lepidopteran  Cry  proteins.  A  majority  of  the  trans-
genic  Cry  proteins  currently  in  use  follow  this  model  (see 
Figure  23.1).  Briefly,  when  ingested  by  lepidopteran  insect 
larvae  the  Cry  protein,  a  protoxin,  is  solubilized  by  the  high 
pH of the gut lumen. After solubilization the protoxin is acti-
vated  through  cleavage  by  digestive  enzymes  into  a  smaller 
(~60 kDa)  fragment  (Hofte  and  Whiteley,  1989;  OECD, 
2007).  The  activated  toxic  fragment  then  binds  to  recep-
tors  on  the  membrane  of  the  insect’s  midgut  epithelial  cells 
(Bravo et al., 1992). In the generally accepted model of Cry 
action, the toxic fragment forms oligomers that insert into the 
membrane and form a pore, causing loss of homeostasis. This 
leads to osmotic shock, cell lysis, septicemia, and insect death 
(Lorence et al., 1995). Alternatively, it has recently been pro-
posed  that  toxicity  is  due  to  the  activation  of  an  apoptotic 
signal  cascade  pathway  after  binding  to  the  midgut  recep-
tors (Zhang et al., 2006). In some species enteric bacteria are 
required for insect death (Broderick et al., 2006, 2009). The 
narrow target range of the Cry proteins is due to the unique 
binding receptors and the specificity of the digestive enzymes 
needed to activate the toxin (OECD, 2007).

Cry proteins

Bacillus  thuringiensis  is  a  gram  positive  bacterium  that  pro-
duces insecticidal proteins in the vegetative state as well as dur-
ing sporulation. The δ-endotoxins produced in the sporulation 
phase are composed of one or more crystal (Cry) and/or cyto-
lytic (Cyt) proteins and are a major source of the bacterium’s 
toxicity (Bravo et al., 2007). The toxicity, mode of action, and 
specificity  of  Cry  proteins  have  been  experimentally  verified 
(OECD,  2007).  cry  genes  constitute  nearly  all  of  the  anti-
insect  genes  in  transgenic  insect  protected  plants.  Currently 
over  80  different  types  of  Cry  proteins  have  been  identified. 
They  belong  to  distinct  protein  families,  and  the  holoproteins 
range  in  size  from  50  to  140 kDa  (Crickmore  et  al.,  1998). 
In  addition,  binary  forms  of  Cry  proteins  occur  in  the  bacte-
rium and are used in transgenic crops. The best characterized 
Cry34A/Cry35A  binary  protein  has  constituent  masses  of  14 
and 44 kDa, respectively (Schnepf et al., 2005). Most Cry pro-
teins have a distinct specificity and target only a single order or 
a few species from that order. Some, however, have a broader 
spectrum of activity that spans two or three orders.

Commercially Available Insect 
Protected Crops

Bt maize

Maize  was  domesticated  around  12,000  years  ago 
in 
Mesoamerica and is now the largest crop in the Americas. The 
United  States  is  the  largest  producer  of  maize  in  the  world, 
with  China,  Brazil,  and  South  Africa  also  growing  significant 
areas.  In  the  United  States  only  2.5%  of  maize  is  grown  for 
human  consumption;  the  majority  being  used  for  livestock 
feed. An estimated 29% of the total 2007 maize production in 
the United States was used for biofuels, and this is expected 
to increase in the future (Dhugga, 2007). Two major pests of 
maize  in  the  United  States  and  Canada  are  the  lepidopteran 
European  corn  borer  (ECB;  Ostrinia  nubilalis)  and  the  cole-
opteran  western  corn  rootworm  (WCR;  Diabrotica  virgifera 
virgifera).  It  is  estimated  that  the  WCR  alone  is  responsible 
for $1 billion in lost revenue each year in the United States, 
which includes $800 million in yield loss and $200 million in 

354

Insects, nematodes, and other pests

C H A P T E R   2 3

Ingestion, solubilization and

activation of the toxin

Crystal toxin
Protoxin
Active toxin

Active toxin binds to the microvilli

(mediated by transmembrane
proteins) and results in pore
formation, and cell death.

Rupture of the gut lining, septicemia,

and death of the insect

Figure 23.1 l The mode of action of B. thuringiensis cry toxins on susceptible insect larvae l The larvae ingest the Cry toxin, which 
is solubilized in the high pH of the midgut lumen. Digestive enzymes then activate the toxin by cleaving it into smaller fragments. The activated 
toxin binds to the membrane of the midgut epithelial cells and forms a pore that ruptures the gut lining. This leads to osmotic shock, cell lysis, 
septicemia, and insect death.

insect  control  costs.  The  ECB  larvae  live  hidden  within  the 
maize  stalk  and  the  WCR  larvae  bore  into  the  maize  roots, 
making both pests extremely difficult to control with conven-
tional pesticides. Since the release of Bt maize targeted to ECB 
in 1996, the area planted with genetically modified maize had 
increased to over 35 million hectares by 2008 (James, 2008).

Currently, there are 21 registered varieties of maize avail-
able  commercially  that  contain  a  cry  gene.  Maize  has  also 
been  developed  to  carry  multiple  (stacked)  traits,  and  many 
of these varieties contain two or more different cry genes and 
one or more herbicide tolerance genes. Some of the Bt maize 
lines  offer  protection  from  the  WCR  and  other  related  corn 

rootworms  through  the  inclusion  of  modified  Cry3Bb1  or 
Cry34/Cry35A genes. The maize hybrids are resistant to the 
major lepidopteran and coleopteran pests.

Some  technology  developers  have  collaborated  to  pro-
duce a hybrid maize called SmartStax™, which contains eight 
transgenes  (James,  2009).  It  produces  the  Bt  toxins  Cry2Ab, 
Cry1A.105, Cry1F, Cry3Bb1, Cry34, and Cry35Ab1, and two 
herbicide  tolerance  genes.  It  gained  approval  from  the  U.S. 
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)  and  the  Canadian 
Food Inspection agency and was planted commercially in 2010.
The  first  versions  of  Bt  maize  were  protected  against 
lepidopteran  species,  specifically,  ECB.  Most  studies  of  the 

355

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

effectiveness of Bt maize have therefore focused on this pest. 
While Bt maize has been shown to be effective at controlling 
ECB, the crop’s location, climate, time of planting, and how 
much  if  any  pesticides  are  used  can  also  affect  the  level  of 
infestation. The benefit of Bt maize to the farmer is the ability 
to control the pest with reduced labor and less chemical pesti-
cides (Payne et al., 2003). A recent study estimates that farm 
income from planting Bt maize has been enhanced by over $8 
billion in the first 13 years (1996–2008) since commercializa-
tion  (Brookes  and  Barfoot,  2010).  Bt  maize  has  been  widely 
accepted  by  low  resource  farmers  in  South  Africa  where  Bt 
white maize is used as a traditional food (yellow maize is used 
for  feed).  First  released  in  2001,  Bt  maize  now  accounts  for 
two-thirds  of  the  total  South  African  white  maize  hectarage 
of 1.5 million in 2009 (James, 2009).

Bt  maize  protected  from  WCR  was  first  introduced  in 
2003.  These  plants  are  very  effective  against  corn  rootworm 
larvae  (Al-Deeb  and  Wilde,  2005).  The  yield  losses  and  the 
control costs of this pest are estimated at $1 billion annually 
in the United States alone (Metcalf, 1986). Estimates carried 
out before the commercial release of the modified maize sug-
gested savings to farmers could be $14 to $69 million annu-
ally.  The  recent  commercialization  of  hybrid  maizes  with 
multiple insect resistances has the potential to contribute fur-
ther savings.

An  indirect  benefit  of  Bt  maize  has  been  a  reduction  in 
pathogen  infections  (Munkvold  et  al.,  1997).  Insects  wound 
the plants when they feed, increasing the risk that mycotoxin-
producing fungi or other microorganisms will infect the plant. 
As well as reducing potential yield, the fungal infections pose 
a risk to the health of humans and animals and decrease the 
value of the crop. It has been estimated that the reduced fun-
gal damage is worth $17 million annually (Wu et al., 2004).

Bt cotton

Cotton  is  a  major  global  crop,  with  26  million  tonnes  pro-
duced  in  2008  at  yields  just  under  800 kg/ha.  China,  India, 
and  the  United  States  account  for  two-thirds  of  all  cotton 
grown,  with  Pakistan,  Brazil,  and  Uzbekistan  being  other 
major cotton growing nations. Cotton is predominately grown 
for its fiber, although it is also harvested as a source of oil and 
seed  meal.  Insects  are  the  major  constraint  to  cotton  pro-
duction;  they  result  in  global  yield  losses  of  $5  billion  annu-
ally  (Thomson,  2006).  About  25%  of  all  insecticides  used  in 
agriculture are applied to cotton; in West Africa this may be 
as high as 80% (James, 2004). The potential for high returns 
has made genetically modified cotton popular; currently 46% 
of  all  cotton  grown  is  either  genetically  modified  for  insect 
resistance, herbicide tolerance, or both (James, 2008).

The  major  pests  of  cotton  are  the  lepidopteran  tobacco 
budworm (Heliothis virescens), cotton bollworm (Helicoverpa 
zea),  and  pink  bollworm  (Pectinophora  gossypiella).  These 
insects  lay  their  eggs  on  the  cotton  boll  and  after  hatching 
the larvae chew through the cotton lint, causing considerable 
damage to the plant. Being lepidopterans they are susceptible 
to control using Bt Cry toxins. Bt cotton (Bollgard®) express-
ing cry1Ac was first released in 1996. In its first year, the crop 

was  attacked  by  an  unusually  high  number  of  cotton  boll-
worms, which are less susceptible to Cry1Ac, and some of the 
planted  cotton  was  lost  (Kaiser,  1996).  The  following  years 
were  more  successful  and  the  number  of  Bt  cotton  hectares 
subsequently  increased  in  the  United  States  and  worldwide. 
In 2003, Bollgard II was released. This contained the cry2Ab 
gene in addition to cry1Ac, providing greater protection from 
the  cotton  bollworm  and  decreasing  the  likelihood  of  resist-
ance appearing in bollworm populations.

Bt  cotton  is  also  in  widespread  use  in  several  developing 
nations. China, the world’s largest cotton producer, developed 
its own Bt cotton using a fused cry1Ab/cry1Ac, which has been 
available  commercially  since  1997  (James  and  Choudhary, 
2010).  In  China  the  cowpea  trypsin  inhibitor  gene  has  been 
added  to  some  lines,  providing  a  second  mode  of  insect  pro-
tection.  These  lines  were  released  commercially  in  2001.  In 
2002  India  commercialized  Bt  cotton  containing  the  cry1Ac 
gene, and Bt cotton is also grown in Australia, Brazil, Argentina, 
South Africa, Burkina Faso, Mexico, Columbia, and Costa Rica

Like  Bt  maize,  the  economic  benefits  of  Bt  cotton  are  an 
increase in yield protection due to reduced pest damage and 
lower  pesticide  costs.  A  study  carried  out  by  the  University 
of  Arizona  concluded  that  in  2001  American  and  Chinese 
farmers  gained  $179  million  through  the  use  of  Bt  cotton, 
despite  a  worldwide  decline  in  the  price  of  cotton  (Frisvold 
et  al.,  2006).  A  recent  study  has  attributed  an  increase  of 
$15.6  billion  to  farm  income  over  13  years  due  to  the  com-
mercialization of Bt cotton (Brookes and Barfoot, 2010). The 
economic  benefits  of  Bt  cotton  have  been  more  pronounced 
in  countries  outside  of  the  United  States.  This  is  likely  due 
to  the  relatively  low  insect  pressure  experienced  in  the 
United  States  compared  to  other  countries.  China,  India, 
and Australia sprayed their cotton crops more than ten times 
a season compared to just two for the United States (James, 
2001). South Africa and Australia have grown Bt cotton since 
the  late  1990s,  and  studies  have  documented  positive  eco-
nomic and/or environmental benefits (Morse et al., 2004; Fitt, 
2008). In Burkina Faso, where Bollgard® cotton was first field 
tested  in  2003,  trials  over  3  years  found  cotton  yields  aver-
aged  20%  above  the  non-transgenic  controls  and  reduced 
insecticide applications by two-thirds (Vitale et al., 2008). Bt 
cotton was commercialized in Burkina Faso in 2008.

The greatest returns on investments in Bt cotton have been 
seen  in  China  and  India.  This  appears  largely  due  to  higher 
pest infestations, greater resistance to conventional pesticides, 
and the majority of growers being small-scale famers (1 ha), 
many of whom lack the money to purchase pesticides. Small-
scale  farmers  in  China  almost  doubled  their  income  after 
adopting Bt cotton, although consumers did not benefit due to 
governmental control of cotton prices (Pray et al., 2001). In 
India where pest damage is substantial, the yield of Bt cotton 
increases have been up to 80% (Qaim and Zilberman, 2003). 
Even though the initial seed costs for the farmers were higher, 
the  Bt  cotton  provided  greater  returns  (Bambawale  et  al., 
2004).

The  success  of  Bt  cotton  in  India  and  China  has  created 
problems with stewardship and regulation of the products. In 
India the spread and adoption of Bt cotton has been rapid and 
almost universal in many cotton growing areas (Stone, 2007). 

356

Table 23.1  Distribution of Bt and genetically modified crops by 
country in 2009 (in thousand hectares)

Country

Crops

Bt crop area

United States

Maize and cotton

27,163

Genetically 
modified 
crop area

64,000

8,400

21,400

3,700

21,300

2,100

8,200

490

230

115

790

76

73

32

24

15

6

5

3

3

2

1

Insects, nematodes, and other pests

C H A P T E R   2 3

Discontinued Bt crops

There  are  Bt  crops  that  have  been  discontinued  for  various 
reasons.  A  Bt  potato  that  targeted  the  Colorado  potato  bee-
tle  (Letinotarsa  decemlineata)  was  produced  in  1996.  This 
beetle had developed resistance to many chemical pesticides, 
but  remained  susceptible  to  Bt  spray  containing  Cry3A  tox-
ins.  A  released  variety  of  potato  expressing  the  cry3A  gene 
was successful at controlling the insect (Perlak et al., 1993). 
However,  many  buyers  and  processors  were  hesitant  to  buy 
the  genetically  modified  potatoes  because  of  perceived  pub-
lic resistance to biotechnology crops. The Bt potato was with-
drawn from the market in 2001.

StarLink™  was  a  maize  variety  containing  the  cry9C 
gene.  The  Cry9C  protein  is  more  slowly  digested  in  a  simu-
lated  stomach  than  other  Cry  proteins,  leading  regulatory 
authorities  to  raise  concerns  about  its  potential  allergenic-
ity  in  humans;  they  approved  the  maize  only  for  livestock 
feed. In 2000 it was reported that traces of StarLink™ maize 
were  detected  in  taco  shells  destined  for  human  consump-
tion  (Kaufman,  2000).  StarLink™  was  withdrawn  from  reg-
istration  and  an  extensive  program  to  remove  all  traces  of 
the variety from the food chain was initiated. At the time of 
withdrawal it made up less than 1% of the total maize area in 
the United States and no positive samples have been detected 
since  2004.  Since  the  “contamination”  was  publicized,  28 
people have claimed allergic reactions after eating maize prod-
ucts that may have contained StarLink™. After testing by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration and Centers for Disease 
Control  and  Prevention,  it  was  concluded  that  there  was  no 
evidence that the reactions reported were consistent with an 
allergic response (CDC, 2001).

As part of the normal product development cycle, other Bt 
crops have been withdrawn by developers as they are super-
seded by new and improved varieties. Knockout™ maize was 
phased out in 2003, partly because of its relatively higher risk 
to the monarch butterfly (see next section), but also because 
other  Bt  lines  were  more  efficient.  Another  variety  of  Bt 
maize  (Bt  Xtra™)  was  removed  from  the  market  after  com-
pany mergers. With the current development of stacked trait 
crops many of the first generation of single trait crops will or 
have been replaced. This is necessary to ensure that resistance 
to the pyramided insect resistance genes is delayed for as long 
as possible. The Cry1Ac expressing cotton will be completely 
replaced by Bollgard II, which expresses both the cry1Ac and 
cry2Ab genes.

Bt Crops Under Development

Bt brinjal

Brinjal  (eggplant/aubergine)  is  an  important  food  crop  in 
India,  Bangladesh,  and  the  Philippines.  Its  major  insect  pest 
is  the  lepidopteran  fruit  and  shoot  borer  (FSB;  Leucinodes 
arbonalis).  The  FSB  larvae  bore  into  the  vegetable  and  then 
plug  the  entry  hole  with  excreta,  which  shields  them  from 
insecticide  sprays.  In  India  brinjal  is  sprayed  with  chemicals 

357

8,381

5,145

3,672

2,205

1,614

1,200

392

184

115

90

76

56

28

24

12

6

5

3

3

2

1

India

Brazil

China

Cotton

Maize and cotton

Cotton and poplar

Argentina

Maize and cotton

South Africa

Maize and cotton

Canada

Philippines

Australia

Burkina Faso

Uruguay

Spain

Mexico

Chile

Colombia

Honduras

Czech Republic

Portugal

Romania

Poland

Costa Rica

Egypt

Slovakia

Total

Maize

Maize

Cotton

Cotton

Maize

Maize

Cotton

Maize

Cotton

Maize

Maize

Maize

Maize

Maize

Cotton

Maize

Maize

Adapted from James (2009).

1

50,398

1

130,966

This has led to a rise in the number of Bt hybrids being pro-
duced, both officially (137 in 2007) and illegally (Jayaraman, 
2004).  The  illegal  varieties  are  more  popular  among  some 
farmers primarily because they are cheaper, and because they 
are generally created by hybridizing with local varieties, which 
means  they  can  be  better  suited  to  the  local  environment 
(Roy et al., 2007). Further, the high demand and limited sup-
ply  of  quality  seed,  especially  in  the  early  years  of  commer-
cialization,  together  with  the  absence  of  seed  certification, 
resulted in the sale of fraudulent Bt seeds (Herring, 2008).

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

India
16.6%

Brazil
10.2%

China
7.3% Argentina

4.4%

South Africa
3.2%

Canada
2.4%

Other
2.0%

USA
53.9%

Philippines
0.8%

Australia
0.4%

Burkina Faso
0.2%

Uruguay
0.2%

Spain
0.2%

Mexico
0.1%

Chile
0.1%

Other
0.1%

Figure 23.2 l Global distribution of Bt Crops in 2009. (Adapted from James 2009.) 

15  to  40  times  each  season.  A  Bt  brinjal  was  cleared  for 
release 
in  India  by  the  Genetic  Engineering  Approval 
Committee in 2009. It is the first food crop for broad-scale, 
direct  human  consumption  containing  a  Bt  gene  that  has 
passed the regulatory phase.

Bt  brinjal  was  developed  using  a  hybrid  Cry1Ac/Cry1Ab 
gene  and  has  been  very  effective  at  controlling  FSB  with  an 
average  of  seven-fold  less  fruit  damage  compared  to  non-
Bt  lines.  Choudhary  and  Gaur  (2008)  have  predicted  that 
Bt  brinjal  will  result  in  yields  25%  above  untreated  con-
trols.  Safety  assessments  have  been  carried  out  since  2002 
and  include  feeding  trials  with  a  range  of  animals  (rats,  rab-
bits, goats, chickens, fish, and lactating cows), measurements 
of  potential  gene  transfer,  weediness,  impact  on  non-target 
organisms,  accumulation  of  Bt  in  the  soil,  and  variations  in 
pest  and  disease  susceptibility  (Maharashtra  Hybrid  Seeds 
Company  Ltd.,  2009).  Some  public  interest  groups  strongly 
oppose the release of the brinjal, and in early 2010 the Indian 
government imposed a moratorium on the release of Bt brinjal 
until further independent studies could be carried out.

Bt rice

Rice  is  one  of  the  most  important  global  food  crops  and  a 
major  source  of  calories  in  the  human  diet.  In  2004  Bt  rice 
was  commercialized  on  a  small  scale  in  Iran  with  the  help 
of  the  International  Rice  Research  Institute  (James,  2005). 
Large-scale  trials  have  been  carried  out  in  China  since  1999 
(Zhang  et  al.,  1999).  Two  Bt  rice  varieties  have  reached 
the  pre-production  trial  stage,  and  are  being  grown  under 
field  conditions  in  selected  villages  within  two  of  China’s 

investigating  the  finan-
provinces.  Independent  research 
cial  impact  of  Bt  rice  for  small-scale  farmers  in  the  pre- 
production  trial  suggest  that  the  drop  in  pesticide  use  and 
increase  in  yield  will  have  positive  financial  benefits  for 
China’s rural poor (Huang et al., 2008).

The  major  hurdle  to  commercialization  of  rice  in  China  is 
concern over the possible ecological consequences of gene flow 
into wild rice species. China is the center of origin and diver-
sity  for  rice  and  contains  many  wild  rice  varieties.  Gene  flow 
from  cultivated  rice  to  wild  rice  is  unavoidable  (Chen  et  al., 
2004),  and  it  is  possible  that  wild  rice  will  gain  a  selective 
advantage  when  exposed  to  lepidopteran  pests  (Cohen  et  al., 
2008). There are also concerns about the effect of genetically 
modified rice on trade, in particular to Europe, and a possible 
unwillingness  to  become  the  first  nation  to  commercialize  a 
major genetically modified food for direct human consumption. 
Nevertheless, in late 2009 China approved preparations for the 
release of Bt rice, which could occur in two to four years.

Other Bt crops

Other Bt crops expressing cry genes are being developed for 
commercial use. Some are at the field trial stage, while others 
are still very much in the development stage. Bt soybean con-
taining a Cry1Ac gene is in the final stages of development for 
release into South America (Miklos et al., 2007). Field trials 
have  been  conducted  in  Nigeria  using  a  cowpea  transformed 
with  a  cry1Ab  gene.  Other  crops  that  have  been  engineered 
to  produce  Cry  toxins  include  wheat,  sugarcane,  chickpea, 
canola, tobacco, apples, kiwifruit, cabbage, peanuts, broccoli, 
pigeon pea, strawberry, poplar, spruce, and eucalyptus.

358

Insects, nematodes, and other pests

C H A P T E R   2 3

Impact of Bt

Benefits of Bt crops

As well as the increased yield protection and economic value 
(see Figure 23.3), other advantages of Bt crops include human 
safety as a result of reduced handling of insecticides, ease of 
use, an all-in-one product insect control, time and labor sav-
ings,  and  better  pest  control  (Rice,  2004).  The  reduction  of 
pesticide use has the advantage of decreasing the environmen-
tal contamination risk, increasing insect biodiversity by reduc-
ing non-target deaths, lowering the resource cost of producing 
the  pesticides,  and  lessening  the  amount  of  on-farm  waste 
generated. In addition, some traits, such as those that protect 
the roots of plants from insect pests, can indirectly result in 
drought  tolerance  when  compared  to  non-transformed  lines 
(Clark et al., 2006).

Figure 23.3 l Unsprayed, non-transgenic cotton (left) and unsprayed 
Bt (Cry 1Ac) cotton (right) prior to harvest. (Photo courtesy of C. Mares.) 

Concerns about Bt crops

Concerns  about  Bt  crops  have  been  raised  by  some  politi-
cal,  environmental,  and  academic  groups  (Mendelsohn 
et al., 2003). Most concerns deal with factors common to all 
genetically  modified  crops,  in  particular  human  and  environ-
mental safety, corporate control of the food supply, and ethi-
cal  issues  over  labeling  and  intellectual  property.  These  will 
be addressed later in the book, but now we will concentrate 
on questions raised that are specific to Bt crops. These gener-
ally involve: (1) the health impact on humans or animals that 
consume the cry proteins; (2) non-target effects on beneficial 
insects;  and  (3)  the  development  of  resistant  pests  (Shelton 
et al., 2003).

As  a  pesticide  spray,  B.  thuringiensis  has  long  been  con-
sidered  a  safe  alternative  to  chemical  pesticides.  Despite 
over 60 years of use, few human health problems have been 
associated with Bt sprays, and studies conclude that Bt poses 
very  little  risk  to  mammals  at  field-level  dosages  (Glare  and 
O’Callaghan, 2000; Mendelsohn et al., 2003; OECD, 2007). 
A  major  difference  between  the  Bt  spray  and  Bt  engineered 
crops  is  that  the  insecticidal  cry  proteins  are  expressed  at 
higher  doses  and  within  the  plant  tissues.  This  has  helped 
make  them  successful  at  controlling  insect  infestations,  but 
concerns have been raised about how this could affect human 
health. Currently most crops expressing Bt genes (except Bt 
sweetcorn) are not directly consumed by humans (the major-
ity of maize is harvested for animal feed), although cottonseed 
oil  is  used  for  frying  in  the  food  service  industry.  However, 
there are crops in development containing cry genes that will 
directly enter the human food supply (e.g., rice and brinjal), 
and more are planned for the medium-term future.

Food from genetically modified plants is highly regulated. 
Before a new genetically modified crop can be approved for 
commercial release, it must comply with national and inter-
national  human  health  safety  assessments  (Mendelsohn 
et al., 2003; OECD, 2007; Johnson et al., 2007). To date the 
vast majority of published studies related to Bt crops reveal 
similar nutritional performance and growth between animals 

fed  genetically  modified  and  conventional  food  (Flachowsky 
et  al.,  2005;  Batista  and  Oliveira,  2009).  The  differences 
that  have  sometimes  been  observed  at  the  microscopic  and 
molecular  level  (Magaña-Gómez  and  de  la  Barca,  2008)  are 
difficult  to  assess  and  frequently  not  confirmed  by  other 
investigators.

Concerns  have  been  raised  about  the  toxicity  of  Bt  crops 
to  non-target  organisms,  especially  those  involved  in  pollina-
tion, decomposition of biomass, and biological control meth-
ods  (Dale  et  al.,  2002).  The  potential  for  adverse  effects  is 
evaluated as part of the environmental risk assessment before 
any crops are commercialized (Nap et al., 2003; Conner et al., 
2003). A tiered approach to assessing the potential for harm 
to beneficial insects has been developed (Romeis et al., 2008). 
Since Cry proteins are active against specific orders of insects, 
it  is  possible  to  narrow  down  which  beneficial  insects  might 
be  affected.  Also,  targeting  expression  of  the  cry  gene  to  a 
specific tissue can eliminate the need to evaluate the effects 
on certain insects (i.e., if the gene is not expressed in the pol-
len there is no need to evaluate pollen feeding insects).

The  most  publicized  research  into  the  possibility  of  Bt 
crops  harming  beneficial  insects  relates  to  the  Monarch  but-
terfly  (Ferber,  1999).  Monarch  caterpillars  feed  on  milkweed 
plants, which often grow near maize fields. In a laboratory situ-
ation,  only  56%  of  the  Monarch  larvae  fed  milkweed  leaves 
dusted  with  Bt  maize  pollen  survived,  significantly  less  than 
a  control  group  fed  milkweed  that  was  not  dusted  (Losey 
et al., 1999). Additional large-scale studies were commissioned 
to  quantify  the  risk  to  the  Monarch  butterfly  in  the  field. 
Because the gene promoters used in Yieldgard®CornBorer and 
Bt11 were almost inactive in pollen, the larvae did not receive 
lethal  amounts  of  toxin,  although  the  levels  expressed  in  the 
pollen  of  one  line  (Knockout™)  were  40-fold  higher  and  did 
have  a  deleterious  effect  (Hellmich  et  al.,  2001).  Knockout™ 
has since been withdrawn from the market.

It was also discovered that the pollen on milkweed leaves 
in  the  field  was  less  than  had  been  anticipated  and  that  the 
exposure rapidly declined with distance from the maize field 
(Pleasants et al., 2001). The breeding season of the Monarch 

359

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

butterfly had limited overlap with maize pollination and only 
a  small  proportion  of  the  butterflies  utilized  milkweed  close 
to  maize  crops  (Sears  et  al.,  2001).  In  2002,  despite  a  40% 
increase  from  2001  in  Bt  maize  plantings,  the  Monarch  but-
terfly  population  of  North  America  increased  by  30%,  with 
loss  of  habitat  in  central  Mexico  and  California  seen  as  the 
major threat to their survival (Gatehouse et al., 2002).

Because  Bt  crops  can  exhibit  100%  lethality  to  cer-
tain  pests,  there  will  naturally  be  effects  on  the  predators 
of  these  pests.  Meta-analyses  comparing  Bt  plants  to  their 
non-sprayed,  non-transgenic  counterparts  have  revealed 
no  unexpected  negative  or  positive  ecological  effects, 
although  predator  numbers  were  reduced  on  the  Bt  crops 
(Wolfenbarger  et  al.,  2008;  Duan  et  al.,  2009;  Naranjo, 
2009). The smaller predator population was attributed to the 
reduced number of prey and the low nutritional quality of the 
sick  prey  that  were  eaten  before  they  died.  In  an  ecological 
setting the use of Bt crops can increase biodiversity as pesti-
cide levels drop, and the number of off-target effects will be 
much less (Cattaneo et al., 2006).

Insects  developing  resistance  to  the  Cry  toxins  is  a  major 
concern. Over 400 species of insects have already developed 
resistance  to  various  chemical  pesticides  and  it  is  expected 
that they will eventually develop resistance to the Cry toxins 
if the technology is not properly protected. This could affect 
farmers who use Bt sprays as well as those who plant Bt crops. 
Resistance to Bt sprays had already been documented for pop-
ulations  of  diamondback  moth  (Plutella  xylostella),  cabbage 
looper  (Trichoplusia  ni),  and  the  Indian  meal  worm  (Plodia 
interpunctella;  Tabashnik,  1994)  before  commercial  release 
of  Bt  crops.  In  the  field,  by  contrast,  resistance  to  Bt  crops 
has been slow to develop (Fox, 2003). After 14 years of use 
there  is  evidence  of  three  pest  populations  developing  some 
field  resistance:  the  bollworm  (H.  zea);  the  fall  army  worm 
(Spodoptera  frugiperda);  and  the  stem  borer  (Busseola  fusa; 
Tabashnik, 2008).

The  main  strategy  to  delay  insect  resistance  involves  ref-
uges.  These  consist  of  non-Bt  plants  grown  near  the  Bt  crop 
allowing  susceptible  pests  to  survive  and  breed.  As  long  as 
the resistance trait is recessive and enough susceptible insects 
are available, they should dilute out any resistance genes that 
have been selected. This strategy has worked well in the past 
and  according  to  entomologist  Bruce  Tabashnik,  the  evolu-
tion  of  H.  zea  resistance  could  be  due  to  the  concentration 
of  Cry  toxin  not  being  high  enough  to  kill  off  the  hetero-
zygous  hybrids  (i.e.,  resistance  is  not  recessive;  Tabashnik  et 
al., 2008). Recently, stacked Bt crops have been commercial-
ized that pyramid two or more cry genes. This is expected to 
further  delay  the  onset  of  resistance  as  insects  will  have  to 
evolve resistance to both toxins at the same time (Zhao et al., 
2005). For pyramiding to work efficiently the two toxins must 
demonstrate no cross-resistance, so if resistance is developed 
to one toxin they are still completely vulnerable to the other 
toxin  (Tabashnik  et  al.,  2009).  Therefore  new  insecticidal 
proteins  that  have  a  distinctly  different  mode  of  action  than 
Cry toxins make attractive stacking options. In addition, both 
toxins must independently meet the high dose, high lethality 
requirement of accepted insect resistance management (IRM) 
plans (Ferré et al., 2008).

Improving Bt

New Cry proteins with the potential to be used as insecticides 
are  still  being  discovered  (Guo  et  al.,  2008).  However,  with 
nearly  500  different  types  of  δ-endotoxins  annotated  from 
B.  thuringiensis  (Crickmore,  2010)  there  is  no  shortage  of 
Cry  toxins  to  investigate.  The  early  cry  genes  used  in  plants 
were controlled by the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S gene pro-
moter, resulting in constitutive expression of the toxin at high 
levels  in  every  cell.  With  tissue-specific  promoters  the  toxin 
can  be  preferentially  expressed  predominantly  where  insect 
damage occurs. Gene promoters are now available that allow 
expression  predominantly  in  the  epidermal  cells  or  the  pho-
tosynthetic cells. Seed-specific gene promoters can be used to 
target insects that feed on seeds. The use of gene promoters 
that express the toxin only in response to insect stress (such 
as cell damage) would allow even greater control. Subcellular 
targeting sequences can also be added to the cry genes so that 
the  protein  can  be  localized  to  different  cell  compartments, 
including the cell wall or the chloroplast. This often results in 
higher levels of Cry protein, which also reduces the risk that 
insect resistance will develop.

The effectiveness of Bt in controlling target insects can also 
be increased. Stacking Bt genes is one way to do this. As addi-
tional  new  and  safe  insecticidal  proteins  are  discovered  (see 
the next section), they will inevitably be stacked with the cry 
genes.  Deliberate  mutation  of  Cry  toxins  has  been  used  to 
determine their mode of action and has also produced some 
novel  proteins  with  increased  activity.  Site-directed  muta-
tions  have  been  used  to  increase  toxicity  to  target  insects 
(Rajamohan et al., 1996) and even led to the creation of Cry 
proteins toxic to mosquitoes from lepidopteran-specific toxins 
(Liu and Dean, 2006).

An  alternative  approach  is  to  create  hybrid  cry  genes  by 
fusing  two  cry  genes  together  or  with  other  genes,  and  con-
trolling them from the same gene promoter (Bohorova et al., 
2001).  Hybrid  Cry  toxins  can  increase  the  range  of  insects 
that  can  be  controlled  and  even  produce  toxins  that  affect 
insects that were previously immune (de Maagd et al., 2000; 
Naimov et al., 2003; Singh et al., 2004; Karlova et al., 2005). 
Experiments  have  been  conducted  in  which  a  cry  gene  is 
fused  with  a  gene  coding  for  the  non-toxic  part  of  the  ricin 
toxin (Mehlo et al., 2005). This region also binds to the insect 
midgut,  providing  a  secondary  binding  receptor  for  the  Cry 
protein. As well as enhancing the Bt toxin’s effectiveness, it is 
expected to delay resistance as both receptors would need to 
mutate simultaneously for resistance to develop.

Cowpea Trypsin Inhibitor

The  only  commercialized  crop  genetically  modified  for  insect 
resistance  that  does  not  solely  use  a  Cry  protein  utilizes  the 
cowpea  trypsin  inhibitor  (CpTI).  Insects  rely  on  proteases  to 
digest  proteins  in  their  diet  and  trypsin  is  the  major  protease 
used  by  Lepidoptera.  CpTI  interferes  with  the  insect’s  diges-
tion  of  protein,  negatively  affecting  the  organism’s  nutrition, 
growth,  and  metabolism  (Gatehouse  and  Boulter,  1983). 
Cowpeas are a significant food crop throughout the tropics and 

360

Insects, nematodes, and other pests

C H A P T E R   2 3

are  widely  consumed  by  humans  and  animals  in  sub-Saharan 
Africa without any obvious ill effects. Purified CpTI protein fed 
to rats showed only minimal short-term, anti-nutritional effects 
(Pusztai et al., 1992), and expression in tobacco and rice pro-
vided good resistance against insects (Boulter et al., 1989; Xu 
et  al.,  1996).  The  first  commercial  crop  expressing  CpTI  was 
Zhong-41  cotton  developed  in  China.  It  contains  the  Cry1Ac 
gene  along  with  CpTI  and  was  commercialized  in  2001  with 
the  intent  of  delaying  the  evolution  of  resistance  in  the  cot-
ton bollworm (Guo et al., 1999). Rice that expresses the CpTI 
gene  is  due  to  be  released  in  China  alongside  the  Bt  varieties 
(James,  2009).  The  use  of  CpTI  as  an  IRM  tool  does  not  fit 
the  currently  accepted  IRM  models,  since  the  CpTI  protein 
does  not  independently  provide  high  dose,  high  lethality  per-
formance against target pests. For this reason, use of CpTI as a 
resistance gene in combination with Bt toxins would probably 
not be approved outside of China.

Novel Insecticidal Protection

VIP genes

In  the  mid-1990s  a  new  insecticidal  protein  group  was  dis-
covered  in  B.  thuringiensis,  which  unlike  the  Cry  proteins 
are not expressed when the bacterium sporulates. These pro-
teins were found during the bacterium’s vegetative state and 
hence  were  called  vegetative  insecticidal  proteins  (VIPs). 
Like  the  Cry  proteins,  it  has  been  suggested  that  VIP  pro-
teins  are  activated  by  proteases,  bind  to  membrane  proteins 
within  the  insect’s  midgut  epithelium,  and  form  pores  (Lee 
et al., 2003). They are of particular interest as they provided 
a new range of insecticidal activity (Estruch et al., 1996) and, 
while they share a similar mechanism of action, they bind dif-
ferent receptors and do not impede Cry toxin activity (Fang 
et al., 2007). This makes them good candidates for controlling 
resistance through stacking with cry genes.

A  maize  variety  with  the  Vip3A  gene,  called  Viptera™ 
(Agrisure  Viptera  3111  trait  stack)  gained  regulatory  approval 
in  2010.  The  variety’s  stacked  genes  (cry1Ab,  vip3Aa20, 
cry3A) will give resistance to the primary maize pests, borers, 
and rootworms, as well as secondary pests, many of which can-
not  be  controlled  by  Cry  proteins  alone.  These  include  corn 
earworms, armyworms, cutworms, sugarcane borers, and com-
mon  stalk  borers.  A  VIP  cotton  line,  VipCot™,  contains  the 
transgenic cotton event COT67B, which produces the Cry1Ab 
protein and COT102, which features the novel Vip3A protein. 
It has received U.S. EPA approval for use in natural refuges as 
well as import approvals for Brazil, Japan, and Mexico.

Microorganism-derived toxins

Other  bacteria  also  contain  insecticidal  toxins.  Photorhabdus 
luminescens,  a  bacterium  symbiotic  with  nematodes,  has 
been studied and shown to contain numerous insecticidal fac-
tors. A gene that produces Toxin A from this bacterium was 
cloned  and  modified  for  expression  in  Arabidopsis,  in  which 
it gave almost complete protection against tobacco hornworm 

(Manduca sexta) larvae (Liu et al., 2003). Analysis of the P. 
luminescens genome has revealed more predicted insecticidal 
toxins than any other bacterium investigated (Duchaud et al., 
2003).  Other  promising  genes  being  cloned  and  assessed  for 
insecticidal  activity  are  the  “Tc  toxin  complexes”  (Tca,  Tcb, 
Tcc,  and  Tcd),  the  “Photorhabdus  insect-related”  (Pir)  tox-
ins, the “Makes caterpillars floppy” toxins (Mcf1 and Mcf2), 
the  “Photorhabdus  virulence  cassettes  (PVCs),”  and  the 
“Photorhabdus  insecticidal  toxins”  (Pits;  ffrench-Constant 
et al., 2007; Lang et al., 2010). In principle, the toxins from 
P. luminescens and similar ones from another nematode sym-
biont  (Xenorhabdus  nematophilus)  could  be  promising  alter-
natives or complements to the well-established Cry proteins, 
but  technical  difficulties  in  expressing  these  large  complex 
proteins  will  likely  delay  their  development  in  commercial-
ized products.

Brevibacillus  laterosporus  is  a  spore-forming  bacterium 
with  insecticidal  activity  against  a  wide  spectrum  of  pests 
including  Lepidoptera,  Coleoptera,  and  the  Mollusks  (de 
Oliveira et al., 2004). Although no information on transgenic 
plants expressing B. laterosporus genes has been published in 
the  peer  reviewed  literature,  the  patents  have  been  submit-
ted for the insecticidal proteins (Floris et al., 2007; Sampson 
et  al.,  2009).  Cholesterol  oxidase  from  Streptomyces  is  a 
potent inhibitor of cotton boll weevil larvae by inducing lysis 
in the midgut epithelium. It has been expressed in transgenic 
plants, but unless it is targeted to the chloroplast it negatively 
affects plant development and fertility (Corbin et al., 2001). 
With  the  current  success  of  the  cry  genes  in  controlling  the 
boll weevil, it has not yet been pursued commercially.

Baculoviruses infect insects and have been developed as bio-
logical insecticides similar to B. thuringiensis, although the cost 
of manufacturing and their relatively slow onset of action has 
limited  commercial  success.  However,  baculovirus  bioactivity 
can be enhanced dramatically through engineering with other 
toxins (reviewed in the next section). The virus-enhancing fac-
tor  (Enhancin)  disrupts  the  peritrophic  matrix  (PM),  making 
the insects more vulnerable to infection. Baculovirus Enhancin 
has been expressed in tobacco plants. The levels of expression 
were  generally  low,  but  the  development  of  T.  ni  larvae  was 
slowed  on  some  plants  (Cao  et  al.,  2002).  Fusolin  is  a  chitin 
binding  protein  that  also  disrupts  the  PM.  When  the  fusolin 
gene  from  the  armyworm  entomopoxvirus  was  inserted  into 
transgenic  rice,  it  rendered  armyworm  larvae  42  times  more 
susceptible to Baculovirus infection (Hukuhara et al., 1999).

Plant-derived toxins

Plants  have  natural  defenses  against  insect  attack  and  trans-
ferring plant defense genes between plants could extend the 
spectrum of resistance. However, as a result of co-evolution, 
herbivorous  insects  have  adapted  to  the  plant  defenses  they 
normally encounter. This limits the prospects of some trans-
genics, but some show real promise.

CpTI is only one inhibitor of insect digestive enzymes, and 
there is a wide range of natural plant toxins that make use of 
this digestive enzyme inhibitor strategy. Plants express diges-
tive inhibitors in their seeds, fruits, tubers, and corms, which 

361

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

appear  to  protect  them  from  insect  attack.  They  have  detri-
mental effects on insect development and larval survival, both 
key  measures  of  insecticidal  activity.  Proteinase  inhibitors 
from  insect-resistant  plants  have  been  cloned  and  expressed 
at  high  levels  in  different  hosts  (Malone  et  al.,  2008),  but 
generally  only  provide  partial  protection  (Gatehouse,  2008). 
Insects  appear  to  adapt  to  the  presence  of  such  inhibitors  in 
their diets by elevating the levels of other digestive enzymes. 
This means that genes for additional inhibitors would need to 
be stacked for effective insect protection. In addition, the lack 
of lethality of these proteins will make adhering to the current 
insect-resistant management regulations difficult.

A digestive inhibitor that has successfully conferred resist-
ance to an insect pest is the bean α-amylase inhibitor (αAI). 
When expressed in the seeds of pea using a strong promoter it 
made up to 3% of the seed protein (Shade et al., 1994). Field 
trials confirmed that the peas were completely resistant to the 
pea weevil (Bruchus pisorum; Morton et al., 2000). However, 
post-translational  processing  of  the  αAI  in  pea  appeared  to 
cause  an  immune  response  in  mice  (Prescott  et  al.,  2005). 
Following  these  results,  development  of  the  αAI  pea  was 
suspended.

Plant  lectins  are  another  source  of  potential  insect  resist-
ance genes (Murdock et al., 1990; Murdock and Shade, 2002). 
Lectins  are  a  diverse  group  of  carbohydrate  binding  proteins 
that  are  involved  in  a  range  of  functions  (De  Hoff  et  al., 
2009).  Some  lectins  are  toxic  and  are  believed  to  be  part  of 
the plant’s natural defense against insects. Lectins are attrac-
tive as they target many insects not affected by Bt and other 
toxins.  Transgenic  plants  have  been  created  by  introducing 
genes for plant lectins into new hosts. The snowdrop and gar-
lic  lectin  have  been  introduced  into  rice  giving  partial  resist-
ance to the sap-sucking rice brown planthopper (Nilaparvata 
lugens;  Rao  et  al.,  1998;  Saha  et  al.,  2006).  The  same  argu-
ments mentioned earlier pertaining to high dose, high lethality 
and IRM apply here as well. Concerns have been raised about 
the  toxicity  of  some  lectins  to  mammals,  although  consump-
tion of transgenic rice containing the snowdrop lectin by rats 
evoked no detrimental symptoms (Poulsen et al., 2007).

Plant  peroxidases  (POX)  have  been  implicated  in  a  wide 
range  of  physiological  processes,  including  insect  resistance. 
Transgenic  plants  expressing  high  levels  of  tobacco  anionic 
POX  have  resulted  in  reduced  numbers  and  feeding  by  cat-
erpillars,  beetles,  whiteflies,  aphids,  and  grasshoppers  in 
five  different  groups  (Dowd  et  al.,  1998).  However,  POX’s 
multiple  roles  within  cells  could  lead  to  incompatibility 
with  endogenous  and  other  introduced  resistance  proteins. 
Ribosome-inactivating  proteins  (RIPs)  are  a  group  of  plant 
proteins capable of inactivating eukaryotic ribosomes. RIPs are 
widely  distributed  around  the  plant  kingdom  and,  although 
they can be very toxic (e.g., ricin from the castor bean), most 
have low or selective toxicities. Transgenic tobacco expressing 
RIPs have shown reduced damage from insect pests (Shahidi-
Noghabi et al., 2009) and hybrid RIP/POX expressing plants 
do not exhibit any cross interference (Dowd et al., 2006).

Transgenic  tobacco,  rice,  papaya,  and  potato  expressing 
plant  defensins  increase  resistance  to  a  wide  range  of  plant 
pathogenic microbes and fungi (Carvalho and Gomes, 2009). 
A  defensin  from  mung  bean  has  shown  in  vitro  lethality  to 

larvae  of  the  bruchid  Callosobruchus  chinensis,  suggesting 
some also have insecticidal activity (Chen et al., 2002; Liu et 
al., 2006). Patatin is a lipid acyl hydrolase and major protein 
found in potato tubers, which inhibits the growth of southern 
and western corn rootworms fed an artificial diet (Strickland 
et al., 1995). Although no commercial transgenic plants have 
been developed, patatin and related lipid acyl hydrolases have 
been patented (Alibhai and Rydel, 2010).

Secondary metabolites

Plants  synthesize  a  range  of  secondary  chemicals  as  defenses 
against  insects  (Fraenkel,  1959).  It  is  possible  to  increase 
resistance  in  plants  that  do  not  produce  these  metabolites 
through the addition of genes for the required enzymes (Jones 
et  al.,  1987).  Three  genes  from  sorghum  (Sorghum  bicolour) 
that express the entire biosynthetic pathway of the tyrosine-
derived  cyanogenic  glucoside  dhurrin  were  transferred  into 
Arabidopsis (Kristensen et al., 2005). This resulted in the pro-
duction of hydrogen cyanide in damaged tissue and increased 
resistance  to  the  flea  beetle  (Phyllotreta  nemorum).  Three 
genes  have  also  been  added  to  tobacco  allowing  the  produc-
tion  of  caffeine,  a  natural  insecticide  (Kim  et  al.,  2006).  A 
transgenic  tobacco  plant  with  an  enzyme  that  converts  tryp-
tophan into the alkaloid tryptamine has been created (Thomas 
et  al.,  1995).  When  fed  to  sweet  potato  whiteflies  (Bemisia 
tabaci) there was a dramatic reduction in fly fertility, although 
strictly speaking the plants were not insecticidal.

The isopentenyl-transferase (ipt) gene from Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens  codes  for  a  key  enzyme  in  the  cytokinin  biosyn-
thetic  pathway.  Cytokinins  have  been  correlated  with  the 
accumulation  of  insecticidal  secondary  metabolites  in  plants. 
The ipt gene was expressed in both tobacco and tomato under 
a  wound-inducible  promoter,  resulting  in  cytokinin  levels 
70  times  higher  than  in  the  control  (Smigocki  et  al.,  2000). 
The  resulting  plants  exhibited  reduced  leaf  consumption 
by  M.  sexta  and  the  peach  potato  aphid  (Myzus  persicae). 
Unfortunately,  the  ipt  gene  also  had  a  detrimental  effect  on 
plant development as it encodes one of the major plant hor-
mones. Obviously there are risks associated with altering bio-
synthetic pathways, as the increase of a certain metabolite can 
disrupt many other pathways.

Another  strategy  is  to  modify  the  volatiles  (e.g.,  scent) 
expressed  by  plants  to  attract  insects  for  pollination.  This 
can  be  used  to  deter  insect  colonization  (Wang  et  al.,  2001; 
Aharoni  et  al.,  2003)  or  to  attract  natural  enemies  of  insect 
pests.  Arabidopsis  has  been  transformed  with  a  gene  for  an 
aphid  volatile  (sesquiterpene  (e)-β-farnesene)  that  is  released 
in  response  to  aphid  predators  (Beale  et  al.,  2006).  It  warns 
other  aphids  to  stay  away  and  this  was  observed  through 
choice  experiments.  Arabidopsis  was  also  transformed  with 
a maize terpene (TPS10) gene that emits volatiles that were 
attractive  to  parasitoid  wasps  (Schnee  et  al.,  2006).  When 
maize  is  attacked  by  herbivores  it  releases  this  terpene  that 
wasps associate with a nearby source of food. Plants express-
ing the TPS10 gene attracted wasps, suggesting it could pos-
sibly be used as a pre-emptive defensive mechanism for some 
crops.

362

Insects, nematodes, and other pests

C H A P T E R   2 3

Other toxins

RNAi

Chitinases  digest  chitin,  a  major  component  of  insect  cell 
walls,  and  their  genes  are  found  in  species  from  all  king-
doms  (Arakane  and  Muthukrishnan,  2010).  Transgenic 
tobacco  expressing  an  M.  sexta  chitinase  prevented  growth 
of  H.  virescens,  but  did  not  affect  M.  sexta,  probably  due 
to  their  thicker  peritrophic  matrix  (Ding  et  al.,  1998). 
Spraying with a sublethal dose of Bt increased the mortality 
of M. sexta larvae, suggesting the use of chitinases with Cry 
proteins  could  increase  resistance.  Papaya  engineered  with 
the M. sexta chitinase has greater tolerance to spider mites 
(McCafferty  et  al.,  2006),  whereas  transgenic  cotton  con-
taining M. sexta chitinase conferred strong insect resistance 
in the field (Wang et al., 2005). However, expression of bac-
ulovirus  chitinase  in  tobacco  had  no  effect  on  H.  virescens, 
although it did provide some resistance to fungal pathogens 
(Shi  et  al.,  2000).  Surprisingly,  some  examples  of  trans-
genic plants expressing chitinase genes have promoted insect 
growth (Saguez et al., 2005) or reduced toxicity (Gatehouse 
et al., 1996).

Toxins from animals have also been assessed as insecticides. 
Scorpion depressant toxins are a group of evolutionarily con-
served  polypeptides  that  target  sodium  channels  and  induce 
flaccid paralysis in insects. A toxic gene from the Manchurian 
scorpion  has  been  expressed  in  rapeseed  along  with  a  
M.  sexta  chitinase  gene.  This  resulted  in  high  resistance  to 
diamondback moths (Wang et al., 2005). The scorpion toxin 
Androctonus  australis  Hector  Insect  Toxin  (AaIT)  has  been 
expressed  in  poplar  trees,  which  showed  resistance  to  gypsy 
moth  larvae  (Wu  et  al.,  2000),  and  in  cotton  for  control  of 
the cotton bollworm (Wu et al., 2008). Spider toxins are pri-
marily  targeted  toward  insects,  and  spider  genes  expressed 
in  transgenic  rice  conferred  resistance  to  striped  stem  borer 
(Chilo  suppressalis)  and  rice 
leaffolder  (Cnaphalocrocis 
medinalis;  Huang  et  al.,  2001).  Transgenic  tobacco  express-
ing spider toxin was also highly resistant to larvae of the cot-
ton  bollworm  (H.  armigera)  and  the  Egyptian  armyworm 
(Spodoptera  littoralis;  Khan  et  al.,  2006),  and  transgenic 
tobacco  lines  stably  expressing  the  toxic  teratocyte  secre-
tory  protein  from  the  parasitic  wasp  Microplitis  croceipes 
caused growth retardation and larval mortality in M. sexta and 
H. virescens (Maiti et al., 2003).

Avidin  is  an  egg  white  glycoprotein  that  binds  to  the 
vitamin  biotin  with  high  affinity.  Avidin  and  a  related  pro-
tein,  streptavidin,  produced  by  the  bacterium  Streptomyces 
avidinii,  is  toxic  to  insects  that  require  a  lot  of  biotin; 
including  species  of  Coleoptera,  Lepidoptera,  Diptera,  and 
Sarcoptiformes.  Maize  expressing  an  avidin  gene  was  fully 
resistant to three coleopteran larvae, but showed no toxicity 
in mice fed for 21 days (Kramer et al., 2000). Since plants 
require  biotin,  expressing  the  gene  in  the  cytoplasm  can 
lead  to  developmental  abnormalities  (Murray  et  al.,  2002). 
By  targeting  the  protein  to  vacuoles  (Burgess  et  al.,  2002; 
Markwick  et  al.,  2003)  or  the  seeds  (Kramer  et  al.,  2000) 
this  problem  is  overcome.  Because  biotin  binding  proteins 
do  not  require  a  receptor  on  the  insect  midgut  for  activity, 
they would complement the insecticidal activity of the Cry 
toxins.

RNA interference (RNAi) is an alternative to expressing toxic 
or inhibitory proteins for insect control (Baum et al., 2007). 
RNAi  is  the  introduction  of  double-stranded  RNA  (dsRNA) 
into a cell, inhibiting the expression of a gene. RNAi was ini-
tially  discovered  in  the  nematode  Caenorhabditis  elegans 
(Fire  et  al.,  1998).  It  has  since  proved  to  be  a  valuable  tool 
for  studying  gene  function  in  fungi,  plants,  insects,  and  ani-
mals (Mello and Conte, 2004). The mechanism for silencing 
via RNAi has been well investigated (Filipowicz et al., 2008; 
Carthew and Sontheimer, 2009).

Feeding  nematodes  and  planarians  with  bacteria  contain-
ing  dsRNA  has  been  shown  to  initiate  RNAi  gene  silencing 
(Timmons  and  Fire,  1998;  Newmark  et  al.,  2003).  Recent 
studies  have  shown  that  oral  delivery  of  specific  dsRNA 
can  induce  silencing  in  ticks  (Soares  et  al.,  2005),  the  light 
brown  apple  moth  (Turner  et  al.,  2006),  triatomine  bugs 
(Araujo et al., 2006), termites (Zhou et al., 2008), the tsetse 
fly  (Walshe  et  al.,  2009),  and  the  beet  armyworm  (Tian 
et  al.,  2009).  Plants  that  are  resistant  to  herbivorous  insect 
attack  due  to  RNAi  have  now  been  created.  Maize  trans-
formed with dsRNA that targeted a vacuolar ATPase of the 
western corn rootworm, conferred resistance similar to that 
achieved  by  the  Bt  toxin  (Baum  et  al.,  2007).  In  a  similar 
experiment  dsRNA  was  expressed  in  cotton  that  targeted  a 
cotton bollworm P450 mRNA encoding an antidote to a nat-
ural  cotton  toxin,  creating  bollworm-resistant  cotton  (Mao 
et al., 2007). They showed that ingestion of either the proc-
essed  short  interfering  (siRNA)  or  long  dsRNA  was  enough 
to induce gene silencing, although the long dsRNA was more 
effective.

RNAi may have certain advantages over protein-based tox-
ins.  First  it  degrades  much  faster  in  the  mammalian  diges-
tive  system,  which  will  make  it  safer  for  human  and  animal 
consumption.  Also  humans  and  animals  already  consume 
large  amounts  of  RNA  and  DNA  in  their  diets  without  any 
ill effects. In addition, there are likely to be fewer regulatory 
issues associated with RNAi, since the technology has already 
been used in a number of commercially approved biotechnol-
ogy  products  (Auer  and  Frederick,  2009),  and  is  undergoing 
regulatory review for use in combating insect diseases such as 
the  colony  collapse  disorder  affecting  honey  bees  worldwide 
(Hunter  et  al.,  2010).  Another  advantage  is  the  very  high 
insect  species  specificity  of  RNAi  molecules,  meaning  only 
non-target  arthropods  closely  related  to  the  pest  taxonomi-
cally would be negatively affected (Huesing et al., 2009). This 
specificity also means that non-target organism testing can be 
much more limited to nearest neighbor taxa for this class of 
molecules  (Romeis  et  al.,  2010).  RNAi  has  the  potential  to 
target any insect gene, although genes expressed in the midgut 
make the most attractive targets. As only a short sequence of 
the insect’s RNA needs to be targeted, it is relatively easy to 
combine multiple gene targets. The plant is only expressing an 
RNA  fragment  (plants  routinely  produce  RNAi  molecules  as 
part of their normal physiology) so the resource drain should 
be  low.  There  is  a  negligible  risk  that  the  RNA  will  show 
homology to any of the plant’s own genes, so there should be 
no effect on the plant’s biological processes.

363

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Nematode-Resistant Crops

Plant parasitic nematodes comprise 15% of the total number 
of  nematode  species  currently  known  (Fuller  et  al.,  2008). 
They  can  result  in  yield  losses  of  20%  in  a  single  crop  (Bird 
and  Kaloshian,  2003)  and  cost  an  estimated  $125  billion 
worth  of  crop  losses  globally  each  year  (Chitwood,  2003). 
The  majority  of  these  losses  are  inflicted  by  the  root-knot 
nematodes  and  cyst  nematodes  (Koenning  et  al.,  1999). 
Chemical  control  is  expensive  and  crop  rotation  does  not 
work  against  species  with  wide  host  ranges  (Abad  et  al., 
2003).  While  natural  resistance  does  exist  in  some  cultivars, 
genetic  engineering  allows  greater  scope,  either  by  introduc-
ing resistant genes from other species or using RNAi to target 
endogenous nematode genes.

Some of the commercialized resistant genes used in insect 
control  can  also  have  a  negative  effect  on  nematode  popula-
tions.  CpTI  and  Bt  proteins  expressed  in  transgenic  plants 
have  shown  varying  levels  of  protection  against  nematodes. 
CpTI  expressing  transgenic  Arabidopsis  affected  the  sexual 
development  of  nematodes  (Urwin  et  al.,  1998),  and  expo-
sure  to  Bt  toxins  reduced  nematode  fertility  and  viability 
(Marroquin  et  al.,  2000).  Resistance  to  the  root-knot  nema-
tode  Meloidogyne  incognita  was  observed  when  the  Cry6A 
protein  was  expressed  in  tomato  roots  (Li  et  al.,  2007). 
Other  nematode-resistant  genes  engineered  into  transgenic 
plants  include  serine  protease  inhibitors  (Cai  et  al.,  2003; 
Vishnudasan  et  al.,  2005),  cystatins  (Urwin  et  al.,  1997; 
Vain et al., 1998; Samac and Smigocki, 2003; Atkinson et al., 
2004),  the  snowdrop  lectin  (Ripoll  et  al.,  2003),  and  mono-
clonal  antibodies  (Baum  et  al.,  1996).  Proteinase  inhibitors 
show the most promise in conferring nematode resistance and 
field  trials  of  transgenic  potatoes  expressing  cystatins  have 
been successfully completed (Urwin et al., 2001).

Recently  more  focus  has  been  on  the  use  of  RNAi  tech-
nology  to  control  plant-parasitic  nematodes  (Gheysen  and 
Vanholme, 2007). Yadav et al. (2006) first reported the devel-
opment  of  a  transgenic  plant  conferring  nematode  resistance 
by  expressing  dsRNA.  By  targeting  two  root-knot  nematode 
housekeeping  genes  they  produced  transgenic  tobacco  over 
95%  more  resistant  to  M.  incognita  than  wild-type.  Huang 
et  al.  (2006)  expressed  dsRNA  for  a  gene  involved  in  nem-
atode  parasitism  in  Arabidopsis  thaliana.  This  resulted  in 
effective  resistance  to  four  major  species  of  root-knot  nem-
atode,  more  than  any  other  known  natural  resistant  gene. 
However,  inducing  plant-delivered  RNAi  in  cyst  nema-
todes  has  been  difficult  and  resistance  has  been  much  lower 
(Steeves  et  al.,  2006;  Sindhu  et  al.,  2009).  With  the  recent 
sequencing of the plant-parasitic nematode M. hapla genome 
(Opperman et al., 2008) more RNAi targets will be identified.

B. sphaericus (Bs) both exhibit mosquitocidal activity. Toxicity 
to  mosquitoes  has  been  increased  ten-fold  by  introducing  Bt 
genes  from  Bti  into  Bs  (Federici  et  al.,  2003).  Toxic  genes 
from  B.  thuringiensis  have  been  inserted  into  Photorhabdus 
(Jamoussi et al., 2009). However, the most advanced recom-
binant pathogenic control agents are baculoviruses.

An early recombinant baculovirus was generated by remov-
ing  the  ecdysteroid  UDP  glucosyltransferase  (egt)  gene 
(O’Reilly  and  Miller,  1989).  The  egt  deletion  viruses  killed 
host  larvae  30%  faster  than  the  wild-type  virus  and  reduced 
feeding  damage  by  about  40%  (O’Reilly  and  Miller,  1991). 
Other early attempts to improve baculoviruses involved addi-
tion of genes encoding juvenile hormone esterase (Hammock 
et  al.,  1990),  a  scorpion  AaIT  toxin  (Stewart  et  al.,  1991; 
Chejanovsky  et  al.,  1995),  chitinase  (Gopalakrishnan  et  al., 
1995),  and  spider  toxins  (Hughes  et  al.,  1997).  However, 
none  of  these  additions  increase  efficacy  beyond  the  egt 
deletion.

The  introduction  of  a  digestive  cathepsin  L-like  protease 
from  the  flesh  fly  (Harrison  and  Bonning,  2001),  a  neu-
rotoxin  (tox34)  from  the  straw-itch  mite  (Popham  et  al., 
1997; Burden et al., 2000), LqhIT2 scorpion toxin (Harrison 
and  Bonning,  2000),  µ-Aga-IV  spider  toxin  (Prikhodko 
et  al.,  1996),  and  As  II  and  Sh  I  derived  from  sea  anemo-
nes  (Prikhodko  et  al.,  1996)  into  transgenic  baculoviruses 
increased the killing speed by 50–60%. Attempts to introduce 
Bt  endotoxins  into  baculovirus  showed  no  increase  in  insec-
ticidal  activity  (Merryweather  et  al.,  1990).  As  the  Bt  pro-
toxin was expressed in the insect cytoplasm it was unable to 
reach the insect midgut for activation. To overcome this prob-
lem the Bt toxin has been fused with polyhedron to produce 
polyhedra  that  occlude  the  BT  toxin  into  the  insect  midgut, 
increasing  baculovirus  killing  efficacy  by  over  60%  (Chang 
et al., 2003).

Field  trials  using  AaIT  expressing  baculovirus  showed 
23–29% lower feeding damage compared to wild-type (Cory 
et  al.,  1994)  and  can  result  in  a  20%  increase  in  yield  (Sun 
et al., 2004). The modified baculoviruses offer levels of pro-
tection  similar  to  chemical  pesticides  and  have  little  adverse 
effect  on  beneficial  insects.  Also  fitness  is  reduced  as  they 
are unable to propagate as efficiently within the host as wild-
type  baculoviruses  (Zwart  et  al.,  2009).  Future  modifica-
tions  could  involve  removing  genes  that  will  reduce  fitness 
without  impacting  the  efficacy,  stacking  toxic  genes  to  delay 
insect resistance and increase virulence, and adding genes that 
enhance  the  durability  of  the  virus  in  the  field,  such  as  UV 
resistance.

Conclusion

Recombinant Insecticides

Another  related  method  of  insect  protection  involves  the 
genetic  modification  of  biological  control  agents  to  make 
them more efficient (Inceoglu et al., 2006; Park and Federici, 
2009).  The  B.  thuringiensis  ssp.  israelensis  (Bti)  and 

So  far  the  benefits  of  genetically  modified  insect-protected 
crop  plants  have  far  outweighed  the  risks  associated  with 
them.  Bt  crops  expressing  Cry  proteins  are  in  their  second 
decade of safe use. The use of Bt free refugia and other IRM 
techniques have delayed the onset of insect resistance to sin-
gle Cry toxins, but many experts consider it only a matter of 
time  before  they  lose  their  effectiveness  in  controlling  their 
target  pests.  Crops  stacked  with  multiple  protective  genes 

364

Insects, nematodes, and other pests

C H A P T E R   2 3

have already been developed and should delay resistance fur-
ther. Plants with genes for fused hybrid Cry proteins have also 
been  released  commercially  and  should  offer  the  same  type 
of longer term protection. It is important that any stacked or 
hybrid  genes  have  different  modes  of  action;  meet  the  high 
dose,  high  lethality  standard;  and  do  not  interfere  with  each 
other’s  performance.  Ultimately,  however,  the  future  of 
genetically modified insect protected plants relies on the dis-
covery and development of new approaches.

Fortunately  promising  alternatives  to  Cry  proteins  exist  and 
are being developed. The VIP toxins, also from B. thuringiensis, 
are likely to be the next toxins released commercially. The bac-
terium P. luminescens has a whole host of toxic genes, many of 

which are still being characterized, and could rival or even exceed 
B. thuringiensis in importance, but development of this class of 
protein  toxins  has  proven  difficult.  Plants  have  developed  their 
own  defense  mechanisms  against  insects  and  by  swapping  sys-
tems between different species further protection may be elic-
ited.  While  plant  digestive  inhibitors  and  lectins  have  shown 
mixed results at this stage, there are still opportunities to develop 
them  further.  Toxins  from  spiders,  wasps,  and  scorpions  have 
been tested and, although effective against insects, there are con-
cerns  about  their  safety  and  perception  for  humans  and  other 
mammals.  RNAi  is  a  relatively  new  possibility  and  if  it  proves 
effective against insects in the field it has major potential as an 
insect control agent.

References

Abad, P., Favery, B., Rosso, M. N., & Castagnone 

Sereno, P. (2003). Root knot nematode 
parasitism and host response: Molecular 
basis of a sophisticated interaction. 
Molecular Plant Pathology, 4, 217–224.

Aharoni, A., Giri, A. P., Deuerlein, S., Griepink, F.,  

de Kogel, W. J., & Verstappen, F. W. A., et al. 
(2003). Terpenoid metabolism in wild-type 
and transgenic Arabidopsis plants. Plant Cell, 
15, 2866–2884.

Al-Deeb, M. A., & Wilde, G. E. (2005). Effect 

of Bt corn expressing the Cry3Bb1 toxin 
on western corn rootworm (Coleoptera: 
Chrysomelidae) biology. Journal of the 
Kansas Entomological Society, 78, 142–152.

Alibhai, M. F. & Rydel, T. J. (2010). Insect 
inhibitory lipid acyl hydrolases. United 
States Patent 7662372.

Arakane, Y., & Muthukrishnan, S. (2010). 

Insect chitinase and chitinase-like proteins. 
Cellular and Molecular Life Science, 67, 
201–216.

Araujo, R. N., Santos, A., Pinto, F. S., Gontijo, 

N. F., Lehane, M. J., & Pereira, M. H. 
(2006). RNA interference of the salivary 
gland nitrophorin 2 in the triatomine bug 
Rhodnius prolixus (Hemiptera: Reduviidae) 
by dsRNA ingestion or injection. Insect 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 36, 
683–693.

Atkinson, H. J., Grimwood, S., Johnston, K., & 
Green, J. (2004). Prototype demonstration 
of transgenic resistance to the nematode 
Radopholus similis conferred on banana by a 
cystatin. Transgenic Research, 13, 135–142.

Auer, C., & Frederick, R. (2009). Crop 

improvement using small RNAs: Applications 
and predictive ecological risk assessments. 
Trends in Biotechnology, 27, 644–651.

Bambawale, O. M., Singh, A., Sharma, 

O. P., Bhosle, B. B., Lavekar, R. C., & 
Dhandhapani, A., et al. (2004). Performance 
of Bt cotton (MECH-162) under integrated 
pest management in farmers’ participatory 
field trial in Nanded district, Central India. 
Current Science, 86, 1628–1637.

Batista, R., & Oliveira, M. M. (2009). Facts and 
fiction of genetically engineered food. Trends 
in Biotechnology, 27, 277–286.

Baum, J. A., Bogaert, T., Clinton, W., Heck, G. 
R., Feldmann, P., & Ilagan, O., et al. (2007). 
Control of coleopteran insect pests through 

RNA interference. Nature Biotechnology, 25, 
1322–1326.

Baum, T. J., Hiatt, A., Parrott, W. A., Pratt,  

L. H., & Hussey, R. S. (1996). Expression in 
tobacco of a functional monoclonal antibody 
specific to stylet secretions of the root-
knot nematode. Molecular Plant–Microbe 
Interactions, 9, 382–387.

Beale, M. H., Birkett, M. A., Bruce, T. J. A., 

Chamberlain, K., Field, L. M., & Huttly, A. K.,  
et al. (2006). Aphid alarm pheromone 
produced by transgenic plants affects aphid 
and parasitoid behavior. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 10509–10513.

Berliner, E. (1911). Uber die Schlaffsucht 

der Mehlmottenraupe. Zeitschrift fur das 
Gesamstadt, 252, 3160–3162.

Bird, D. M. K., & Kaloshian, I. (2003). Are 
roots special? Nematodes have their say. 
Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology, 
62, 115–123.

Bohorova, N., Frutos, R., Royer, M., Estanol, 

P., Pacheco, M., & Rascon, Q., et al. (2001). 
Novel synthetic Bacillus thuringiensis cry1B 
gene and the cry1B-cry1Ab translational 
fusion confer resistance to southwestern 
corn borer, sugarcane borer and fall 
armyworm in transgenic tropical maize. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 103, 
817–826.

Boulter, D., Gatehouse, A. M. R., & Hilder, 

V. (1989). Use of cowpea trypsin inhibitor 
(CpTI) to protect plants against insect 
predation. Biotechnology Advances, 7, 
489–497.

Bravo, A., Gill, S. S., & Soberon, M. (2007). 

Mode of action of Bacillus thuringiensis Cry 
and Cyt toxins and their potential for insect 
control. Toxicon, 49, 423–435.

Bravo, A., Hendricks, K., Jancens, S., & 

Peferoen, M. (1992). Immunocytochemical 
analysis of specific binding of Bacillus 
thuringiensis crystal proteins to lepidopteran 
and coleopteran midgut membranes. Journal 
of Invertebrate Pathology, 60, 247–253.

Broderick, N. A., Raffa, K. F., & Handelsman, 

J. (2006). Midgut bacteria required for 
Bacillus thuringiensis insecticidal activity. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
103, 15196–15199.

Broderick, N. A., Robinson, C. J., McMahon, M. 

D., Holt, J., Handelsman, J., & Raffa, K. F.  
(2009). Contributions of gut bacteria to 
Bacillus thuringiensis-induced mortality vary 
across a range of Lepidoptera. BMC Biology, 
7, 11.

Brookes, G., & Barfoot, P. (2010). GM crops: 
Global socio-economic and environmental 
impacts 1996–2008. Dorchester, UK: P.G 
Economics Ltd.

Burden, J. P., Hails, R. S., Windass, J. D., 

Suner, M. M., & Cory, J. S. (2000). 
Infectivity, speed of kill, and productivity of 
a baculovirus expressing the itch mite toxin 
txp-1 in second and fourth instar larvae 
of Trichoplusia ni. Journal of Invertebrate 
Pathology, 75, 226–236.

Burgess, E. P. J., Malone, L. A., Christeller, J. T.,  

Lester, M. T., Murray, C., & Philip, B. A.,  
et al. (2002). Avidin expressed in transgenic 
tobacco leaves confers resistance to two 
noctuid pests, Helicoverpa armigera and 
Spodoptera litura. Transgenic Research, 11, 
185–198.

Cai, D., Thurau, T., Tian, Y., Lange, T., Yeh, 

K. W., & Jung, C. (2003). Sporamin-
mediated resistance to beet cyst nematodes 
(Heterodera schachtii Schm.) is dependent 
on trypsin inhibitory activity in sugar 
beet (Beta vulgaris L.) hairy roots. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 51, 839–849.

Cao, J., Ibrahim, H., Garcia, J., Mason, H., 

Granados, R., & Earle, E. (2002). Transgenic 
tobacco plants carrying a baculovirus 
enhancin gene slow the development and 
increase the mortality of Trichoplusia ni 
larvae. Plant Cell Reports, 21, 244–250.

Carthew, R. W., & Sontheimer, E. J. (2009). 
Origins and mechanisms of miRNAs and 
siRNAs. Cell, 136, 642–655.

Carvalho, A. O., & Gomes, V. M. (2009). 

Plant defensins: Prospects for the biological 
functions and biotechnological properties. 
Peptides, 30, 1007–1020.

Cattaneo, M. G., Yafuso, C., Schmidt, C., 

Huang, C., Rahman, M., & Olson, C., et 
al. (2006). Farm-scale evaluation of the 
impacts of transgenic cotton on biodiversity, 
pesticide use, and yield. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 7571–7576.

365

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

CDC,  Investigation of human health effects 

associated with potential exposure to 
genetically modified corn: A report to the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration from the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
National Center for Environmental Health.
Chang, J. H., Choi, J. Y., Jin, B. R., Roh, J. Y.,  
Olszewski, J. A., & Seo, S. J., et al. (2003). 
An improved baculovirus insecticide 
producing occlusion bodies that contain 
Bacillus thuringiensis insect toxin. Journal of 
Invertebrate Pathology, 84, 30–37.

Chejanovsky, N., Zilberberg, N., Rivkin, H.,  

Zlotkin, E., & Gurevitz, M. (1995). 
Functional expression of an alpha anti-insect 
scorpion neurotoxin in insect cells and 
lepidopterous larvae. FEBS Letters, 376, 
181–184.

Chen, K. C., Lin, C. Y., Kuan, C. C., Sung, H. Y.,  

& Chen, C. S. (2002). A novel defensin 
encoded by a mungbean cDNA exhibits 
insecticidal activity against bruchid. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 50, 
7258–7263.

Chen, L. J., Lee, D. S., Song, Z. P., Suh, H. S.,  

& Lu, B. R. (2004). Gene flow from 
cultivated rice (Oryza sativa) to its weedy 
and wild relatives. Annals of Botany, 93, 
67–73.

Chitwood, D. J. (2003). Research on plant 

parasitic nematode biology conducted by the 
United States Department of Agriculture –  
Agricultural Research Service. Pest 
Management Science, 59, 748–753.
Choudhary, B., & Gaur, K. (2008). The 

development and regulation of Bt brinjal 
in India (Eggplant/Aubergine) (Vol. 38). 
International Service for the Acquisition of 
Agri-Biotech Applications.

Clark, P. L., Vaughn, T. T., Meinke, L. J., 

Molina-ochoa, J., & Foster, J. E. (2006). 
Diabrotica virgifera virgifera (Coleoptera: 
Chrysomelidae) larval feeding behavior 
on transgenic maize (MON 863) and its 
isoline. Journal of Economic Entomology, 99, 
722–727.

Cohen, M. B., Arpaia, S., Lan, L. P., Chau, L. M.,  

& Snow, A. A. (2008). Shared flowering 
phenology, insect pests, and pathogens 
among wild, weedy, and cultivated rice in 
the Mekong Delta, Vietnam: Implications 
for transgenic rice. Environmental Biosafety 
Research, 7, 73–85.

Conner, A. J., Glare, T. R., & Nap, J. P. (2003). 

The release of genetically modified crops 
into the environment. Plant Journal, 33, 
19–46.

Corbin, D. R., Grebenok, R. J., Ohnmeiss, T. E.,  

Greenplate, J. T., & Purcell, J. P. (2001). 
Expression and chloroplast targeting of 
cholesterol oxidase in transgenic tobacco 
plants. Plant Physiology, 126, 1116–1128.
Cory, J. S., Hirst, M. L., Williams, T., Hails, 
R. S., Goulson, D., & Green, B. M., et al. 
(1994). Field trial of a genetically improved 
baculovirus insecticide. Nature, 370, 
138–140.

Crickmore, N. (2010) Full list of delta-

endotoxins.  http://www.lifesci.sussex.
ac.uk/home/Neil_Crickmore/Bt/toxins2.
html/

Crickmore, N., Zeigler, D. R., Feitelson, J., 
Schnepf, E., Van Rie, J., & Lereclus, D.,  

366

et al. (1998). Revision of the nomenclature 
for the Bacillus thuringiensis pesticidal 
crystal proteins. Microbiology and Molecular 
Biology Reviews, 62, 807–813.

Dale, P. J., Clarke, B., & Fontes, E. M. G. 

(2002). Potential for the environmental 
impact of transgenic crops. Nature 
Biotechnology, 20, 567–574.

De Hoff, P. L., Brill, L. M., & Hirsch, A. M. 

(2009). Plant lectins: The ties that bind in 
root symbiosis and plant defense. Molecular 
Genetics and Genomics, 282, 1–15.

de Maagd, R. A., Weemen-Hendriks, M., 

Stiekema, W., & Bosch, D. (2000). Bacillus 
thuringiensis delta-endotoxin Cry1C domain 
III can function as a specificity determinant 
for Spodoptera exigua in different, but 
not all, Cry1-Cry1C hybrids. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 66, 1559–
1563.

de Oliveira, E. J., Rabinovitch, L., Monnerat, 

R. G., Passos, L. K. J., & Zahner, V. 
(2004). Molecular characterization of 
Brevibacillus laterosporus and its potential 
use in biological control. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 70, 6657.

Dhugga, K. S. (2007). Maize biomass yield and 
composition for biofuels. Crop Science, 47, 
2211–2227.

Ding, X., Gopalakrishnan, B., Johnson, L. B., 
White, F. F., Wang, X., & Morgan, T. D.,  
et al. (1998). Insect resistance of transgenic 
tobacco expressing an insect chitinase gene. 
Transgenic Research, 7, 77–84.

Dowd, P. F., Holmes, R. A., Pinkerton, T. S., 

Johnson, E. T., Lagrimini, L. M., & Boston, 
R. S. (2006). Relative activity of a tobacco 
hybrid expressing high levels of a tobacco 
anionic peroxidase and maize ribosome-
inactivating protein against Helicoverpa 
zea and Lasioderma serricorne. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 54, 
2629–2634.

Dowd, P. F., Lagrimini, L. M., & Nelsen, T. C. 

(1998). Relative resistance of transgenic 
tomato tissues expressing high levels of 
tobacco anionic peroxidase to different 
insect species. Natural Toxins, 6, 241–249.

Duan, J. J., Lundgren, J. G., Naranjo, S., & 
Marvier, M. (2009). Extrapolating non-
target risk of Bt crops from laboratory to 
field. Biology Letters, 6, 74–77.

Duchaud, E., Rusniok, C., Frangeul, L., 

Buchrieser, C., Givaudan, A., & Taourit, S., 
et al. (2003). The genome sequence of the 
entomopathogenic bacterium Photorhabdus 
luminescens. Nature Biotechnology, 21, 
1307–1313.

Estruch, J. J., Warren, G. W., Mullins, M. A., 

Nye, G. J., Craig, J. A., & Koziel, M. G. 
(1996). Vip3A, a novel Bacillus thuringiensis 
vegetative insecticidal protein with a wide 
spectrum of activities against lepidopteran 
insects. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
93, 5389–5394.

Fang, J., Xu, X., Wang, P., Zhao, J. Z., 

Shelton, A. M., & Cheng, J., et al. (2007). 
Characterization of chimeric Bacillus 
thuringiensis Vip3 toxins. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 73, 956–961.

Federici, B. A., Park, H. W., Bideshi, D. K., 

Wirth, M. C., & Johnson, J. J. (2003). 

Recombinant bacteria for mosquito control. 
Journal of Experimental Biology, 206, 
3877–3885.

Ferber, D. (1999). GM crops in the cross hairs. 

Science, 286, 1662–1666.

Ferré, J., Rie, J., & Macintosh, S. C. (2008). 

Insecticidal genetically modified crops and 
insect resistance management (IRM). In J. 
Romeis, A. M. Shelton & G. G. Kennedy 
(Eds.), Integration of insect-resistant 
genetically modified crops within IPM 
programs (pp. 41–85). New York: Springer.

ffrench-Constant, R. H., Dowling, A., & 

Waterfield, N. R. (2007). Insecticidal toxins 
from Photorhabdus bacteria and their 
potential use in agriculture. Toxicon, 49, 
436–451.

Filipowicz, W., Bhattacharyya, S. N., & 

Sonenberg, N. (2008). Mechanisms of post-
transcriptional regulation by microRNAs: 
Are the answers in sight? Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 9, 102–114.

Fire, A., Xu, S. Q., Montgomery, M. K., Kostas, 
S. A., Driver, S. E., & Mello, C. C. (1998). 
Potent and specific genetic interference by 
double-stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Nature, 391, 806–811.

Fitt, G. P. (2008). Have Bt crops led to changes 

in insecticide use patterns and impacted 
IPM? In J. Romeis, A. M. Shelton, & G. 
G. Kennedy (Eds.), Integration of insect-
resistant genetically modified crops within 
IPM programs (Vol. V, pp. 303–328). 
New York: Springer.

Flachowsky, G., Chesson, A., & Aulrich, K. 

(2005). Animal nutrition with feeds from 
genetically modified plants. Archives of 
Animal Nutrition, 59, 1–40.

Floris, I., Ruiu, L., Satta, A., Delrio, G., Rubino, 

S., Paglietti, B., et al. (2007). US Patent 
App. 20,100/003,227.

Fox, J. L. (2003). Resistance to Bt toxin 

surprisingly absent from pests. Nature 
Biotechnology, 21, 958–959.

Fraenkel, G. (1959). The raison d’etre of 

secondary plant substances. Science, 129, 
1466–1470.

Frisvold, G. B., Tronstad, R., & Reeves, J. M. 

(2006). International Impacts of Bt Cotton 
Adoption. In R. E. Evenson & V. Santaniello 
(Eds.), International trade and policies for 
genetically modified products (pp. 191–201). 
Cambridge: CAB International.

Fuller, V. L., Lilley, C. J., & Urwin, P. E. (2008). 
Nematode resistance. New Phytologist, 180, 
27–44.

Gatehouse, A. M. R., & Boulter, D. (1983). 

Assessment of antimetabolic effects of 
trypsin inhibitors from cowpea (Vigna 
unguiculata) and other legumes on 
development of the bruchid beetle 
Callosobruchus maculatus. Journal of the 
Science of Food and Agriculture, 34, 345–350.

Gatehouse, A. M. R., Down, R. E., Powell, K. 

S., Sauvion, N., Rahbé, Y., & Newell, C. A.,  
et al. (1996). Transgenic potato plants 
with enhanced resistance to the peach-
potato aphid Myzus persicae. Entomologia 
Experimentalis Et Applicata, 79, 295–307.

Gatehouse, A. M. R., Ferry, N., & Raemaekers, 

R. J. M. (2002). The case of the monarch 
butterfly: A verdict is returned. Trends in 
Genetics, 18, 249–251.

Gatehouse, J. A. (2008). Biotechnological 

prospects for engineering insect-resistant 
plants. Plant Physiology, 146, 881–887.

Gheysen, G., & Vanholme, B. (2007). RNAi 

from plants to nematodes. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 25, 89–92.

Glare, T. R., & O’Callaghan, M. (2000). 

Bacillus thuringiensis: Biology, ecology and 
safety. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Goldberg, L. J., & Margalit, J. (1977). A 

bacterial spore demonstrating rapid 
larvicidal activity against Anopheles sergentii, 
Uranotaenia unguiculata, Culex univitattus, 
Aedes aegypti and Culex pipiens. Mosquito 
News, 37, 355–358.

Gopalakrishnan, B., Muthukrishnan, S., & 

Kramer, K. J. (1995). Baculovirus-mediated 
expression of a Manduca sexta chitinase 
gene: Properties of the recombinant protein. 
Insect Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
25, 255–265.

Guo, S., Liu, M., Peng, D., Ji, S., Wang, P., 
& Yu, Z., et al. (2008). New strategy for 
isolating novel nematicidal crystal protein 
genes from Bacillus thuringiensis strain 
YBT-1518. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 74, 6997–7001.

Guo, S. D., Cui, H. Z., Xia, L. Q., Wu, D., 
Ni, W. C., & Zhang, Z. L., et al. (1999). 
Development of bivalent insect-resistant 
transgenic cotton plants. Scientia Agricultura 
Sinica, 28, 1–7.

Hammock, B. D., Bonning, B. C., Possee,  

R. D., Hanzlik, T. N., & Maeda, S. (1990). 
Expression and effects of the juvenile 
hormone esterase in a baculovirus vector. 
Nature, 344, 458–461.

Harrison, R. L., & Bonning, B. C. (2000). 

Use of scorpion neurotoxins to improve 
the insecticidal activity of Rachiplusia ou 
multicapsid nucleopolyhedrovirus. Biological 
Control, 17, 191–201.

Harrison, R. L., & Bonning, B. C. (2001). Use 

of proteases to improve the insecticidal 
activity of baculoviruses. Biological Control, 
20, 199–209.

Hellmich, R. L., Siegfried, B. D., Sears, M. 

K., Stanley-Horn, D. E., Daniels, M. J., & 
Mattila, H. R., et al. (2001). Monarch larvae 
sensitivity to Bacillus thuringiensis-purified 
proteins and pollen. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 98, 11925–11930.

Herring, R. J. (2008). Whose numbers count? 
Probing discrepant evidence on transgenic 
cotton in the Warangal district of India. 
International Journal of Multiple Research 
Approaches, 2, 145–159.

Hofte, H., & Whiteley, H. R. (1989). 

Insecticidal crystal proteins of Bacillus 
thuringiensis. Microbiology and Molecular 
Biology Reviews, 53, 242–255.

Horsch, R. B., Fraley, R. T., Rogers, S. G., 

Sanders, P. R., Lloyd, A., & Hoffmann, N. 
(1984). Inheritance of functional foreign 
genes in plants. Science, 223, 496–498.

Huang, G., Allen, R., Davis, E. L., Baum, T. J., & 
Hussey, R. S. (2006). Engineering broad root-
knot resistance in transgenic plants by RNAi 
silencing of a conserved and essential root-
knot nematode parasitism gene. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 103, 14302–14306.

Insects, nematodes, and other pests

C H A P T E R   2 3

Huang, J., Hu, R., Rozelle, S., & Pray, C. 

(2008). Genetically modified rice, yields, 
and pesticides: Assessing farm level 
productivity effects in china. Economic 
Development and Cultural Change, 56, 
241–263.

Huang, J. Q., Zhi Ming, W. E. I., Hai Long, A. 

N., & Zhu, Y. X. (2001). Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens-mediated transformation of rice 
with the spider insecticidal gene conferring 
resistance to leaffolder and striped stem 
borer. Cell Research, 11, 149–155.

Huesing, J., Lloyd, F., Levine, S., & Vaughn, 

T. (2009). Approaches to tier-based 
NTO testing of RNAi pest control traits. 
Entomological Society of America. Annual 
Meeting Tuesday, December 15, 2009 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Hughes, P. R., Wood, H. A., Breen, J. P., 

Simpson, S. F., Duggan, A. J., & Dybas, 
J. A. (1997). Enhanced bioactivity of 
recombinant Baculoviruses expressing 
insect-specific spider toxins in Lepidopteran 
crop pests. Journal of Invertebrate Pathology, 
69, 112–118.

Hukuhara, T., Hayakawa, T., & Wijonarko, A. 

(1999). Increased baculovirus susceptibility 
of armyworm larvae feeding on transgenic 
rice plants expressing an entomopoxvirus 
gene. Nature Biotechnology, 17, 1122–1124.

Hunter, W., Ellis, J., van Engelsdorp, D.,  

Hayes, J., Westervelt, D., & Glick, E., et al. 
(2010). Large-scale field application of RNA: 
technology reducing Israeli acute paralysis 
virus disease in honey bees (Apis mellifera, 
Hymenoptera: Apidae). Plos pathogens, 
6(12), e100116.

Inceoglu, A. B., Kamita, S. G., & Hammock, 

B. D. (2006). Genetically modified 
baculoviruses: A historical overview and 
future outlook. Advances in Virus Research, 
68, 323–360.

Ishiwatari, S. (1901). On a kind of severe 

flacherie (sotto disease). Dainihon Sanshi 
Kaiho, 114, 1–5.

James, C. (2001). Global status of 

commercialized biotech/GM crops: 2001 
(Vol. 24). Ithaca, NY: International 
Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech 
Applications. (ISAAA Brief No. 24).

James, C. (2004). Global status of 

commercialized biotech/GM crops: 2004 
(Vol. 32). Ithaca, NY: International 
Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech 
Applications. (ISAAA Brief No. 32).

James, C. (2005). Global status of 

commercialized biotech/GM crops: 2005 
(Vol. 34). Ithaca, NY: International 
Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech 
Applications. (ISAAA Brief No. 34).

James, C. (2008). Global status of 

commercialized biotech/GM crops: 2008 
(Vol. 39). Ithaca, NY: International 
Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech 
Applications. (ISAAA Brief No. 39).

James, C. (2009). Global status of 

commercialized biotech/GM crops: 2009 
(Vol. 41). Ithaca, NY: International 
Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech 
Applications. (ISAAA BriefNo. 41).

James, C., & Choudhary, B. (2010). Global 

adoption of biotech cotton, 1996 to 2007. 
In J. Widholm, H. Lorz & T. Nagata (Eds.), 

Biotechnology in agriculture and forestry (pp. 
177–196). Heidelburg: Springer.

Jamoussi, K., Sellami, S., Abdelkefi-Mesrati, 

L., Givaudan, A., & Jaoua, S. (2009). 
Heterologous expression of Bacillus 
thuringiensis vegetative insecticidal 
protein-encoding gene vip3LB in 
Photorhabdus temperata strain K122 
and oral toxicity against the Lepidoptera 
Ephestia kuehniella and Spodoptera littoralis. 
Molecular Biotechnology, 43, 97–103.
Jayaraman, K. S. (2004). India produces 

homegrown GM cotton. Nature 
Biotechnology, 22, 255–256.

Johnson, K. L., Raybould, A. F., Hudson, M. D., 
& Poppy, G. M. (2007). How does scientific 
risk assessment of GM crops fit within the 
wider risk analysis? Trends in Plant Science, 
12, 1–5.

Jones, D., Huesing, J., Zador, E., & Heim, C. 
(1987). The tobacco-insect model system 
for genetically engineering plants for non-
protein insect resistance factors. Molecular 
Entomology, 469–478.

Kaiser, J. (1996). Pests overwhelm Bt cotton 

crop. Science, 273, 423.

Kalaitzandonakes, N., Alston, J. M., & 

Bradford, K. J. (2007). Compliance costs for 
regulatory approval of new biotech crops. 
Nature Biotechnology, 25, 509–511.

Karlova, R., Weemen-Hendriks, M., Naimov, S., 

Ceron, J., Dukiandjiev, S., & de Maagd, R. 
A. (2005). Bacillus thuringiensis δ-endotoxin 
Cry1Ac domain III enhances activity against 
Heliothis virescens in some, but not all Cry1-
Cry1Ac hybrids. Journal of Invertebrate 
Pathology, 88, 169–172.

Kaufman, M. (2000, September 18) Biotech 
critics cite unapproved corn in taco shells 
(pp. A02). Washington Post.

Khan, S. A., Zafar, Y., Briddon, R. W., Malik, 

K. A., & Mukhtar, Z. (2006). Spider venom 
toxin protects plants from insect attack. 
Transgenic Research, 15, 349–357.

Kim, Y. S., Uefuji, H., Ogita, S., & Sano, H. 

(2006). Transgenic tobacco plants producing 
caffeine: A potential new strategy for insect 
pest control. Transgenic Research, 15, 
667–672.

Koenning, S. R., Overstreet, C., Noling, J. W., 
Donald, P. A., Becker, J. O., & Fortnum, B. 
A. (1999). Survey of crop losses in response 
to phytoparasitic nematodes in the United 
States for 1994. Journal of Nematology, 31, 
587–618.

Kramer, K. J., Morgan, T. D., Throne, J. E., 
Dowell, F. E., Bailey, M., & Howard, J. 
A. (2000). Transgenic avidin maize is 
resistant to storage insect pests. Nature 
Biotechnology, 18, 670–674.

Krieg, A., Huger, A. M., Langenbruch, G. A., & 
Schnetter, W. (1983). Bacillus thuringiensis 
var. tenebrionis, a new pathotype effective 
against larvae of Coleoptera. Zeitschrift für 
Angewandte Entomologie, 96, 500–508.

Kristensen, C., Morant, M., Olsen, C. 

E., Ekstrøm, C. T., Galbraith, D. W., 
& Lindberg Møller, B., et al. (2005). 
Metabolic engineering of dhurrin in 
transgenic Arabidopsis plants with marginal 
inadvertent effects on the metabolome and 
transcriptome. Proceedings of the National 

367

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 102, 1779–1784.

Lambert, B., & Peferoen, M. (1992). 

Insecticidal promise of Bacillus 
thuringiensis. Facts and mysteries about 
a sucessful biopesticide. BioScience, 42, 
112–122.

Lang, A. E., Schmidt, G., Schlosser, A., Hey, 
T. D., Larrinua, I. M., & Sheets, J. J., et al. 
(2010). Photorhabdus luminescens toxins 
ADP-Ribosylate actin and RhoA to force 
actin clustering. Science, 327, 1139–1142.

Lee, M. K., Walters, F. S., Hart, H., Palekar, N., 

& Chen, J. S. (2003). The mode of action 
of the Bacillus thuringiensis vegetative 
insecticidal protein Vip3A differs from 
that of Cry1Ab δ-endotoxin. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 69, 4648–4657.

Li, X. Q., Wei, J. Z., Tan, A., & Aroian, R. V. 
(2007). Resistance to root knot nematode 
in tomato roots expressing a nematicidal 
Bacillus thuringiensis crystal protein. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 5, 455–464.

Liu, D., Burton, S., Glancy, T., Li, Z. S., 

Hampton, R., & Meade, T., et al. (2003). 
Insect resistance conferred by 283-kDa 
Photorhabdus luminescens protein TcdA in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature Biotechnology, 
21, 1222–1228.

Liu, X. S., & Dean, D. H. (2006). Redesigning 
Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1Aa toxin into a 
mosquito toxin. Protein Engineering, Design 
& Selection, 19, 107–111.

Liu, Y. J., Cheng, C. S., Lai, S. M., Hsu, 

M. P., Chen, C. S., & Lyu, P. C. (2006). 
Solution structure of the plant defensin 
VrD1 from mung bean and its possible role 
in insecticidal activity against bruchids. 
Proteins, 63, 777–786.

Lorence, A., Darszon, A., Díaz, C., Liévano, 

A., Quintero, R., & Bravo, A. (1995). 
δ-Endotoxins induce cation channels 
in Spodoptera frugiperda brush border 
membranes in suspension and in planar lipid 
bilayers. FEBS Letters, 360, 217–222.
Losey, J. E., Rayor, L. S., & Carter, M. E. 

(1999). Transgenic pollen harms monarch 
larvae. Nature, 399, 214.

Magaña-Gómez, J. A., & de la Barca, A. M. 
C. (2008). Risk assessment of genetically 
modified crops for nutrition and health. 
Nutrition Reviews, 67, 1–16.

Maharashtra Hybrid Seeds Company Ltd. 

(Mahyco), University of Agricultural 
Sciences (UAS), D. and Tamil Nadu 
Agricultural University (TNAU), C. (2009) 
Report of the Expert Committee (EC-II) on 
Bt Brinjal Event EE-1.

Maiti, I. B., Oey, N., Dahlman, D. L., & 

Webb, B. A. (2003). Antibiosis-type insect 
resistance in transgenic plants expressing 
a teratocyte secretory protein (TSP14) 
gene from a hymenopteran endoparasite 
(Microplitis croceipes). Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 1, 209–219.

Malone, L. A., Gatehouse, A. M. R., & Barratt, 

B. I. P. (2008). Beyond Bt: Alternative 
strategies for insect-resistant genetically 
modified crops. In J. Romeis, A. M. Shelton 
& G. G. Kennedy (Eds.), Integration of 
insect-resistant genetically modified crops 
within IPM programs (pp. 357–417). 
New York: Springer.

368

Mao, Y. B., Cai, W. J., Wang, J. W., Hong, 

G. J., Tao, X. Y., & Wang, L. J., et al. 
(2007). Silencing a cotton bollworm P450 
monooxygenase gene by plant-mediated 
RNAi impairs larval tolerance of gossypol. 
Nature Biotechnology, 25, 1307–1313.

Markwick, N. P., Docherty, L. C., Phung, M. M.,  

Lester, M. T., Murray, C., & Yao, J. L.,  
et al. (2003). Transgenic tobacco and apple 
plants expressing biotin-binding proteins are 
resistant to two cosmopolitan insect pests, 
potato tuber moth and lightbrown apple 
moth, respectively. Transgenic Research, 12, 
671–681.

Marroquin, L. D., Elyassnia, D., Griffitts, 

J. S., Feitelson, J. S., & Aroian, R. V. 
(2000). Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) toxin 
susceptibility and isolation of resistance 
mutants in the nematode Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Genetics, 155, 1693–1699.

McCafferty, H. R. K., Moore, P. H., & Zhu, Y. J.  

(2006). Improved Carica papaya tolerance 
to carmine spider mite by the expression 
of Manduca sexta chitinase transgene. 
Transgenic Research, 15, 337–347.

Mehlo, L., Gahakwa, D., Nghia, P. T., Loc,  

N. T., Capell, T., & Gatehouse, J. A.,  
et al. (2005). An alternative strategy for 
sustainable pest resistance in genetically 
enhanced crops. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 102, 7812–7816.

Mello, C. C., & Conte, D. (2004). Revealing 
the world of RNA interference. Nature, 
431, 338–342.

Mendelsohn, M., Kough, J., Vaituzis, Z., & 
Matthews, K. (2003). Are Bt crops safe? 
Nature Biotechnology, 21, 1003–1009.

Merryweather, A. T., Weyer, U., Harris, M. P., 

Hirst, M., Booth, T., & Possee, R. D. (1990). 
Construction of genetically engineered 
baculovirus insecticides containing the 
Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki HD-73 
delta endotoxin. Journal of General Virology, 
71, 1535–1544.

Metcalf, R. L. (1986). Forward. In J. L. 

Krysan, T. A. Miller & J. F. Andersen (Eds.), 
Methods for the study of pest Diabrotica. 
New York: Springer-Verlag.

Miklos, J. A., Alibhai, M. F., Bledig, S. A., 

Connor-Ward, D. C., Gao, A. G., & Holmes, 
B. A., et al. (2007). Characterization of 
soybean exhibiting high expression of a 
synthetic Bacillus thuringiensis cry1A 
transgene that confers a high degree of 
resistance to Lepidopteran pests. Crop 
Science, 47, 148–157.

Morse, S., Bennett, R., & Ismael, Y. (2004). 

Why Bt cotton pays for small-scale 
producers in South Africa. Nature 
Biotechnology, 22, 379–380.

Morton, R. L., Schroeder, H. E., Bateman, 

K. S., Chrispeels, M. J., Armstrong, E., & 
Higgins, T. J. V. (2000). Bean α-amylase 
inhibitor 1 in transgenic peas (Pisum 
sativum) provides complete protection 
from pea weevil (Bruchus pisorum) under 
field conditions. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 97, 3820–3825.

and symptomless infection in kernels of 
maize genetically engineered for European 
corn borer resistance. Phytopathology, 87, 
1071–1077.

Murdock, L. L., & Shade, R. E. (2002). Lectins 

and protease inhibitors as plant defenses 
against insects. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry, 50, 6605–6611.

Murdock, L. L., Huesing, J. E., Nielsen, S. 
S., Pratt, R. C., & Shade, R. E. (1990). 
Biological effects of plant lectins on the 
cowpea weevil. Phytochemistry, 29, 85–89.
Murray, C., Sutherland, P. W., Phung, M. M., 

Lester, M. T., Marshall, R. K., & Christeller, 
J. T. (2002). Expression of biotin-binding 
proteins, avidin and streptavidin, in plant 
tissues using plant vacuolar targeting 
sequences. Transgenic Research, 11, 
199–214.

Naimov, S., Dukiandjiev, S., & de Maagd, R. 
A. (2003). A hybrid Bacillus thuringiensis 
delta-endotoxin gives resistance against 
a coleopteran and a lepidopteran pest in 
transgenic potato. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 1, 51–57.

Nap, J. P., Metz, P. L. J., Escaler, M., & Conner, 

A. J. (2003). The release of genetically 
modified crops into the environment. Plant 
Journal, 33, 1–18.

Naranjo, S. E. (2009). Impacts of Bt crops on 

non-target invertebrates and insecticide 
use patterns. CAB Reviews: Perspectives in 
Agriculture, Veterinary Science, Nutrition 
and Natural Resources, 4, 1–23.

Newmark, P. A., Reddien, P. W., Cebria, F., 

& Alvarado, A. S. (2003). Ingestion of 
bacterially expressed double-stranded 
RNA inhibits gene expression in planarians. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
100, 11861–11865.

OECD (2007) Consensus document on safety 
information on transgenic plants expressing 
Bacillus thuringiensis-derived insect control 
proteins. No. 42. Paris Environment 
Directorate, Organisation for Economic  
Co-operation and Development.

Opperman, C. H., Bird, D. M., Williamson, V. 
M., Rokhsar, D. S., Burke, M., & Cohn, J., 
et al. (2008). Sequence and genetic map of 
Meloidogyne hapla: A compact nematode 
genome for plant parasitism. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 105, 14802–
14807.

O'Reilly, D. R., & Miller, L. K. (1989).  

A baculovirus blocks insect molting by 
producing ecdysteroid UDP-glucosyl 
transferase. Science, 245, 1110.

O'Reilly, D. R., & Miller, L. K. (1991). 

Improvement of a baculovirus pesticide 
by deletion of the egt gene. Nature 
Biotechnology, 9, 1086–1089.

Park, H. W., & Federici, B. A. (2009). 

Recombinant Bacterial Larvicides for 
Control of Important Mosquito Vectors 
of Disease. In S. P. Stock, J. Vandenberg, 
I. Glazer & N. Boemare (Eds.), Insect 
pathogens: Molecular approaches and 
techniques (pp. 163–176). Oxford: CAB 
International.

Munkvold, G. P., Hellmich, R. L., & Showers, 

W. B. (1997). Reduced Fusarium ear rot 

Payne, J., Fernandez-Cornejo, J., & Daberkow, 
S. (2003). Factors affecting the likelihood 

Insects, nematodes, and other pests

C H A P T E R   2 3

of corn rootworm Bt seed adoption. 
AgBioForum, 6, 79–82.

Perlak, F. J., Stone, T. B., Muskopf, Y. M., 

Petersen, L. J., Parker, G. B., & McPherson, 
S. A., et al. (1993). Genetically improved 
potatoes: Protection from damage by 
Colorado potato beetles. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 22, 313–321.

Pleasants, J. M., Hellmich, R. L., Dively, G. 
P., Sears, M. K., Stanley-Horn, D. E., & 
Mattila, H. R., et al. (2001). Corn pollen 
deposition on milkweeds in and near 
cornfields. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 98, 11919–11924.

Popham, H. J. R., Li, Y., & Miller, L. K. (1997). 

Genetic improvement of Helicoverpa zea 
nuclear polyhedrosis virus as a biopesticide. 
Biological Control, 10, 83–91.

Poulsen, M., Kroghsbo, S., Schrøder, M.,  
Wilcks, A., Jacobsen, H., & Miller, A.,  
et al. (2007). A 90-day safety study in Wistar 
rats fed genetically modified rice expressing 
snowdrop lectin Galanthus nivalis (GNA). 
Food and Chemical Toxicology, 45, 350–363.
Pray, C., Ma, D., Jikun, H., & Qiao, F. (2001). 

Impact of Bt cotton in China. World 
Development, 29, 813–825.

Prescott, V. E., Campbell, P. M., Moore, A., 
Mattes, J., Rothenberg, M. E., & Foster,  
P. S., et al. (2005). Transgenic expression 
of bean α-amylase inhibitor in peas results 
in altered structure and immunogenicity. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
53, 9023–9030.

Prikhodko, G. G., Robson, M., Warmke,  

J. W., Cohen, C. J., Smith, M. H. M., & 
Wang, P., et al. (1996). Properties of three 
baculovirus-expressing genes that encode 
insect-selective toxins: Mu-Aga-IV, As II, 
and SH I. Biological Control, 7, 236–244.

Pusztai, A., Grant, G., Brown, D. J., Stewart,  
J. C., Bardocz, S., & Ewen, S. W. B., et al.  
(1992). ) Nutritional evaluation of the 
trypsin (EC 3.4. 21.4) inhibitor from 
cowpea (Vigna unguiculata Walp.). British 
Journal of Nutrition, 68, 783–791.

Qaim, M., & Zilberman, D. (2003). Yield 
effects of genetically modified crops in 
developing countries. Science, 299, 900–902.

Rajamohan, F., Alzate, O., Cotrill, J. A., 

Curtiss, A., & Dean, D. H. (1996). Protein 
engineering of Bacillus thuringiensis 
δ-endotoxin: Mutations at domain II 
of CryIAb enhance receptor affinity 
and toxicity toward gypsy moth larvae. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 93, 
14338–14343.

Rao, K. V., Rathore, K. S., Hodges, T. K., Fu, 

X., Stoger, E., & Sudhakar, D., et al. (1998). 
Expression of snowdrop lectin (GNA) in 
transgenic rice plants confers resistance to 
rice brown planthopper. Plant Journal, 15, 
469–477.

Rice, M.E. (2004) Transgenic rootworm 
corn: Assessing potential agronomic, 
economic, and environmental benefits. 
Plant Health Program. http://www.
plantmanagementnetwork.org/pub/php/
review/2004/rootworm/

Ripoll, C., Favery, B., Lecomte, P., Van Damme, 

E., Peumans, W., & Abad, P., et al. (2003). 

Evaluation of the ability of lectin from 
snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis) to protect 
plants against root-knot nematodes. Plant 
Science, 164, 517–523.

Romeis, J., Bartsch, D., Bigler, F., Candolfi,  

M. P., Gielkens, M. M. C., & Hartley, S. E., 
et al. (2008). Assessment of risk of insect-
resistant transgenic crops to nontarget 
arthropods. Nature Biotechnology, 26, 
203–208.

Romeis, J., Hellmich, R. L., Candolfi, M. P., 

Carstens, K., De Schrijver, A., & Gatehouse, 
A. M. R., et al. (2010). Recommendations 
for the design of laboratory studies on non-
target arthropods for risk assessment of 
genetically engineered plants. Transgenic 
Research, 19, 1–22.

Roy, D., Herring, R. J., & Geisler, C. C. (2007). 

Naturalising transgenics: Official seeds, 
loose seeds and risk in the decision matrix 
of Gujarati cotton farmers. Journal of 
Development Studies, 43, 158–176.
Saguez, J., Hainez, R., Cherqui, A., Van 

Wuytswinkel, O., Jeanpierre, H., & Lebon, 
G., et al. (2005). Unexpected effects of 
chitinases on the peach-potato aphid (Myzus 
persicae Sulzer) when delivered via transgenic 
potato plants (Solanum tuberosum Linne) and 
in vitro. Transgenic Research, 14, 57–67.

Saha, P., Majumder, P., Dutta, I., Ray, T., Roy, 

S. C., & Das, S. (2006). Transgenic rice 
expressing Allium sativum leaf lectin with 
enhanced resistance against sap-sucking 
insect pests. Planta, 223, 1329–1343.
Samac, D. A., & Smigocki, A. C. (2003). 
Expression of oryzacystatin I and II in 
alfalfa increases resistance to the root-lesion 
nematode. Phytopathology, 93, 799–804.

Sampson, K. S., Tomso, D. J. & Guo, R. (2009). 

Pesticidal genes from Brevibacillus and 
methods for their use. United States Patent 
Application 12/644,632.

Schnee, C., Köllner, T. G., Held, M., Turlings, 

T. C. J., Gershenzon, J., & Degenhardt, 
J. (2006). The products of a single maize 
sesquiterpene synthase form a volatile 
defense signal that attracts natural enemies 
of maize herbivores. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 1129–1134.
Schnepf, H. E., Lee, S., Dojillo, J. A., 

Burmeister, P., Fencil, K., & Morera, L., et 
al. (2005). Characterization of Cry34/Cry35 
binary insecticidal proteins from diverse 
Bacillus thuringiensis strain collections. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
71, 1765–1774.

Sears, M. K., Hellmich, R. L., Stanley-Horn, 
D. E., Oberhauser, K. S., Pleasants, J. M., 
& Mattila, H. R., et al. (2001). Impact 
of Bt corn pollen on monarch butterfly 
populations: A risk assessment. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 98, 11937–11942.

Shade, R. E., Schroeder, H. E., Pueyo, J. J., 

Tabe, L. M., Murdock, L. L., & Higgins, T. 
J. V., et al. (1994). Transgenic pea seeds 
expressing the α-amylase inhibitor of the 
common bean are resistant to bruchid 
beetles. Nature Biotechnology, 12, 793–796.

Shahidi-Noghabi, S., Van Damme, E. J. M., 

& Smagghe, G. (2009). Expression of 
Sambucus nigra agglutinin (SNA-I ) from 

elderberry bark in transgenic tobacco plants 
results in enhanced resistance to different 
insect species. Transgenic Research, 18, 
249–259.

Shelton, A. M., Zhao, J. Z., & Roush, R. T. 

(2003). Economic, ecological, food safety, 
and social consequences of the deployment 
of Bt transgenic plants. Annual Review of 
Entomology, 47, 845–881.

Shi, J., Thomas, C. J., King, L. A., Hawes, C. 
A., Possee, R. D., & Edwards, M. L., et al. 
(2000). The expression of a baculovirus-
derived chitinase gene increased resistance 
of tobacco cultivars to brown spot 
(Alternaria alternata). Annals of Applied 
Biology, 136, 1–8.

Sindhu, A. S., Maier, T. R., Mitchum, M. G., 
Hussey, R. S., Davis, E. L., & Baum, T. J. 
(2009). Effective and specific in planta 
RNAi in cyst nematodes: Expression 
interference of four parasitism genes reduces 
parasitic success. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 60, 315–324.

Singh, P., Kumar, M., Chaturvedi, C., Yadav, 
D., & Tuli, R. (2004). Development of a 
hybrid delta-endotoxin and its expression 
in tobacco and cotton for control of 
a polyphagous pest Spodoptera litura. 
Transgenic Research, 13, 397–410.

Smigocki, A., Heu, S., & Buta, G. (2000). 

Analysis of insecticidal activity in transgenic 
plants carrying the ipt plant growth hormone 
gene. Acta Physiologiae Plantarum, 22, 
295–299.

Soares, C. A. G., Lima, C. M. R., Dolan, M. C., 

Piesman, J., Beard, C. B., & Zeidner, N. S. 
(2005). Capillary feeding of specific dsRNA 
induces silencing of the isac gene in nymphal 
Ixodes scapularis ticks. Insect Molecular 
Biology, 14, 443–452.

Steeves, R. M., Todd, T. C., Essig, J. S., & 

Trick, H. N. (2006). Transgenic soybeans 
expressing siRNAs specific to a major sperm 
protein gene suppress Heterodera glycines 
reproduction. Functional Plant Biology, 33, 
991–999.

Stewart, L. M. D., Hirst, M., Ferber, M. L., 

Merryweather, A. T., Cayley, P. J., & Possee, 
R. D. (1991). Construction of an improved 
baculovirus insecticide containing an insect-
specific toxin gene. Nature, 352, 85–88.

Stone, G. D. (2007). Agricultural deskilling and 

the spread of genetically modified cotton 
in Warangal. Current Anthropology, 48, 
67–103.

Strickland, J. A., Orr, G. L., & Walsh, T. A. 

(1995). Inhibition of Diabrotica larval 
growth by patatin, the lipid acyl hydrolase 
from potato tubers. Plant Physiology, 109, 
667–674.

Sun, X., Wang, H., Chen, X., Peng, C., Pan, 
D., & Jehle, J. A., et al. (2004). Biological 
activity and field efficacy of a genetically 
modified Helicoverpa armigera single-
nucleocapsid nucleopolyhedrovirus 
expressing an insect-selective toxin from a 
chimeric promoter. Biological Control, 29, 
124–137.

Tabashnik, B. E. (1994). Evolution of resistance 

to Bacillus thuringiensis. Annual Review of 
Entomology, 39, 47–79.

Tabashnik, B. E. (2008). Delaying insect 

resistance to transgenic crops. Proceedings 

369

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 105, 19029–
19030.

Tabashnik, B. E., Gassmann, A. J., Crowder, D. 
W., & Carriére, Y. (2008). Insect resistance 
to Bt crops: Evidence versus theory. Nature 
Biotechnology, 26, 199–202.

Tabashnik, B. E., Van Rensburg, J. B. J., & 

Carrière, Y. (2009). Field-evolved insect 
resistance to Bt crops: Definition, theory, 
and data. Journal of Economic Entomology, 
102, 2011–2025.

Thomas, J. C., Adams, D. G., Nessler, C. L., 

Brown, J. K., & Bohnert, H. J. (1995). 
Tryptophan decarboxylase, tryptamine, 
and reproduction of the whitefly. Plant 
Physiology, 109, 717–720.

Thomson, J. A. (2006). GM crops: The impact 

and the potential. Collingwood: CSIRO 
Publishing.

Tian, H., Peng, H., Yao, Q., Chen, H., Xie, Q., 

& Tang, B., et al. (2009). Developmental 
control of a Lepidopteran pest Spodoptera 
exigua by Ingestion of bacteria expressing 
dsRNA of a non-midgut gene. PLoS ONE, 
4, 1–13.

Timmons, L., & Fire, A. (1998). Specific 

interference by ingested dsRNA. Nature, 
395, 854.

Turner, C. T., Davy, M. W., MacDiarmid, R. M., 
Plummer, K. M., Birch, N. P., & Newcomb, 
R. D. (2006). RNA interference in the light 
brown apple moth, Epiphyas postvittana 
(Walker) induced by double-stranded 
RNA feeding. Insect Molecular Biology, 15, 
383–391.

Urwin, P. E., Lilley, C. J., McPherson, M. J., & 
Atkinson, H. J. (1997). Resistance to both 
cyst and root knot nematodes conferred by 
transgenic Arabidopsis expressing a modified 
plant cystatin. Plant Journal, 12, 455–461.
Urwin, P. E., McPherson, M. J., & Atkinson, 
H. J. (1998). Enhanced transgenic plant 
resistance to nematodes by dual proteinase 
inhibitor constructs. Planta, 204, 472–479.

Urwin, P. E., Troth, K. M., Zubko, E. I., & 

Atkinson, H. J. (2001). Effective transgenic 
resistance to Globodera pallida in potato 
field trials. Molecular Breeding, 8, 95–101.
Vaeck, M., Reynaerts, A., Höfte, H., Jansens, 
S., De Beuckeleer, M., & Dean, C., et al. 

(1987). Transgenic plants protected from 
insect attack. Nature, 328, 33–37.

Vain, P., Worland, B., Clarke, M. C., Richard, 

G., Beavis, M., & Liu, H., et al. (1998). 
Expression of an engineered cysteine 
proteinase inhibitor (Oryzacystatin-IΔD86) 
for nematode resistance in transgenic rice 
plants. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 96, 
266–271.

Vishnudasan, D., Tripathi, M. N., Rao, U., 

& Khurana, P. (2005). Assessment of 
nematode resistance in wheat transgenic 
plants expressing potato proteinase inhibitor 
(PIN2) gene. Transgenic Research, 14, 
665–675.

Vitale, J., Glick, H., Greenplate, J., & Traore, O.  

(2008). The economic impacts of second 
generation Bt cotton in West Africa: 
Empirical evidence from Burkina Faso. 
International Journal of Biotechnology, 10, 
167–183.

Walshe, D. P., Lehane, S. M., Lehane, M. J., 
& Haines, L. R. (2009). Prolonged gene 
knockdown in the tsetse fly Glossina 
by feeding double stranded RNA. Insect 
Molecular Biology, 18, 11–19.

Wang, E., Wang, R., DeParasis, J., Loughrin, 

J. H., Gan, S., & Wagner, G. J. (2001). 
Suppression of a P450 hydroxylase gene 
in plant trichome glands enhances natural-
product-based aphid resistance. Nature 
Biotechnology, 19, 371–374.

Wang, J., Chen, Z., Du, J., Sun, Y., & Liang, A. 
(2005). Novel insect resistance in Brassica 
napus developed by transformation of 
chitinase and scorpion toxin genes. Plant 
Cell Reports, 24, 549–555.

Wolfenbarger, L. L. R., Naranjo, S. E., 

Lundgren, J. G., Bitzer, R. J., & Watrud, 
L. S. (2008). Bt crop effects on functional 
guilds of non-target arthropods: A meta-
analysis. PLoS ONE, 3, e2118.

Wu, F., Miller, J. D., & Casman, E. A. (2004). 
The economic impact of Bt corn resulting 
from mycotoxin reduction. Journal of 
Toxicology – Toxin Reviews, 23, 397–424.

Wu, J., Luo, X., Wang, Z., Tian, Y., Liang, A., & 
Sun, Y. (2008). Transgenic cotton expressing 
synthesized scorpion insect toxin AaHIT 
gene confers enhanced resistance to cotton 

bollworm (Heliothis armigera) larvae. 
Biotechnology Letters, 30, 547–554.

Wu, N., Sun, Q., Yao, B., Fan, Y., Rao, H., & 
Huang, M., et al. (2000). Insect-resistant 
transgenic poplar expressing AaIT gene. 
Chinese Journal of Biotechnology, 16, 
126–133.

Xu, D., Xue, Q., McElroy, D., Mawal, Y., 

Hilder, V. A., & Wu, R. (1996). Constitutive 
expression of a cowpea trypsin inhibitor 
gene, CpTI, in transgenic rice plants confers 
resistance to two major rice insect pests. 
Molecular Breeding, 2, 167–173.

Yadav, B. C., Veluthambi, K., & Subramaniam, 
K. (2006). Host-generated double stranded 
RNA induces RNAi in plant-parasitic 
nematodes and protects the host from 
infection. Molecular and Biochemical 
Parasitology, 148, 219–222.

Zhang, X., Candas, M., Griko, N. B., Taussig, 
R., & Bulla, L. A. (2006). A mechanism of 
cell death involving an adenylyl cyclase/PKA 
signaling pathway is induced by the Cry1Ab 
toxin of Bacillus thuringiensis. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 103, 9897–9902.

Zhang, X., Liu, J., & Zhao., Q. (1999). Transfer 

of high lysine-rich gene into maize by 
microprojectile bombardment and detection 
of transgenic plants. Journal of Agricultural 
Biotechnology, 7, 363–367.

Zhao, J. Z., Cao, J., Collins, H. L., Bates, S. L., 

Roush, R. T., & Earle, E. D., et al. (2005). 
Concurrent use of transgenic plants expressing 
a single and two Bacillus thuringiensis genes 
speeds insect adaptation to pyramided plants. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 102, 8426–8430.

Zhou, X., Wheeler, M. M., Oi, F. M., & Scharf, 

M. E. (2008). RNA interference in the 
termite Reticulitermes flavipes through 
ingestion of double-stranded RNA. Insect 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 38, 
805–815.

Zwart, M. P., Van Der Werf, W., Van Oers, 
M. M., Hemerik, L., Van Lent, J., & De 
Visser, J., et al. (2009). Mixed infections 
and the competitive fitness of faster acting 
genetically modified viruses. Evolutionary 
Applications, 2, 209–221.

370

Integrating genomics and genetics to 
accelerate development of drought and 
salinity tolerant crops

18

Zvi Peleg  Harkamal Walia  Eduardo Blumwald
University of California, Davis, California

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Impact of Abiotic Stresses on Crop Plant Productivity   .  . 271
Water Deficit: A Major Abiotic Stress Factor   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 272
Salinity   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 272
Plant Responses to Abiotic Stress   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 272
Breeding for Drought and Salinity Tolerance:  
“The Conventional Approach”  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 273

Germplasm resources for drought and  
salinity tolerance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .274
Genetic dissection of plant responses  
to abiotic stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .274
Introducing new technologies for  
abiotic stress breeding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .275

Engineering-Tolerant Crop Plants:  
The Transgenic Approach   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 275
Genes for osmoregulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .275
Dehydration-responsive element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .278
NAC proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .279
Genes for ionic balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .279
Genes for redox regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .279
Aquaporins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .280
Other transcription factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .280
Hormone Balance and Abiotic Stress  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 280
Challenges and Prospects  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 281
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 281

Impact of Abiotic Stresses on Crop 
Plant Productivity

Crop  plants  are  often  grown  under  unfavorable  environ-
mental  conditions  that  prevent  the  full  expression  of  their 
genetic yield potential. The abiotic stress conditions that most 
adversely affect crop yield are associated with water deficiency 
ion  imbalance  and  temperature  extremes.  The  ever-increasing 
human population, concomitant with loss of farmland (due to 

urbanization) and diminishing water availability (associated with 
climate  change),  poses  serious  challenges  to  world  agriculture 
(reviewed by Mittler and Blumwald, 2010). To fulfill the food 
supply  requirements  for  the  projected  population  by  2050,  a 
significant increase (an estimated 50%) in grain yield of major 
crops such as rice (Oryza sativa L.), wheat (Triticum aestivum 
L.), and maize (Zea mays L.) is required (Godfray et al., 2010). 
Boyer  (1982)  reported  that  the  average  production  of  major 
U.S. crops (corn, wheat, soybean, sorghum, oat, barley, potato, 
sugar beet) is only 21.6% of the highest yields attained under 
optimal  conditions.  Diseases,  pests,  and  weed  competition 
losses account for 4.1% and 2.6% yield reductions, respectively, 
with the remainder of the yield reduction attributed to unfavo-
rable physicochemical (abiotic) environments induced by prob-
lematic  soils  and  erratic  climate  patterns  (69.1%).  Certainly, 
some of these losses are caused by inherently unfavorable envi-
ronments  and  some  by  suboptimal  management  practices  by 
farmers, often due to economic constraints or lack of training. 
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that a large fraction of potential 
crop productivity is lost to abiotic stress factors.

Plants respond to environmental stresses at multiple levels 
such  as  molecular,  cellular,  tissue,  anatomical,  morphologi-
cal,  and  whole-plant  physiological  levels  (Bray,  1993,  1997; 
Munns, 2002; Chaves et al., 2003; Bartels and Sunkar, 2005; 
Munns  and  Tester,  2008;  Witcombe  et  al.,  2008).  These 
responses to one or more stresses also vary with species and 
genotype.  The  plant  response  to  stress  also  depends  on  the 
duration  and  severity  of  the  event,  as  well  as  the  age  and 
developmental stage of the plant when the stress is imposed 
(Bray,  1997).  In  crop  plants  the  sensitivity/tolerance  to  abi-
otic  stresses  is  determined  by  yield  loss  rather  than  survival. 
Typically, early plant establishment (germination and seedling) 
and  the  reproductive  stage  are  the  most  sensitive  in  deter-
mining yield under stress (Barnabas et al., 2008). However, a 
large segment of the abiotic stress research in models systems, 
particularly  in  Arabidopsis  thaliana,  in  the  past  has  focused 
primarily  on  the  vegetative  phase  and  has  strived  to  identify 
survival  phenotypes.  This  has  hindered  our  ability  to  readily 
translate the discoveries into crop plants.

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00018-3

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Water Deficit: A Major Abiotic Stress 
Factor

Among the various abiotic stress conditions, water deficiency 
is  the  most  devastating  factor  (Boyer,  1982;  Araus  et  al., 
2008). About 44.9% of U.S. soils are subjected to water def-
icits  due  to  either  drought  (25.3%)  or  shallowness  (19.6%), 
with  an  additional  43%  subjected  to  other  environmental 
limitations,  primarily  cold  (16.5%)  and  waterlogging  (15.7%; 
Boyer,  1982).  Only  12.1%  of  U.S.  soils  are  considered  free 
from  physicochemical  problems.  In  agreement  with  this,  the 
total  indemnification  made  to  U.S.  farmers  for  crop  losses 
due  to  drought,  flooding,  and  low  temperature  accounts  for 
40.8%, 16.4%, and 13.8%, respectively (Boyer, 1982).

About  one-third  of  the  world’s  arable  land  suffers  from 
chronically  inadequate  water  availability  for  agriculture;  in 
virtually  all  agricultural  regions,  crop  yields  are  periodically 
reduced  by  drought  (Bruce  et  al.,  2002).  Currently  ~80% 
of the world’s useable water resources are consumed by irri-
gated agriculture (Condon et al., 2004), within a few decades, 
the  expanding  world  population  will  require  more  water  for 
domestic,  municipal,  industrial,  and  environmental  needs 
(Hamdy et al., 2003). This trend is expected to grow due to 
global climatic change and increased aridity (Vorosmarty et al., 
2000). Thus, to meet the projected food demands, more crop 
per  drop  is  required  (Condon  et  al.,  2004).  Understanding 
plant  responses  to  water  deficiency  is  important,  not  only 
because it is the major stress affecting crop productivity, but 
also  due  to  other  associated  stresses  such  as  heat,  cold,  and 
salinity, which induce water deficiency (osmotic shock/stress) 
in plant tissues (Bohnert et al., 1995).

Salinity

Salinity  (see  definition  of  saline  and  sodic  soils;  Richards, 
1954)  is  a  major  constraint  on  crop  plant  productivity 
(reviewed  by  Apse  and  Blumwald,  2002;  Flowers,  2004; 
Munns and Tester, 2008; Witcombe et al., 2008). More than 
800  million  hectares  of  land  throughout  the  world  are  salt 
affected, which accounts for 6% of the world total land area 
(Munns and Tester, 2008). In most cases salinity results from 
natural causes (salt accumulation over long periods of time). 
In addition, a significant portion of the cultivated agricultural 
land is becoming saline due to deforestation or excess irriga-
tion  (and  fertilization;  Shannon,  1997).  Current  estimates 
indicate that 20% of the roughly 230 million hectares of irri-
gated land is affected by salinity. Given that one-third of the 
food  production  comes  from  irrigated  agriculture,  salinity  is 
becoming a serious problem for crop plant productivity.

Plant Responses to Abiotic Stress

Plant  resistance  to  stress  conditions  may  arise  from  escape, 
avoidance, or tolerance strategies (Levitt, 1972). Escape relies 
on successful completion of reproduction before the onset of 
severe stress (i.e., developmental plasticity) achieved by early 

flowering and/or short growth duration (Mooney et al., 1987). 
Avoidance  involves  the  prevention  or  decreasing  the  impact 
of the stress on the plant, such as minimizing water loss and 
maximizing water uptake (Chaves et al., 2003), or exclusion 
of  salt  ions,  a  feature  observed  in  halophytes  (Munns  and 
Tester,  2008).  Tolerance  relies  on  the  inherent  ability  of  the 
plant to sustain growth (likely at a reduced rate) even when 
the  conditions  are  unfavorable  for  the  maintenance  of  basic 
plant processes. This strategy involves coordination of physio-
logical and biochemical alterations at the cellular and molec-
ular levels, such as osmotic adjustment (Morgan, 1984), and 
the  sequestration  of  ion  in  the  plants  in  the  vacuole  or  leaf 
sheath  and/or  older  leaves  (Mimura  et  al.,  2003).  In  most 
cases, plants subjected to stress conditions combine a suite of 
responses, exhibiting a number of physiological and biochemi-
cal responses at the molecular, cellular, and whole plant level 
(Bray, 1993, 1997; Bohnert et al., 1995; Chaves et al., 2003).

Several  physiological  and  biochemical  aspects  of  the 
responses  of  plants  to  stress  have  been  identified  and  exam-
ined in great detail over a period of several decades. Here we 
focus  on  two  stress-related  physiological  mechanisms:  water 
use  efficiency  (WUE)  and  osmotic  adjustment(OA).  Water  use 
efficiency  is  defined  in  agronomic  terms  as  the  ratio  between 
dry  matter  (or  yield)  production  per  unit  water  use  (Condon 
and  Hall,  1997).  In  a  physiological  context,  however,  WUE 
is  defined  as  the  ratio  between  the  rate  of  carbon  fixed  and 
the  rate  of  water  transpired.  Carbon  isotope  ratio  (13C/12C, 
expressed with differential notation as δ13C) is often used as an 
indirect indicator of WUE (Farquhar et al., 1982; Araus et al., 
2008). Osmotic adjustment is the net increase in intercellular 
solutes  in  response  to  water  stress  (Morgan,  1984).  Osmotic 
adjustment is considered one of the crucial processes in plant 
adaptation  to  drought  and  salinity,  because  it  allows  turgor 
maintenance at lower water potentials, sustains tissue metabolic 
activity,  and  enables  regrowth  upon  rewatering  or  when  the 
high salt levels recede. Plant productivity under arid conditions 
has  been  associated  with  osmotic  adjustment  in  a  number  of 
species such as wheat (Morgan, 1984; Peleg et al., 2009), sun-
flower  (Chimenti  et  al.,  2002),  cotton  (Saranga  et  al.,  2004), 
chickpea (Moinuddin and Khanna-Chopra, 2004), and sorghum 
(Tangpremsri  et  al.,  1995).  At  a  physiological  level,  salinity 
stress has been considered to have a two-phase effect on plants 
(Munns, 2002). The initial phase of salinity stress is primarily 
attributed to an osmotic shock, similar to that of water stress. 
This initial phase likely has a strong osmotic adjustment compo-
nent. The second long-term phase involves ion toxicity, which 
typically takes longer (days or weeks) to accumulate. In most 
cases, the salt tolerance, which eventually translates to greater 
yield, is derived from the ability of the plant to recover from 
the osmotic stress and maintain growth and photosynthesis in 
the longer second phase. A plant’s tolerance to soil salinity is a 
result of three major components: Na exclusion; tissue toler-
ance to Na; and osmotic tolerance (Munns and Tester, 2008; 
Plett and Moller, 2010). The impact of each component varies 
between and even within species. Further, the impact of each 
component can vary during the life cycle of the plant.

Under field conditions, crop plants are routinely subjected 
to a combination of different abiotic stresses. Plant responses 
to one stress can be synergistically or antagonistically modified 

272

Integrating genomics and genetics to accelerate development of drought and salinity tolerant crops

C H A P T E R   1 8

by  the  superimposition  of  other  stresses.  Water  loss  from  a 
plant  (transpiration)  is  an  unavoidable  consequence  of  pho-
tosynthesis  (Cowan,  1986),  whereby  the  energy  of  solar 
radiation is used for carbon fixation. Although increased tran-
spiration  without  a  corresponding  increase  in  photosynthesis 
reduces WUE, it is also beneficial for dissipating excess heat. 
Water stress and heat stress almost invariably co-occur under 
arid-region  field  conditions.  The  resulting  need  for  a  balance 
between plant tolerance to heat and drought complicates strat-
egies  for  manipulating  plant  water  use  to  improve  productiv-
ity  under  arid  conditions.  Another  example  of  interaction 
between two abiotic stresses occurs under salinity. The imme-
diate effect of salinity, reduced soil osmotic potential, is similar 
to water stress and only its later effect, ion toxicity, is specific 
to salt (Munns, 2002; Munns and Tester, 2008). Moreover, pri-
mary abiotic stresses, such as drought, salinity, cold, heat, and 
chemical  pollution  are  often  interconnected  with  secondary 
oxidative stress by inducing the production of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) in plants (Vinocur and Altman, 2005).

Breeding for Drought and Salinity 
Tolerance: “The Conventional 
Approach”

The  primary  goal  of  crop  plant  breeding  is  to  increase  yield 
and other commercial value traits (e.g., nutritional value, fruit 
size,  color,  etc.).  On  a  global  scale,  plant  breeding  has  been 
enormously  successful  in  improving  yields;  for  example,  the 
introduction of dwarf wheat and rice varieties after the Green 
Revolution  (Evenson  and  Gollin,  2003)  and  the  develop-
ment  of  hybrid  maize  (Duvick,  2001).  However,  the  Green 
Revolution was primarily driven for irrigated agricultural sys-
tems.  This  has  often  resulted  in  minimal  breeding  resources 
for improved productivity in water limiting or saline environ-
ments. Furthermore, the improvement of abiotic tolerance in 
crops was hindered due to the inherent complexity in pheno-
typing,  polygenic  control  of  traits,  low  inheritance,  and  nar-
row genetic variation.

Effective  management  of  the  available  water  resources 
through  agronomic  practices  plays  a  major  role  in  sustain-
able production under drought (Peterson and Westfall, 2004). 
Agro-technical  practices  can  have  a  significant  impact  on 
improving  the  WUE,  and  yield  in  marginal  environments  by 
using drip systems for saline water (Mizrahi et al., 1988), defi-
cit irrigation (Geerts and Raes, 2009), no tillage (Klein et al., 
2002),  and precision agriculture  (Cassman, 1999).  However, 
these management strategies are too expensive to implement 
and require infrastructure that is difficult to introduce in both 
developing and underdeveloped countries. Therefore, genetic 
improvement  in  crop  plants  leading  to  sustained  yield  with 
low inputs is proposed to be a critical factor for sustaining the 
increasing population food needs.

Genetic  improvement  of  stress  tolerance  can  be  achieved 
through  selection;  either  directly,  for  a  primary  trait  (such 
as  yield)  in  a  target  environment  (i.e.,  empirical  breeding), 
or  indirectly,  for  a  secondary  trait  related  to  stress  adapta-
tion of the crop when grown in a stressful environment (i.e., 

analytical breeding). Most of the breeding progress in the last 
50  years  has  been  derived  from  empirical  (also  termed  con-
ventional)  breeding,  which  has  taken  yield  as  the  main  trait 
for  selection.  However,  empirical  breeding  appears  to  be 
reaching  a  plateau,  and  complementation  of  traditional  with 
analytical  selection  methodologies  is  required  to  further 
improve yields (Araus et al., 2008).

Many  physiological  traits  have  been  suggested  as  second-
ary traits for different species and environments (reviewed by 
Araus  et  al.,  2008;  Cattivelli  et  al.,  2008).  Phenology  is  the 
most widely used secondary trait because of ease of measure-
ment and high heritability. Flowering data and plant height are 
the  major  drought  escape  traits,  and  can  be  used  efficiently 
under  terminal  drought  conditions.  However,  this  approach 
has  several  limitations,  and  earlier  varieties  may  suffer  yield 
penalties in stress-free growing seasons. One of the main lim-
iting factors for increasing productivity, even under non-stress 
conditions,  is  photosynthesis  capacity  (reviewed  by  Murchie 
et al., 2009). Stay-green is an important trait for post-flower-
ing drought resistance for many cereal crops such as sorghum, 
rice,  and  maize  (Campos  et  al.,  2004).  Osmoregulation  was 
reported  to  be  an  effective  selection  criterion  for  drought 
adaptation under a water deficit environment (Morgan, 1983; 
Ludlow and Muchow, 1990; Zhang et al., 1999). Recent stud-
ies  confirmed  the  role  of  osmotic  adjustment  in  drought, 
although  a  number  of  contrasting  reports  were  also  pub-
lished (reviewed by Serraj and Sinclair, 2002). In some cases 
OA was associated with increased yield (Morgan, 1983), and 
in  other  studies  no  such  association  was  founded  (Turner 
et  al.,  2007).  It  has  been  suggested  that  using  OA  as  selec-
tion  criteria  will  be  beneficial  to  improve  yields  only  under 
severe  water  stress  conditions,  where  yield  potentials  tend 
to  be  low  (Serraj  and  Sinclair,  2002).  The  identification  and 
manipulation of candidate genes for such traits could facilitate 
improved tolerance and increase yields.

WUE  is  an  important  determinant  of  plant  adaptation 
under  limited  water  availability  (Condon  and  Hall,  1997). 
WUE  is  often  represented  by  carbon  isotope  ratio,  δ13C 
(Farquhar  et  al.,  1982).  Increased  WUE  can  be  obtained  by 
either increased photosynthetic rate or reduced stomatal con-
ductance  (e.g.,  in  response  to  stress  and  particularly  under 
water deficit). In both cases it would reflect increase in tran-
spiration  efficiency  at  the  leaf  scale,  although  the  former  is 
more likely to be associated with increased productivity, while 
the  latter  is  likely  to  be  critical  for  survival  and  sustainable 
productivity  under  drought.  Accordingly,  δ13C  was  reported 
to be negatively, positively or not at all associated with yield 
(Condon  et  al.,  2004;  Araus  et  al.,  2008).  An  example  of  a 
successful breeding program based on WUE was reported by 
Rebetzke et al. ( 2002). Using δ13C they selected bread wheat 
lines with high WUE under drought conditions that produced 
greater aerial biomass and grain yield (Rebetzke et al., 2002).

Stomatal  density  and  stomatal  aperture  are  two  of  the 
components that can control how efficiently a plant optimizes 
water  loss  with  photosynthesis  during  stress.  In  Arabidopsis, 
QTLs  affecting  transpiration  efficiency  have  been  identi-
fied (Juenger et al., 2005; Masle et al., 2005) and one gene, 
ERECTA, has been shown to regulate transpiration efficiency 
(TE;  Masle  et  al.,  2005).  ERECTA  encodes  a  leucine-rich 

273

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

repeat  receptor-like  kinase  (Torii  et  al.,  1996)  and  regulates 
TE via the control of stomatal density, gs, mesophyll cell pro-
liferation,  and  photosynthetic  capacity  (Masle  et  al.,  2005). 
Recently,  the  α-subunit  of  the  heterotrimeric  G  protein  in 
Arabidopsis,  GPA1,  was  found  to  regulate  stomatal  density 
via  the  control  of  epidermal  cell  size  and  stomata  formation 
(Nilson and Assmann, 2010). In rice, a C2H2 zinc finger tran-
scription factor, DST (drought and salt tolerance), was cloned 
and reported to control stomatal aperture under drought and 
salt stress (Huang et al., 2009). DST contributed to stomata 
movement via regulation of genes involved in ROS homeosta-
sis. It was proposed that DST regulated H2O2 homeostasis by 
inhibiting  ROS  accumulation  during  stress,  and  possibly  pre-
venting stomatal closure during drought and salt stress. These 
results  would  indicate  that  the  genetic  manipulation  of  the 
stomatal responses during stress could provide a powerful tool 
for stress tolerance improvement in crop plants.

Germplasm resources for drought and 
salinity tolerance

Domestication  of  wild  plants  and  modern  plant  breeding 
imposed a genetic bottleneck on crop plants that has severely 
eroded  the  allelic  variations  of  genes  originally  found  in  the 
wild  species  (Tanksley  and  McCouch,  1997).  Modern  crop 
cultivars  are  the  product  of  intensive  selection  to  facilitate 
higher yields under irrigated environments. This selection has 
narrowed  the  genetic  variability  for  abiotic  stress  resistance, 
making  them  relatively  sensitive  to  stress.  Natural  biodiver-
sity is an underexploited sustainable resource that can enrich 
the  genetic  basis  of  cultivated  plants  with  novel  alleles  that 
improve  productivity  and  adaptation  (McCouch,  2004;  Gur 
and Zamir, 2004). For instance, wild emmer wheat (Triticum 
turgidum  ssp. dicoccoides),  the  direct  progenitor  of  domesti-
cated wheat, was found to harbor a rich allelic repertoire for 
various  morphophysiological  traits  conferring  drought  and 
salinity tolerance (Nevo et al., 1992; Peleg et al., 2005, 2008). 
Likewise,  wild  species  of  Oryza  also  showed  potential  to 
improve drought tolerance related traits (maintenance of leaf 
elongation and stomatal conductance under stress, high levels 
of membrane stability) in rice (Liu et al., 2004). The wild rel-
ative of tomato (Solanum pennellii) and bean (Phaseolus ssp.) 
were  reported  to  be  more  resistant  to  salinity  than  modern 
cultivars (Dehan and Tal, 1978; Bayuelo-Jimenez et al., 2002). 
These studies, and others, highlighted the potential for stress 
tolerance improvement by introducing novel alleles from wild 
related species and landraces. A major challenge for breeding 
is the rapid introgression of desired traits found in landraces 
and  wild  relatives,  with  a  minimal  drag,  to  enrich  the  culti-
vated  gene  pools.  However,  the  traditional  introgression  of 
novel  alleles  from  wild  relatives  via  conventional  breeding  is 
a  slow  and  tedious  process.  The  adoption  of  new  genomics 
tools  will  accelerate  and  improve  the  introgression  of  genes 
into crop plants, and can prevent the drag of undesirable traits 
(e.g.,  seed  dispersal,  flowering  time,  height,  etc.)  from  the 
wild.  Furthermore,  genetic  engineering  approaches  can  help 
overcome  species  barriers  and  extend  the  search  beyond  the 
realm of sexually compatible species.

Genetic dissection of plant responses to 
abiotic stress

One factor that has limited the development of stress-tolerant 
crops  is  the  low  heritability  of  complex  traits  such  as  yield, 
significant genotype-by-environment interaction (G  E), and 
QTLs-by-environment interaction (QTL  E). Furthermore, a 
general lack of understanding of the physiological parameters 
that  reflect  genetic  potential  for  improved  productivity  in  a 
water-limited environment has also contributed. Using genetic 
mapping  to  dissect  the  inheritance  of  complex  traits  in  the 
same population is a powerful means to distinguish common 
heredity from casual associations among such traits. In princi-
ple, this can permit a direct test of the role of specific physio-
logical  traits  in  genetic  improvement  of  plant  productivity 
under  abiotic  stresses,  such  as  those  imposed  by  drought  or 
salinity conditions.

Genetic  mapping  has  been  used  to  identify  quantitative 
trait  loci  (QTLs)  responsible  for  improved  productivity  under 
drought  or  salinity  conditions  and  for  morphophysiological 
traits  associated  with  stress  responses  (reviewed  by  Tuberosa 
and Salvi, 2006; Collins et al., 2008). However, in only a few 
studies were productivity and physiological differences geneti-
cally mapped in the same populations, enabling researchers to 
identify  possible  association  between  these  traits  (Saranga  et 
al., 2004; Peleg et al., 2009). When testing genetic maps across 
various  sites/years,  QTLs  that  promote  high  and  stable  yield 
in  multiple  environment  conditions  were  prioritized  (Collins 
et al., 2008). These QTLs, expressed across most environments, 
are  termed  “constitutive  QTLs,”  while  QTLs  that  expressed 
only  under  specific  environments  are  called  “adaptive  QTLs.” 
However,  when  breeding  for  drought-prone  environments, 
QTLs that are specific for water-limited conditions, rather than 
those that are strictly constitutive, could be more beneficial for 
improving plant performance (Saranga et al., 2004; Peleg et al., 
2009)  Moreover,  since  different  subsets  of  QTLs  account  for 
productivity under contrasting conditions, a wide environmen-
tal adaptation can be obtained by combining constitutive QTLs 
with various sets of environment-specific QTLs.

QTLs analyses of physiological traits, such as OA, relative 
water  content  (RWC),  WUE,  and  cell  membrane  stability 
(CMS),  have  been  widely  used  as  stress  tolerance  indica-
tors,  especially  drought  and  salinity.  In  rice,  rooting  and  OA 
were  found  to  be  associated  with  improved  drought  toler-
ance (Babu et al., 2003). A QTL for root length was found to 
explain  30%  of  the  variation  (Price  and  Tomos,  1997),  how-
ever, this was not stable when other environmental constrains 
were tested (Price et al., 2002). These results suggested that 
manipulating root morphology would not necessarily improve 
drought  tolerance.  QTLs  responsible  for  variation  in  K  and 
Na  content  were  indentified,  and  one  of  these  QTLs  was 
cloned,  designated  as  SALTOL,  and  it  was  found  to  explain 
40% of the variation in salinity tolerance (Lin et al., 2004).

To  date,  hundreds  of  QTLs  for  productivity  and  abiotic-
stress  related  morphophysiology  traits  have  been  reported 
(Tuberosa and Salvi, 2006; Vij and Tyagi, 2007; Collins et al., 
2008). These identified stress-related QTLs might substantially 
contribute  toward  a  better  understanding  of  the  genetic  and 

274

Integrating genomics and genetics to accelerate development of drought and salinity tolerant crops

C H A P T E R   1 8

functional  basis  of  plant  responses  to  abiotic  stress  (reviewed 
by  Salvi  and  Tuberosa,  2005),  directly  or  via  positional  clon-
ing. However, their contribution to crop plant breeding, using 
molecular-assisted  selection  (MAS),  has  been  very  limited  in 
releasing  new  cultivars  with  improved  stress  tolerance.  While 
MAS was found to be very efficient in biotic stress resistance 
(reviewed  in  Collard  and  Mackill,  2008),  only  few  examples 
of its use can be found for abiotic stress (Collins et al., 2008). 
The  major  weakness  of  traditional  MAS  comes  from  its  two 
components:  QTL  identification;  and  the  estimation  of  their 
effects. Current QTL identification methods are usually based 
on  biparental  populations  that  are  not  representative,  and  do 
not  have  the  same  level  of  allelic  diversity  and  phase  as  the 
breeding program as a whole. Generating and genotyping such 
mapping  populations  is  costly.  In  many  cases,  MAS  was  not 
efficient  due  to  low  heritability,  high  QTL    E,  reliability  of 
QTLs mapping (due to population size and/or number of repli-
cates and environments; Collard and Mackill, 2008).

Introducing new technologies for abiotic 
stress breeding

Newly  developed  tools  will  facilitate  the  mapping,  cloning, 
and use of stress-related QTLs for plant adaptations to stress 
conditions:
1. New molecular platforms, for high-throughput marker 

genotyping such as array based (diversity array technology, 
DArT), single feature polymorphism (SFP; Rostoks et al., 
2005), and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) are 
becoming increasingly accessible.

2. Development of new mapping approaches, such as 

association mapping and consensus maps with high marker 
saturation and advance mapping software (Ronin et al., 
1999).

3. Development of advance high-throughput phenotyping and 

statistical models to test environmental effects (Sadok 
et al., 2007).

4. Increasing availability of sequence information (e.g., “deep” 

sequencing of DNA and mRNA) and tools for functional 
analyses of the candidate genes (TILLING; Till et al., 
2007, RNA interference; Lukens and Zhan, 2007, and 
microRNAs).

5. More efficient transformation techniques will enable major 
stress-related QTLs to be considered for positional cloning, 
aiming to manipulate the target trait more directly by 
genetic engineering.
Model plants, such as Arabidopsis thaliana, Brachypodium 
distachyon,  and  Medicago  truncatula,  have  been  and  will 
continue  to  offer  insights  into  the  genetic  and  biochemi-
cal  basis  of  abiotic  stress  adaptations  (Bohnert  et  al.,  2006; 
Hirayama and Shinozaki, 2010). Furthermore, the identifica-
tion of stress-related genes and pathways has been facilitated 
by  introducing  new  tools  and  resources  developed  in  these 
models plants. Microarray technology is a very powerful tool 
to discover genes related to stress adaptation. In Arabidopsis, 
thousand  of  transcripts  profiles  were  used  to  indentify  can-
didate  genes  for  stress  responses  (Seki  et  al.,  2009;  Urano 

et  al.,  2010).  Recent  progress  in  transcriptome  analyses  has 
lead  to  the  routine  use  of  high-density  microarrays,  tiling 
arrays  (Zeller  et  al.,  2009),  and  deep  sequencing  (RNA-seq) 
in  functional  genomics  laboratories  (Nelson  et  al.,  2007). 
RNA-seq  has  the  potential  to  not  only  identify  transcript 
abundance, but also to discern the allelic sequence variant of 
the transcripts that can be useful in case of hybrids or allopol-
yploids such as wheat and cotton. However, robust statistical 
methods are required to interpret large RNA-seq datasets.

Increasing  DNA  sequencing  information  will  open  new 
options to study the function of stress-related genes. For rice 
and Arabidopsis, various T-DNA or transposome tagged popu-
lations are publicly available (Hirayama and Shinkozaki, 2010). 
TILLING  (Targeting  Induced  Local  Lesions  IN  Genomes)  is 
a  reverse  genetics  technique  combining  chemical  mutagen-
esis with high-throughput mutation detection to identify point 
mutations  within  a  specific  locus.  TILLING  resources  have 
been  developed  for  many  crop  plants,  including  maize  (Till 
et al., 2004), rice (Till et al., 2007), wheat (Uauy et al., 2009), 
and tomato (Minoia et al., 2010), which allow the production 
of  targeted  knockout  genes.  Allelic  variants  generated  from 
TILLING  will  enable  functional  analyses  of  candidate  genes, 
especially those where complete knockout is lethal. Power of 
detection of allelic mutants is likely to improve considerably as 
deep-sequencing becomes more accessible.

Engineering-Tolerant Crop Plants: 
The Transgenic Approach

Response  of  plants  to  environmental  stress  affects  all  aspects 
of  plant  physiology  and  metabolism,  leading  to  severe  yield 
losses.  Thus,  tolerance  mechanisms  depend  on  the  preven-
tion  or  alleviation  of  cellular  damage,  the  re-establishment 
of  homeostatic  conditions,  and  the  resumption  of  growth. 
Discovering and understanding the molecular/genetic basis of 
these  tolerance  components  has  been  the  focus  of  crop  bio-
technology  in  the  past  two  decades.  Despite  these  enormous 
research efforts, the role of very few genes in enhancing abi-
otic stress tolerance has been demonstrated under field condi-
tions. However, this is expected to change, primarily because 
research  is  increasingly  focused  on  high  yields  under  stress 
rather than plant survival. Other factors include better facili-
ties  for  testing  the  transgenic  materials  and  the  increasing 
acceptance  of  genetically  engineered  plants  by  the  communi-
ties. Genetic engineering of candidate genes for abiotic stress 
was found to be successful in model plants growing under con-
trolled  conditions,  and  provided  insights  on  the  role  of  these 
genes in key physiological and biochemical processes (reviewed 
by Vinocur and Altman, 2005; Umezawa et al., 2006; Pardo, 
2010). In this review, we have focused on efforts for improving 
the tolerance of crop plants to abiotic stress.

Genes for osmoregulation

Active  accumulation  of  solute  in  the  vacuoles  (i.e.,  osmotic 
adjustment)  is  a  common  physiological  component  affecting 
drought  and  salinity  tolerance  (Munns,  2002).  Increasing  the 

275

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Table 18.1  Summary of drought and salt stress-related genes introduced into crop plants

Gene engineered 
(source)

Promoter

Crop

Growth conditions and stage

Result

References

Osmoregulation associated genes

P5GS (Vigna aconitifolia)

35S

Tobacco

Six-week-old seedlings, 
greenhouse

Three-weeks seedling, 
greenhouse

10- to 18-fold more proline than control 
plants, and enhances root growth

Kishor et al. (1995)

Faster growth of shoots and roots

Su and Wu (2004)

Water withholding at booting 
stage, greenhouse

Accumulation of proline, which resulted 
in improved tolerance to water deficit

Vendruscolo et al. 
(2007)

Rice

Wheat

Chickpea

Greenhouse

Rice

Four-leaf stage, greenhouse

Higher proline accumulation, however, 
modest increase in TE

Bhatnagar-Mathur 
et al. (2009)

Increase amount of proline, drought and 
salinity tolerance

Xu et al. (2008)

P5CS (V. aconitifolia)

P5CS (V. aconitifolia)

P5CSF129A (V. 
aconitifolia)

ZFP252 (Oryza sativa)

Act1

AIPC

35S

35S

betA (E. coli)

AhCMO (Atriplex 
hortensis)

BADH (A. hortensis)

35S

NA

ubi-1 
(maize)

codA (A. globiformis)

35S

TPSP (E. coli)

mtlD (E. coli)

AVP1

AVP1 (Arabidopsis 
thaliana)

AVP1 (A. thaliana)

AVP1 (A.thaliana)

betA (Escherichia coli)

NA

Maize

Drought at reproductive stage, in 
the field

Increase of 10–23% in yield relative to 
wild-type, under stress

Quan et al. (2004)

Cotton

Cotton

Wheat

Rice

Rice

Wheat

Tomato

Withholding water, at first flower 
stage, greenhouse

Increase glycine betaine level, drought 
tolerance and increase yield

Lv et al. (2007)

Two-true-leaf stage, pots 
experiment in greenhouse

Water stress applied post-
flowering, greenhouse

Enhancing glycine betaine content, and 
resistance to salinity stress

Zhang et al. (2009)

Tolerance to drought, improved 
photosynthesis capacity

Wang et al. (2010)

Five-week-old seedlings, 
hydroponic

Production of glycine betaine, improved 
growth

Sakamoto and 
Murata (1998)

Accumulation of more trehalose, less 
photo-oxidative damage, improved 
mineral balance

Garg et al. (2002)

Three-week-old seedlings, growth 
chamber

Improved tolerance to water stress and 
salinity

Abebe et al. (2003)

Five-week-old plants were 
subjected to drought, greenhouse

Increased root biomass, and enhanced 
recovery of plants from an episode of 
water stress

Park et al. (2005)

rcbS and 
ABA-
induced

ubi-1 
(maize)

35S

35S

Cotton

Twenty-day-old plants were 
subjected to drought or salinity in 
greenhouse

Significantly improved tolerance to both 
drought and salt stresses, with increase 
of 20% fiber yield

Pasapula et al. 
(2011)

35S

35S

Rice

5-week-old seedlings were 
subjected to salt treatments

Alfalfa

Growth room

Enhanced salt tolerance

Zhao et al. (2006)

About 215% improvement in shoot dry 
weight

Bao et al. (2009)

AP2/ERF transcription factor family

HvCBF4 (Hordeum 
vulgare)

TERF1 (Solanum 
lycopersicum)

Ubi1

35S

Rice

Rice

4-week-old seedlings subjected to 
drought or salinity

Higher survival rate, confirmed improved 
drought and salinity tolerance

Oh et al. (2007)

2-week-old seedlings were 
exposed to drought or salinity

Better recovery rate, enhanced tolerance 
to abiotic stress

Gao et al. (2008)

276

Integrating genomics and genetics to accelerate development of drought and salinity tolerant crops

C H A P T E R   1 8

Table 18.1  (Continued)

Gene engineered 
(source)

Promoter

Crop

Growth conditions and stage

Result

References

DREB1A (Arabidopsis)

Ubi1

Rice

Four-week-old plants were 
subjected to four days of drought 
following re-watering, greenhouse

Improved photosynthesis, and survival 
rate

Oh et al. (2005)

WXP1(Medicago 
truncatula)

35S

Alfalfa

Seedling, subjected to cycles 
drought, greenhouse

OsDBEB1A and 
OsDBEB1B (O. sativa)

35S and 
Ubi1

Rice

Seedling, grown in soil or 
hydroponic, greenhouse

Increase in cuticular wax loading on 
leaves, drought tolerance, and higher 
recovery rate

Tolerance to drought and salinity 
(survival), reduced growth under normal 
conditions

Zhang et al. (2005)

Ito et al. (2006)

Nac family

SNAC1 (O. sativa)

35S

NAC10 (O. sativa)

GOS2 and 
RCc3

Rice

Rice

Severe water stress at the 
reproductive stage in the field

4-week-old plants subjected 
to three days of drought in 
greenhouse and field experiment

22–34% more seed setting than control

Hu et al. (2006)

Enlarged roots, improved drought 
tolerance, with increased yield

Jeong et al. (2010)

OsNAC045 (O. sativa)

35S

Rice

Seedlings at three-leaf stage 
subjected to stress

Enhanced tolerance to drought and salt 
treatment

Zheng et al. (2009)

Transcription factors

OsWRKY11 (O. sativa)

HSP101

Rice

2-week old seedlings, greenhouse

Slow water loss, and reduced wilting

Wu et al. (2009)

AtNF-YBI, ZmNF-YB2 
(A. thaliana and Zea mays)

35S, 
OsActin1

Maize

Greenhouse and field evaluation

Improved photosynthesis and 
polysaccharide metabolism

Nelson et al. (2007)

Ion transporters

AtNHX1 (A. thaliana)

AgNHX1 (A. thaliana)

PgNHX1 (Pennisetum 
glaucum)

AtNHX1 (A. thaliana)

AtNHX1 (A. thaliana)

OsNHX1 (O. sativa)

AtNHX1 (A. thaliana)

SOD2 (yeast)

35S

35S

NA

35S

35S

35S

35S

35S

Tomato

Hydroponics in greenhouse

Greenhouse and hydroponics in 
growth room

Increased growth, and flower and seed 
production

Zhang and 
Blumwald (2001)

50% or 81–100% survival of seedlings

Ohta et al. (2002)

Rice

Rice

Wheat

Tall 
fescue

10-day-old seedlings, hydroponics 
in greenhouse

About 81% improvement in shoot and 
root lengths

Verma et al. (2007)

14-day-oldseedlings in 
greenhouse and field conditions

About 68% increase in shoot dry weight 
and 26% in root dry weight

Xue et al. (2004)

Different level of salinity, pots in 
growth chamber

Transgenic plants thrived well at 
200 mM NaCl

Tian et al. (2006)

Perennial 
ryegrass

2-week-old seedlings subjected to 
salt, in growth room

Transgenic plants survived at 350 mM 
NaCl when all wild-type plants died

Wu et al. (2005)

Brassica 
napus

2-week-old seedlings, watered 
with 200 mM, greenhouse

Improved growth, seed yield and oil 
quality under high salinity, salt tolerance

Zhang et al. (2001)

Rice

5-week-old seedlings subjected to 
150 and 300 mM

Higher levels of photosynthesis and root 
proton exportation capacity

Zhao et al. (2006)

(Continued)

277

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Table 18.1  (Continued)

Gene engineered 
(source)

Promoter

Crop

Growth conditions and stage

Result

References

Hormones related genes

IPT (Agrobacterium)

SARK

Tobacco

Flowering plants, greenhouse 
and field

Delayed senescence, improved 
photosynthesis and drought tolerance

Rivero et al. (2007, 
2009, 2010)

AtLOS5 (A.thaliana)

OsActin1/
HVA22P

Rice

Drought stress applied at booting 
stage in field experiment

Significantly increased the spikelet 
fertility and yield of field grown

Xiao et al. (2009)

LeNCED1

35S

Tomato

Five-leaf stage plant subjected to 
drought

Increased ABA accumulation but had no 
effect on dehydration tolerance

Thompson et al. 
(2007)

production of diverse osmolytes was tested in various plants to 
improve tolerance to abiotic stress (Table 18.1). The manipula-
tion of the mannitol level by over-expression of the mannitol-
1-phosphate dehydrogenase (mtlD) gene resulted in improved 
tolerance  to  salinity  and  drought  in  model  plants  Arabidopsis 
(Thomas  et  al.,  1995)  and  tobacco  (Karakas  et  al.,  1997).  In 
wheat, where mannitol is normally not synthesized, expression 
of  the  mtlD  (from  Escherichia  coli)  gene  also  improved  toler-
ance to water stress and salinity (Abebe et al., 2003). Another 
Arabidopsis gene encoding for a vacuolar pyrophosphatase pro-
ton pump (AVP1) was over-expressed in Arabidopsis (Gaxiola 
et  al.,  2001),  tomato  (Park  et  al.,  2005),  cotton  (Pasapula 
et  al.,  2011),  and  rice  (Zhao  et  al.,  2006),  and  induced 
improved  growth  during  drought  and  salt  stress.  Interestingly, 
the overexpressed AVP1 resulted in a more robust root system 
that  could  possibly  improve  the  plant’s  ability  to  absorb  more 
water from the soil (Pasapula et al., 2011).

Chickpea  (Cicer  arietinum)  was  transformed  with  an 
osmoregulatory  gene  P5CSF129A  (under  35S  promoter) 
encoding  the  mutagenized  Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate  syn-
thetase (P5CS) for the overproduction of proline (Bhatnagar-
Mathur  et  al.,  2009).  The  transgenic  plants  showed 
significantly higher proline accumulation; however, it resulted 
only in a modest increase in transpiration efficiency, suggesting 
that enhanced proline had little bearing on the components of 
yield in chickpea. Wheat plants over-expressing P5CS (under 
the  control  of  a  stress-induced  promoter  complex;  AIPC), 
showed accumulation of proline, which resulted in improved 
tolerance  to  water  deficiency  (Vendruscolo  et  al.,  2007). 
Likewise, transgenic rice over-expressing P5CS showed signifi-
cantly  higher  tolerance  to  salinity  and  water  stress  produced 
in terms of faster shoot and root growth (Su and Wu, 2004). 
Rice  plants  over-expressing  the  ZFP252  gene  resulted  in  an 
increased amount of free proline and soluble sugars, elevated 
the  expression  of  stress  defense  genes,  and  enhanced  toler-
ance to salt and drought stresses (Xu et al., 2008).

Glycine betaine (GB), a fully N-methyl-substituted deriva-
tive of glycine, accumulates in the chloroplasts and plastids of 
many  species  such  as  Poaceae,  Amaranthaceae,  Asteraceae, 
Malvaceae,  and  Chenopodiaceae  in  response  to  drought  and 
salinity. GB effectively stabilizes the quaternary structures of 

enzymes  and  complex  proteins,  and  protects  the  photosyn-
thetic  machineries  via  ROS  scavenging  (Chen  and  Murata, 
2008).  Transgenic  maize  expressing  betA,  encoding  a  choline 
dehydrogenase,  showed  more  GB  accumulation  under 
drought and salinity in the field (Quan et al., 2004). Drought 
stress, applied at the reproductive stage, resulted in a 10–23% 
higher yield relative to the wild-type plants. Similarly, cotton 
plants expressing betA were also more drought tolerant (Lv et 
al.,  2007).  Under  water  stress  conditions,  transgenic  cotton 
had  higher  RWC,  OA  increased  photosynthesis,  reduced  ion 
leakage,  and  lower  lipid  membrane  peroxidation  than  wild-
type  plants.  A  CMO  gene  (AhCMO)  cloned  from  Atriplex 
hortensis  was  introduced  into  cotton,  showing  enhanced 
resistance  to  salinity  stress  (Zhang  et  al.,  2009).  Transgenic 
potato  plants  (S.  tuberosum  L.)  developed  via  the  introduc-
tion  of  the  bacterial  choline  oxidase  (codA)  gene,  expressed 
under the control of an oxidative stress-inducible SWPA2 pro-
moter,  evidenced  enhanced  tolerance  to  NaCl  and  drought 
stress at the whole plant level (Ahmad et al., 2008). Recently, 
wheat plants over-expressing a BADH gene, encoding betaine 
aldehyde dehydrogenase, were shown to be more tolerant to 
drought and heat by improving the photosynthesis capacity of 
flag leafs (Wang et al., 2010).

Dehydration-responsive element

In  Arabidopsis,  a  dehydration-responsive  element  (DRE)/C-
repeat (CRT) was identified as a cis-acting element regulating 
gene expression in response to dehydration (drought, salinity, 
and  cold  stress;  Yamaguchi-Shinozaki  and  Shinozaki,  1994). 
Several  dehydration  responsive  element  binding  proteins 
(DREB)  have  been  identified.  The  over-expression  of  these 
genes  activated  the  expression  of  many  downstream  genes 
with the DRE elements in their promoters, and the resulting 
transgenic plants showed improved stress tolerance (Agarwal 
et  al.,  2006).  The  over-expression  of  ERF  genes  such  as 
HvCBF4 (from barley), TERF1 (from tomato), and HARDY, 
DREB1A  (from  A.  thaliana)  in  rice  conferred  increased  tol-
erance  to  abiotic  stresses  (Oh  et  al.,  2005,  2007;  Karaba 
et  al.,  2007;  Gao  et  al.,  2008).  Furthermore,  expression  of 

278

Integrating genomics and genetics to accelerate development of drought and salinity tolerant crops

C H A P T E R   1 8

the  rice  ERF  gene  AP37  (under  the  control  of  a  constitu-
tive  promoter)  enhanced  rice  yields  under  stress  (Oh  et  al., 
2009). Rice plants over-expressing an ethylene response factor 
(ERF), a protein TSRF1 that binds to the GCC-box, showed 
enhanced  osmotic  and  drought  tolerance  in  seedlings  (Quan 
et al., 2010). Transgenic rice lines over-expressing OsDBEB1A 
and  OsDBEB1B  under  the  control  of  a  constitutive  ubiqui-
tin  promoter  showed  more  tolerance  to  drought  and  salinity 
conditions; however, under normal conditions, the transgenic 
lines showed reduced growth (Ito et al., 2006). The DREB1 
pathway  was  also  associated  with  proline  accumulation. 
Tomato  and  rice  plants  over-expressing  the  AtDREB1B/
CBF1 or OsDBEB1B showed higher levels of proline as com-
pared  with  the  wild-type  plants  grown  under  water  stress. 
Rice plants over-expressing OsDREB1G and OsDREB2B also 
showed significantly improved tolerance to water deficit stress 
at the seedling stage (Chen et al., 2008).

NAC proteins

Several NAC, including (NAM, (no apical meristem), ATAF1-
2, and CUC2 (cup-shaped cotyledon domains, which are one 
of  the  largest  plant  transcription  factor  families;  Riechmann 
et  al.,  2000),  have  been  reported  to  be  associated  with  abi-
otic  stresses.  In  rice,  over-expression  of  a  stress  responsive 
gene  SNAC1  (STRESS-RESPONSIVE  NAC  1)  significantly 
enhanced  drought  resistance  (22–34%  increased  in  seed  set-
ting)  in  the  field  under  severe  water  stress  conditions  at  the 
reproductive  stage  (Hu  et  al.,  2006).  Over-expression  of 
OsNAC045  induced  enhanced  tolerance  to  drought  and  salt 
treatments  (Zheng,  2009).  Recently,  the  over-expression  of 
OsNAC10  in  rice,  under  the  control  of  the  constitutive  pro-
moter GOS2 and the root-specific promoter RCc3, improved 
tolerance  to  drought  and  salinity.  More  important,  the  RCc3: 
OsNAC10  plants  displayed  significantly  enhanced  drought 
tolerance at the reproductive stage, increasing grain yield (25–
42%) in the field under drought conditions (Jeong et al., 2010).

Genes for ionic balance

The accumulation of Na ions into vacuoles through the oper-
ation  of  a  vacuolar  Na/H  antiporter  provided  an  efficient 
strategy to avert the deleterious effect of Na in the cytosol 
and  maintain  osmotic  balance  by  using  Na  (and  Cl)  accu-
mulated  in  the  vacuole  to  drive  water  into  the  cells  (Apse 
et  al.,  1999;  Apse  and  Blumwald,  2002).  Transgenic  plants 
over-expressing  an  Arabidopsis  vacuolar  Na/H  antiporter, 
AtNHX1, exhibited improved salt tolerance in Brassica napus 
(Zhang  et  al.,  2001),  tomato  (Zhang  and  Blumwald,  2001), 
cotton (He et al., 2005), and wheat (Xue et al., 2004). The 
transformation  of  an  ortholog  gene  (AgNHX1)  from  halo-
phytic  plant  A.  gmelini  into  rice  improved  salt  tolerance  of 
the  transgenic  rice  (Ohta  et  al.,  2002).  Transformation  of 
another  Na/H  antiporter  family  member,  AtNHX3  (from 
A.  thaliana),  in  sugar  beet  (Beta  vulgaris  L.)  resulted  in 
increased  salt  accumulation  in  leaves,  but  not  in  the  storage 
roots, with enhanced constituent soluble sugar contents under 
salt stress condition (Liu et al., 2008).

The major focus for salt tolerance gene search specifically 
in Arabidopsis has been on ion exclusion, uptake, and seques-
tration  to  limit  ion  toxicity.  The  over-expression  of  SOS1, 
a  plasma  membrane-bound  Na/H  antiporter,  improved 
the  ability  of  the  transgenic  plants  to  grow  in  the  presence 
of  high  NaCl  concentrations  (Shi  et  al.,  2003).  The  removal 
of  sodium  from  the  xylem,  reducing  sodium  transfer  rate  to 
the  shoots,  is  mediated  by  the  HKT  gene  family  (Plett  and 
Moller, 2010). AtHKT1;1 in Arabidopsis, OsHKT1;5 in rice, 
and  HKT1;4  in  wheat  are  all  critical  in  transporting  Na 
into the root stele, decreasing Na in the shoot (Hauser and 
Horie,  2010).  One  strategy  for  improving  salinity  tolerance 
is to increase the expression of such genes to further reduce 
sodium concentrations in the xylem (Plett et al., 2010).

The introduction of genes associated with the maintenance 
of  ion  homeostasis  from  halotolerance  into  crop  plants  con-
firmed  salinity  tolerance.  The  yeast  gene  HAL1  introduced 
into  tomato  (Gisbert  et  al.,  2000),  watermelon  (Citrullus 
lanatus; Thunb.; Ellul et al., 2003, and melon (Cucumis melo 
L.; Bordas et al., 1997), confirmed a higher level of salt toler-
ance,  with  higher  cellular  K  to  Na  ratio  under  salt  stress. 
Likewise,  introducing  the  yeast  HAL2  gene  into  tomato 
resulted  in  improved  root  growth  under  NaCl  conditions, 
which contributed to improved salt tolerance (Arrillaga et al., 
1998). Over-expression of HAL3 (from Saccharomyces cerevi-
siae)  homolog  NtHAL3  in  tobacco  increased  proline  biosyn-
thesis  and  the  enhancement  of  salt  and  osmotic  tolerance  in 
cultured tobacco cells (Yonamine et al., 2004).

Genes for redox regulation

Another  physiological  and  biochemical  cellular  component 
common  to  a  suite  of  abiotic  stresses  including  drought  and 
salt  stress  is  oxidative  stress.  Oxidative  stress  involves  the 
generation of ROS during stress. The most common ROS are 
hydrogen  peroxide  (H2O2),  superoxide,  the  hydroxyl  radi-
cal,  and  the  singlet  oxygen.  ROS  are  continuously  produced 
through  cellular  metabolism  and  plant  cells,  and  are  well 
equipped  with  antioxidants  and  scavenging  enzymes  to  keep 
their  levels  low  under  normal  growth  conditions  (Jaspers 
and  Kangasjärvi,  2010).  In  rice,  transformation  of  manga-
nese  superoxide  dismutase  (MnSOD)  into  chloroplasts  from 
pea (Pisum sativum) under the control of an oxidative stress-
inducible SWPA2 promoter resulted in improved drought tol-
erance.  This  suggested  that  increased  SOD  levels  can  boost 
the ROS scavenging system in plant chloroplasts (Wang et al., 
2005).  Recently,  a  rice  gene  encoding  for  a  receptor-like 
kinase  (RLK)  was  reported  to  improve  the  drought  and 
salt  tolerance  of  transgenic  plants  over-expressing  the  RLK 
(OsSIK1;  Ouyang  et  al.,  2010).  The  transgenic  plants  had 
higher activity of the ROS scavengers, such as peroxidases and 
catalase activity during stress, indicating the ability of the rice 
plant to limit the damage induced by enhanced ROS produc-
tion. Over-expression of the Arabidopsis gene GF14, encod-
ing  a  14-3-3  protein  that  interacts  with  proteins  involved  in 
numerous metabolic processes, including antioxidant activity, 
demonstrated  a  “stay-green”  phenotype  and  improved  toler-
ance to moderate water stress in cotton (Yan et al., 2004).

279

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

More  useful  strategies  to  improve  the  antioxidant  activi-
ties  in  the  cell  are  the  transformation  of  a  pyramid  of  ROS-
scavenging enzymes, which could improve tolerance to various 
stresses.  Two  genes  (from  Suaeda  salsa)  coding  GST  (glu-
tathione  S-transferase,  EC  2.5.1.18)  and  CAT  (catalase,  EC 
1.11.1.6) were transformed under the control of a constitutive 
promoter into rice plants. Transgenic rice seedlings showed a 
marked  enhanced  tolerance  to  salinity  and  oxidative  stresses 
(Zhao  and  Zhang,  2006).  Expression  of  three  antioxidant 
enzymes,  copper  zinc  superoxide  dismutase  (CuZnSOD), 
ascorbate  peroxidase  (APX),  and  dehydroascorbate  (DHA) 
reductase (DHAR) in tobacco chloroplasts resulted in a higher 
tolerance  to  oxidative  stress  induced  by  salinity  stress  (Lee 
et  al.,  2007).  These  studies  suggested  that  the  simultaneous 
expression  of  multiple  antioxidant  enzymes  could  be  more 
effective  than  the  expression  of  single  genes  for  developing 
transgenic plants with enhanced tolerance to abiotic stresses.

Aquaporins

Aquaporins  are  considered  to  be  the  main  channels  for  the 
transport of water, as well as small neutral solutes and CO2, 
through  the  plant  cell  membrane  (Tyerman  et  al.,  2002). 
The  aquaporins  are  small,  very  hydrophobic,  intrinsic  mem-
brane  proteins.  The  regulatory  role  of  aquaporins  in  cellular 
water  transport  and  been  demonstrated  (Knepper,  1994). 
In  lowland  rice,  over-expression  of  the  aquaporin,  RWC3,  a 
member  of  the  plasma-membrane  intrinsic  protein  1  (PIP1) 
subfamily,  under  the  control  of  the  stress-inducible  SWPA2 
promoter, resulted in improvement of general water status of 
the plants under osmotic stress (Lian et al., 2004). The ben-
eficial  results  found  in  this  study  contradict  previous  studies 
in tobacco. Transgenic tobacco, constitutively over-expressing 
the Arabidopsis plasma membrane aquaporin PIP1b, showed 
higher  vigor  under  well-watered  conditions,  but  no  benefi-
cial  effect  under  salt  stress,  and  even  negative  effects  caus-
ing  fast  wilting  during  water  stress  (Aharon  et  al.,  2003).  It 
may be suggested that the gradual drought treatment applied 
by  Aharon  et  al.  (2003)  compared  with  the  osmotic  shock 
used  by  Lian  et  al.  (2004),  affected  the  results  obtained. 
Furthermore,  transgenic  rice  plants  over-expressing  barley 
HvPIP2:1  (a  plasma  membrane  aquaporin),  constitutively 
driven by the 35S-promoter, showed more sensitivity (reduc-
tion in growth rate) to salinity stress (Katsuhara et al., 2003).
Recently, tomato plants constitutively over-expressing ton-
oplast SlTIP2:2 showed increased osmotic water permeability 
of the cell and whole-plant transpiration (Sade et al., 2009). 
The  expression  of  SlTIP2:2  had  multiple  functions,  increas-
ing  transpiration  under  normal  growth  conditions,  limiting 
the reduction in transpiration under drought and salt stresses, 
and also speeding up the revival of transpiration upon recov-
ery  from  these  stresses.  Transgenic  plants  showed  significant 
increases in fruit yield, harvest index, and plant mass relative 
to the control under both normal and water-stress conditions 
(Sade et al., 2009). It was postulated that over-expression of 
the  SlTIP2:2  can  bypass  the  stress-induced  down-regulation 

of  the  endogenous  aquaporins  genes  of  the  tonoplast,  and 
thus prevent the slowdown of tonoplastic osmotic water per-
meability  (Sade  et  al.,  2009).  The  results  of  this  study  raise 
the  possibility  of  manipulating  Aquaporins  genes  to  produce 
drought- and salinity-tolerant crop-plants.

Other transcription factors

Although  multiple  transcription  factors  (TFs)  have  been  well 
characterized  in  various  plant  species,  transcriptional  repro-
gramming  under  drought  and  stress  is  not  fully  understood. 
Over-expression of the AtMYB2 gene in rice under the control 
of  an  abscisic  acid  (ABA)-inducible  promoter  conferred  salt 
stress tolerance, with higher biomass and decreased ion leakage 
(Malik and Wu, 2005). Over-expression of OsWRKY11 (encod-
ing  a  transcription  factor  comprising  a  WRKY  domain)  under 
the control of an HSP101 promoter, conferred heat and drought 
tolerance  at  the  seedling  stage  (slower  leaf-wilting  and  less-
impaired survival rate of green parts of plants; Wu et al., 2009).
Recently,  in  was  shown  that  the  constitutive  over-expres-
sion  of  ubiquitous  chaperones  (from  bacterial  origin)  in  rice 
and  maize  resulted  in  tolerance  to  various  environmental 
stresses  (Castiglioni  et  al.,  2008).  These  results  suggested 
that chaperone molecules may be good candidates for abiotic 
stress enhancement.

Hormone Balance and Abiotic Stress

Hormones play a major role in stress signaling. One of the fast 
responses  of  plants  to  soil  water  stress  is  the  accumulation 
of ABA in the roots (Thompson et al., 2007), which is trans-
ported through the xylem to the shoot (Wilkinson and Davies, 
2010) causing stomatal closure to reduce water loss via tran-
spiration  (Schroeder  et  al.,  2001)  and  eventually  restricting 
cellular growth. ABA can also be synthesized in leaf cells and 
transported through the plant (Wilkinson and Davies, 2010). 
In Arabidopsis, many genes in the ABA metabolism have been 
characterized,  and  those  for  ABA  perception  and  the  down-
stream  signal  relay  are  described  (reviewed  by  Huang  et  al., 
2008;  Cutler  et  al.,  2010).  However,  in  crop  plants,  only 
one  ABA-related  gene  (LOS5/ABA3,  a  key  enzyme  in  the 
last  step  of  ABA  biosynthesis)  has  been  manipulated  in  rice 
with  enhanced  drought  tolerance  (Xiao  et  al.,  2009).  Over-
expression  of  LOS5  under  the  control  of  a  constitutive  or 
drought-inducible  promoter  significantly  increased  the  spike-
let  fertility  and  yield  of  field  grown  transgenic  rice  plants 
(Xiao et al., 2009). In tomato, over-expression of LeNCED1 
(drought-inducible  and  a  rate-limiting  enzyme  for  ABA  bio-
synthesis) resulted in increased ABA accumulation but had no 
effect on dehydration tolerance (Thompson et al., 2007).

Cytokinins  (CK)  have  been  linked  to  a  variety  of  abiotic 
stresses  (Hare  et  al.,  1997).  In  Arabidopsis,  examination  of 
public microarray expression data revealed many genes encod-
ing proteins in the CK signaling pathway that were differentially 
affected by various abiotic stresses (reviewed by Argueso et al., 

280

Integrating genomics and genetics to accelerate development of drought and salinity tolerant crops

C H A P T E R   1 8

2009). CK is an antagonist to ABA, and the exposure of plants 
to drought results in a decreased level of CK. The elevated CK 
level could promote survival under water-stress conditions and 
inhibit leaf senescence and increased levels of proline (Alvarez 
et al., 2008). Manipulation of CK was found to be efficient in 
delaying senescence by spraying (Gan and Amasino, 1997), and 
more recently in transgenic plants. Isopentenyltransferase (IPT, 
rate-limiting  step  in  CK  biosynthesis)  has  been  widely  engi-
neered in several plant species (Ma, 2008). However, drought 
tolerance  varied  with  the  type  of  promoter  used  to  drive  IPT 
expression.  Transgenic  tobacco  (Nicotiana  tabacum)  express-
ing the IPT gene under control of a drought-induced promoter 
(senescence  associated  receptor  kinase;  SARK)  resulted  in 
increased drought tolerance, photosynthetic capacity, and yield 
(Rivero et al., 2007, 2009, 2010).

Likewise,  transgenic  rice  plants  expressing  PSARK::IPT 
showed  improved  drought  tolerance  with  enhanced  grain 
yield (Peleg et al., 2011).

Transgenic  Cassava  (Manihot  esculenta  Crantz)  expressing 
IPT  gene  under  the  control  of  the  senescence  induced  pro-
moter, SAG12, were tested for drought tolerance under field 
conditions  (Zhang  et  al.,  2010).  Under  drought  conditions, 
the transgenic cassava plants were found to be more tolerant 
thean the wild-type, due to prohibition of leaf abscission and 
fast recovery from stress. Creeping bentgrass (Agrostis stolon-
ifera) expressing PSAG12::IPT was tested in a hydroponic sys-
tem using different levels of osmotic stress (PEG) (Merewitz 
et  al.,  2011).  The  transgenic  plants  were  able  to  maintain 
higher  osmotic  adjustment,  chlorophyll  content,  water-use 
efficiency,  and  greater  root  viability  under  osmotic  stress 
compared with the wild-type plants (Merewitz et al., 2011). 
However, the use of PEG to stimulate osmotic stress is artifi-
cial, and not representative of the multi-dimensional response 
of plants to water-deficit under natural conditions.

Jasmonic  acid  (JA)  is  involved  in  plant  development  and 
the  defense  response.  Transgenic  rice  plants  over-expressing 
the Arabidopsis JA carboxyl methyltransferase gene (AtJMT) 
under the Ubi1 promoter showed an increase in JA levels in 
panicles  (Kim  et  al.,  2009).  Plants  were  grown  in  a  green-
house, and before panicle ignition were subjected to 2 weeks 
of  drought.  The  Ubi1::AtJMT  plants  resulted  in  significant 
grain yield reduction, due to a lower number of spikelets and 
lower filling rates than wild-type plants (Kim et al., 2009).

Interactions  and  regulation  of  various  hormone-regulated 
biosynthetic  pathways  (see  Nemhauser  et  al.,  2006)  during 
water stress play important roles in abiotic stress adaptation. 
The homeostatic regulation of phytohormones could play sig-
nificant  roles  in  the  regulation  of  source/sink  relationships, 
and its manipulation could provide a significant avenue for the 
development of abiotic stress tolerance in plants (reviewed by 
Peleg and Blumwald, 2011).

Challenges and Prospects

New  technologies  are  providing  opportunities  to  address  the 
challenging problem of maintaining high-yield crop production 

under  stressful  and  changing  climates.  The  information  
provided  by  high-resolution  transcript  profiling,  the  identi-
fication  of  large-scale  specific  protein  networks,  and  their 
association  with  the  plant  responses  to  environmental  
perturbations  are  allowing  the  application  of  a  systems-level 
approach  to  uncover  the  bases  of  plant  responses  to  envi-
ronmental  changes.  Pursuing  a  systems-level  approach  is  of  
paramount  importance,  because  crops  of  the  future  are  
likely  to  be  stacked  with  multiple  traits  (water  deficit, 
nitrogen  use  efficiency,  pathogen  challenges,  etc.).  A  sys-
tems-level  approach  will  contribute  to  the  development 
of  strategies  for  the  combination  of  an  array  of  traits  with-
out  affecting  the  crop  performance  in  the  absence  of  stress. 
Maintaining  normal  crop  performance  when  the  growth 
conditions  are  favorable  is  likely  to  be  an  important  factor 
because of the weather fluctuations predicted due to climate  
changes.

The  manipulation  of  stress  signaling  components  seems 
to be the most promising approach, as it has the potential to 
control a board range of events. More specific promoters are 
needed to improve the expression of genes of interest under 
the  desirable  environmental  conditions  and/or  growth  phase. 
This  is  particularly  important  for  salt  tolerance  as  regulation 
of  ion  homeostasis  is  highly  tissue  specific  (e.g.,  xylem  load-
ing, ion exclusion in the roots, etc.). The common constitutive 
promoters  are  not  always  efficient,  and  can  have  a  negative 
effect on plant growth and development.

Numerous  genes  related  to  plant  response  to  abiotic  
stress  have  been  identified  and  characterized  (Wang  et  al., 
2003;  Araus  et  al.,  2008).  However,  the  vast  majority  of 
these  studies  were  conducted  on  the  model  plant  A.  thal-
iana (e.g., Masle et al., 2005; Seki et al., 2009) under labora-
tory  conditions  (i.e.  dehydration),  and  only  a  few  have  been 
evaluated  under  field  environmental  conditions.  Moreover, 
most  of  these  studies  showed  stress  tolerance  and/or  
survival,  but  not  the  effects  of  the  different  stress  condi-
tions  on  plant  productivity  (Parry  et  al.,  2005).  Thus,  more 
emphasis should be given to the study of the response of crop 
plants to water deficiency at the reproductive stage and under  
field  conditions.  The  new  powerful  molecular  and  genetic 
tools,  functional  genomics,  metabolomics,  and  proteomics 
will  contribute  to  shed  light  on  key  regulators  of  the  plant 
response  to  stresses.  The  use  of  the  indentified  candidate 
genes  as  targets  for  genetic  engineering  will  accelerate  the 
developing of crop plants with improved stress tolerance and 
increase yields.

Acknowledgments

This study was supported by grants from NSF-IOS-0802112, 
CGIAR  GCP#3008.03,  UC  Discovery  #bio06-10627,  and 
the  Will  W.  Lester  Endowment  of  University  of  California. 
Z.P.  was  supported  by  Vaadia-BARD  postdoctoral  Fellowship 
Award No. FI-419-08 from the United States-Israel Binational 
Agricultural Research and Development Fund (BARD).

281

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

References

Abebe, T., Guenzi, A. C., Martin, B., & 
Cushman, J. C. (2003). Tolerance of 
mannitol-accumulating transgenic wheat to 
water stress and salinity. Plant Physiology, 
131, 1748–1755.

Agarwal, P., Agarwal, P., Reddy, M., & Sopory, S. 

(2006). Role of DREB transcription factors 
in abiotic and biotic stress tolerance in 
plants. Plant Cell Reports, 25, 1263–1274.
Aharon, R., Shahak, Y., Wininger, S., Bendov, 
R., Kapulnik, Y., & Galili, G. (2003). Over-
expression of a plasma membrane aquaporin 
in transgenic tobacco improves plant vigor 
under favorable growth conditions but not 
under drought or salt stress. Plant Cell, 15, 
439–447.

Ahmad, R., Kim, M., Back, K.-H., Kim, H.-S.,  

Lee, H.-S., Kwon, S.-Y., et al. (2008). 
Stress-induced expression of choline 
oxidase in potato plant chloroplasts confers 
enhanced tolerance to oxidative, salt, and 
drought stresses. Plant Cell Reports, 27, 
687–698.

Alvarez, S., Marsh, E. L., Schroeder, S. G., & 

Schachtman, D. P. (2008). Metabolomic and 
proteomic changes in the xylem sap of maize 
under drought. Plant, Cell & Environment, 
31, 325–340.

Apse, M. P., Aharon, G. S., Snedden, W. A., 

& Blumwald, E. (1999). Salt tolerance 
conferred by overexpression of a vacuolar 
Na/H antiport in Arabidopsis. Science, 
285, 1256–1258.

Apse, M. P., & Blumwald, E. (2002). 

Engineering salt tolerance in plants. Current 
Opinion in Biotechnology, 13, 146–150.

Araus, J. L., Slafer, G. A., Royo, C., & Serret, 
M. D. (2008). Breeding for yield potential 
and stress adaptation in cereals. Critical 
Reviews in Plant Sciences, 27, 377–412.
Argueso, C. T., Ferreira, F. J., & Kieber, J. 

J. (2009). Environmental perception 
avenues: The interaction of cytokinin and 
environmental response pathways. Plant, 
Cell & Environment, 32, 1147–1160.

Arrillaga, I., Gil-Mascarell, R., Gisbert, C., 
Sales, E., Montesinos, C., Serrano, R.,  
et al. (1998). Expression of the yeast HAL2 
gene in tomato increases the in vitro salt 
tolerance of transgenic progenies. Plant 
Science, 136, 219–226.

Babu, R. C., Nguyen, B. D., Chamarerk, 

V., Shanmugasundaram, P., Chezhian, P., 
Jeyaprakash, P., et al. (2003). Genetic 
analysis of drought resistance in rice by 
molecular markers: Association between 
secondary traits and field performance. Crop 
Science, 43, 1457–1469.

Bao, A.-K., Wang, S.-M., Wu, G.-Q., Xi, J.-J.,  

Zhang, J.-L., & Wang, C.-M. (2009). 
Overexpression of the Arabidopsis H-PPase 
enhanced resistance to salt and drought 
stress in transgenic alfalfa (Medicago sativa 
L.). Plant Science, 176, 232–240.

Bartels, D., & Sunkar, R. (2005). Drought and 
salt tolerance in plants. Critical Reviews in 
Plant Sciences, 24, 23–58.

Bayuelo-Jimenez, J. S., Debouck, D. G., & 
Lynch, J. P. (2002). Salinity tolerance in 
Phaseolus species during early vegetative 
growth. Crop Science, 42, 2184–2192.

Bhatnagar-Mathur, P., Vadez, V., Jyostna Devi, 

M., Lavanya, M., Vani, G., & Sharma, K. 
(2009). Genetic engineering of chickpea  
(Cicer arietinum L.) with the P5CSF129A 
gene for osmoregulation with implications 
on drought tolerance. Molecular Breeding, 
23, 591–606.

Bohnert, H. J., Gong, Q., Li, P., & Ma, S. 

(2006). Unraveling abiotic stress tolerance 
mechanisms – getting genomics going. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 9, 
180–188.

Bohnert, H. J., Nelson, D. E., & Jensen, R. 

G. (1995). Adaptations to environmental 
stresses. Plant Cell, 7, 1099–1111.

Bordas, M., Montesinos, C., Dabauza, M., 

Salvador, A., Roig, L. A., Serrano, R., et al. 
(1997). Transfer of the yeast salt tolerance 
gene HAL1 to Cucumis melo L. cultivars 
and in vitro evaluation of salt tolerance. 
Transgenic Research, 6, 41–50.

Boyer, J. S. (1982). Plant productivity and 

environment. Science, 218, 443–448.

Bray, E. A. (1993). Molecular responses to 

water deficit. Plant Physiology, 103, 1035–
1040.

Bray, E. A. (1997). Plant responses to water 
deficit. Trends in Plant Science, 2, 48–54.
Bruce, W. B., Edmeades, G. O., & Barker, T. 

C. (2002). Molecular and physiological 
approaches to maize improvement for 
drought tolerance. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 53, 13–25.

Campos, H., Cooper, M., Habben, J. E., 

Edmeades, G. O., & Schussler, J. R. (2004). 
Improving drought tolerance in maize: A 
view from industry. Field Crops Research, 
90, 19–34.

Cassman, K. G. (1999). Ecological 

intensification of cereal production systems: 
Yield potential, soil quality, and precision 
agriculture. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 96, 5952–5959.

Castiglioni, P., Warner, D., Bensen, R. J., 

Anstrom, D. C., Harrison, J., Stoecker,  
M., et al. (2008). Bacterial RNA chaperones 
confer abiotic stress tolerance in plants and 
improved grain yield in maize under water-
limited conditions. Plant Physiology, 147, 
446–455.

Cattivelli, L., Rizza, F., Badeck, F.-W., 

Mazzucotelli, E., Mastrangelo, A. M., 
Francia, E., et al. (2008). Drought tolerance 
improvement in crop plants: An integrated 
view from breeding to genomics. Field Crops 
Research, 105, 1–14.

Barnabas, B., Jager, K., & Feher, A. (2008). 
The effect of drought and heat stress on 
reproductive processes in cereals. Plant, Cell 
& Environment, 31, 11–38.

Chaves, M. M., Maroco, J. P., & Pereira, J. S. 
(2003). Understanding plant responses to 
drought – from genes to the whole plant. 
Functional Plant Biology, 30, 239–264.

282

Chen, J.-Q., Meng, X.-P., Zhang, Y., Xia, M., 
& Wang, X.-P. (2008). Over-expression of 
OsDREB genes lead to enhanced drought 
tolerance in rice. Biotechnology Letters, 30, 
2191–2198.

Chen, T. H. H., & Murata, N. (2008) 

Glycinebetaine: An effective protectant 
against abiotic stress in plants, 13, 499–505.

Chimenti, C. A., Pearson, J., & Hall, A. J. 
(2002). Osmotic adjustment and yield 
maintenance under drought in sunflower. 
Field Crops Research, 75, 235–246.

Collard, B. C. Y., & Mackill, D. J. (2008). 

Marker-assisted selection: An approach for 
precision plant breeding in the twenty-first 
century. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 363, 
557–572.

Collins, N. C., Tardieu, F., & Tuberosa, R. 
(2008). Quantitative trait loci and crop 
performance under abiotic stress: Where do 
we stand? Plant Physiology, 147, 469–486.

Condon, A. G., & Hall, A. E. (1997). 

Adaptation to diverse environments: 
Genotypic variation in water-use efficiency 
within crop species. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press.

Condon, A. G., Richards, R. A., Rebetzke, 

G. J., & Farquhar, G. D. (2004). Breeding 
for high water-use efficiency. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 55, 2447–2460.
Cowan, I. R. (1986). Economics of carbon 

fixation in higher plants. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Cutler, S. R., Rodriguez, P. L., Finkelstein, R. 
R., & Abrams, S. R. (2010). Abscisic acid: 
Emergence of a core signaling network. 
Annual Review of Plant Biology, 61.

Dehan, K., & Tal, M. (1978). Salt tolerance in 
the wild relatives of the cultivated tomato: 
Responses of Solanum pennellii to high 
salinity. Irrigation Science, 1, 71–76.

Duvick, D. N. (2001). Biotechnology in the 

1930s: The development of hybrid maize. 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 2, 69–74.

Ellul, P., Ríos, G., Atarés, A., Roig, L. A., 
Serrano, R., & Moreno, V. (2003). The 
expression of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
HAL1 gene increases salt tolerance in 
transgenic watermelon [Citrullus lanatus 
(Thunb.) Matsun. & Nakai.]. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 107, 462–469.

Evenson, R. E., & Gollin, D. (2003). Assessing 

the impact of the Green Revolution, 1960 to 
2000. Science, 300, 758–762.

Farquhar, G. D., O'Leary, M. H., & Berry, J. A. 
(1982). On the relationship between carbon 
isotope discrimination and the intercellular 
carbon dioxide concentration in leaves. 
Australian Journal of Plant Physiology, 9, 
121–137.

Flowers, T. J. (2004). Improving crop salt 

tolerance. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
55, 307–319.

Gan, S., & Amasino, R. M. (1997). Making 
sense of senescence. Molecular genetic 
regulation and manipulation of leaf 
senescence. Plant Physiology, 113, 313–319.

Integrating genomics and genetics to accelerate development of drought and salinity tolerant crops

C H A P T E R   1 8

Gao, S., Zhang, H., Tian, Y., Li, F., Zhang, 
Z., Lu, X., et al. (2008). Expression of 
TERF1 in rice regulates expression of stress-
responsive genes and enhances tolerance to 
drought and high-salinity. Plant Cell Reports, 
27, 1787–1795.

Garg, A. K., Kim, J.-K., Owens, T. G., Ranwala, 

A. P., Choi, Y. D., Kochian, L. V., et al. 
(2002). Trehalose accumulation in rice 
plants confers high tolerance levels to 
different abiotic stresses. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 99, 15898–15903.

Gaxiola, R. A., Li, J., Undurraga, S., Dang, L. 
M., Allen, G. J., Alper, S. L., et al. (2001). 
Drought- and salt-tolerant plants result from 
overexpression of the AVP1 H-pump. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 
11444–11449.

Geerts, S., & Raes, D. (2009). Deficit irrigation 

as an on-farm strategy to maximize crop 
water productivity in dry areas. Agricultural 
Water Management, 96, 1275–1284.

Gisbert, C., Rus, A. M., Bolarin, M. C., Lopez-
Coronado, J. M., Arrillaga, I., Montesinos, 
C., et al. (2000). The yeast HAL1 gene 
improves salt tolerance of transgenic tomato. 
Plant Physiology, 123, 393–402.

Godfray, H. C. J., Beddington, J. R., Crute, I. 
R., Haddad, L., Lawrence, D., Muir, J. F., 
et al. (2010). Food security: The challenge 
of feeding 9 billion people. Science, 327, 
812–818.

Gur, A., & Zamir, D. (2004). Unused natural 

variation can lift yield barriers in plant 
breeding. PLoS Biology, 2, e245.

Hamdy, A., Ragab, R., & Scarascia-Mugnozza, E. 

(2003). Coping with water scarcity: Water 
saving and increasing water productivity. 
Irrigation and Drainage, 52, 3–20.

Hare, P. D., Cress, W. A., & van Staden, J. 

(1997). The involvement of cytokinins in 
plant responses to environmental stress. 
Plant Growth Regulation, 23, 79–103.

Hauser, F., & Horie, T. (2010). A conserved 

primary salt tolerance mechanism mediated 
by HKT transporters: A mechanism for 
sodium exclusion and maintenance of high 
K/Na ratio in leaves during salinity stress. 
Plant, Cell & Environment, 33, 552–565.

He, C., Yan, J., Shen, G., Fu, L., Holaday, 

A. S., Auld, D., et al. (2005). Expression 
of an Arabidopsis vacuolar sodium/
proton antiporter gene in cotton improves 
photosynthetic performance under salt 
conditions and increases fiber yield in the field. 
Plant and Cell Physiology, 46, 1848–1854.

Hirayama, T., & Shinozaki, K. (2010). Research 
on plant abiotic stress responses in the post-
genome era: Past, present and future. The 
Plant Journal, 61, 1041–1052.

Hu, H., Dai, M., Yao, J., Xiao, B., Li, X.,  

Zhang, Q., et al. (2006). Overexpressing a 
NAM, ATAF, and CUC (NAC) transcription 
factor enhances drought resistance and salt 
tolerance in rice. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 103, 12987–12992.
Huang, D., Wu, W., Abrams, S. R., & Cutler, 
A. J. (2008). The relationship of drought-
related gene expression in Arabidopsis 
thaliana to hormonal and environmental 

factors. Journal of Experimental Botany, 59, 
2991–3007.

Huang, X.-Y., Chao, D.-Y., Gao, J.-P., Zhu, 
M.-Z., Shi, M., & Lin, H.-X. (2009). A 
previously unknown zinc finger protein, 
DST, regulates drought and salt tolerance in 
rice via stomatal aperture control. Genes & 
Development, 23, 1805–1817.

Ito, Y., Katsura, K., Maruyama, K., Taji, T., 
Kobayashi, M., Seki, M., et al. (2006). 
Functional analysis of rice DREB1/CBF-
type transcription factors involved in cold-
responsive gene expression in transgenic rice. 
Plant and Cell Physiology, 47, 141–153.

Jaspers, P., & Kangasjärvi, J. (2010). Reactive 
oxygen species in abiotic stress signaling. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 138, 405–413.

Jeong, J. S., Kim, Y. S., Baek, K. H., Jung, H.,  

Ha, S.-H., Do Choi, Y., et al. (2010). 
Root-specific expression of OsNAC10 
improves drought tolerance and grain yield 
in rice under field drought conditions. Plant 
Physiology, 153, 185–197.

Juenger, T. E., Mckay, J. K., Hausmann, N.,  

Keurentjes, J. J. B., Sen, S., Stowe, 
K. A., et al. (2005). Identification and 
characterization of QTL underlying 
whole-plant physiology in Arabidopsis 
thaliana: δ13C, stomatal conductance 
and transpiration efficiency. Plant, Cell & 
Environment, 28, 697–708.

Karaba, A., Dixit, S., Greco, R., Aharoni, A., 

Trijatmiko, K. R., Marsch-Martinez, N., 
et al. (2007). Improvement of water use 
efficiency in rice by expression of HARDY, 
an Arabidopsis drought and salt tolerance 
gene. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 104, 15270–15275.

Karakas, B., Ozias-Akins, P., Stushnoff, C., 
Suefferheld, M., & Rieger, M. (1997). 
Salinity and drought tolerance of mannitol-
accumulating transgenic tobacco. Plant, Cell 
and Environment, 20, 609–616.

Katsuhara, M., Koshio, K., Shibasaka, M., 
Hayashi, Y., Hayakawa, T., & Kasamo, 
K. (2003). Over-expression of a barley 
aquaporin increased the shoot/root ratio 
and raised salt sensitivity in transgenic 
rice plants. Plant & Cell Physiology, 44, 
1378–1383.

Kim, E. H., Kim, Y. S., Park, S.-H., Koo, Y. J., 
Choi, Y. D., & Chung, Y.-Y., et al. (2009). 
Methyl jasmonate reduces grain yield by 
mediating stress signals to alter spikelet 
development in rice. Plant Physiology, 149, 
1751–1760.

Kishor, P., Hong, Z., Miao, G. H., Hu, C., 
& Verma, D. (1995). Overexpression of 
D1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase 
increases proline production and confers 
osmotolerance in transgenic plants. Plant 
Physiology, 108, 1387–1394.

Klein, J. D., Mufradi, I., Cohen, S., Hebbe, 

Y., Asido, S., Dolgin, B., et al. (2002). 
Establishment of wheat seedlings after 
early sowing and germination in an arid 
Mediterranean environment. Agronomy 
Journal, 94, 585–593.

Knepper, M. A. (1994). The aquaporin family 

of molecular water channels. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 91, 6255–6258.

Lee, Y.-P., Kim, S.-H., Bang, J.-W., Lee, H.-S.,  

Kwak, S.-S., & Kwon, S.-Y. (2007). 
Enhanced tolerance to oxidative stress in 
transgenic tobacco plants expressing three 
antioxidant enzymes in chloroplasts. Plant 
Cell Reports, 26, 591–598.

Levitt, J. (1972). Responses of plant to 

environmental stress. New York: Academic 
Press.

Lian, H.-L., Yu, X., Ye, Q., Ding, X.-S., 

Kitagawa, Y., & Kwak, S.-S., et al. (2004). 
The role of aquaporin RWC3 in drought 
avoidance in rice. Plant & Cell Physiology, 
45, 481–489.

Lin, H. X., Zhu, M. Z., Yano, M., Gao, J. 

P., Liang, Z. W., Su, W. A., et al. (2004). 
QTLs for Na and K uptake of the shoots 
and roots controlling rice salt tolerance. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 108, 
253–260.

Liu, H., Wang, Q., Yu, M., Zhang, Y., Wu, Y., & 

Zhang, H. (2008). Transgenic salt-tolerant 
sugar beet (Beta vulgaris L.) constitutively 
expressing an Arabidopsis thaliana vacuolar 
Na/H antiporter gene, AtNHX3, 
accumulates more soluble sugar but less salt 
in storage roots. Plant, Cell & Environment, 
31, 1325–1334.

Liu, L., Lafitte, R., & Guan, D. (2004). Wild 

Oryza species as potential sources of 
drought-adaptive traits. Euphytica, 138, 
149–161.

Ludlow, M. M., & Muchow, R. C. (1990). A 
critical evaluation of traits for improving 
crop yields in water-limited environments. 
In N. C. Brady (Ed.), Advances in agronomy 
(pp. 107–153). San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press.

Lukens, L. N., & Zhan, S. (2007). The plant 

genome's methylation status and response to 
stress: Implications for plant improvement. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 10, 
317–322.

Lv, S., Yang, A., Zhang, K., Wang, L., & Zhang, 

J. (2007). Increase of glycinebetaine 
synthesis improves drought tolerance in 
cotton. Molecular Breeding, 20, 233–248.

Ma, Q.-H. (2008). Genetic engineering 

of cytokinins and their application 
to agriculture. Critical Reviews in 
Biotechnology, 28, 213–232.

Malik, V., & Wu, R. (2005). Transcription factor 

AtMyb2 increased salt-stress tolerance 
in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Rice Genetics 
Newsletter, 22, 63.

Masle, J., Gilmore, S. R., & Farquhar, G. D. 

(2005). The ERECTA gene regulates plant 
transpiration efficiency in Arabidopsis. 
Nature, 436, 866–870.

McCouch, S. (2004). Diversifying selection in 

plant breeding. PLoS Biology, 2, e347.

Merewitz, E. B., Gianfagna, T., & Huang, B. 

(2011). Photosynthesis, water use, and 
root viability under water stress as affected 
by expression of SAG12-ipt controlling 
cytokinin synthesis in Agrostis stolonifera. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 62, 383–
395.

Mimura, T., Kura-Hotta, M., Tsujimura, T., 

Ohnishi, M., Miura, M., Okazaki, Y., et al. 
(2003). Rapid increase of vacuolar volume in 
response to salt stress. Planta, 216, 397–402.

283

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Minoia, S., Petrozza, A., D’Onofrio, O., Piron, 

F., Mosca, G., Sozio, G., et al. (2010). A 
new mutant genetic resource for tomato 
crop improvement by TILLING technology. 
BMC Research Notes, 3, 69.

Mittler, R., & Blumwald, E. (2010). Genetic 

engineering for modern agriculture: 
Challenges and perspectives. Annual Review 
of Plant Biology, 61, 443–462.

Mizrahi, Y., Taleisnik, E., Kagan-Zur, V., Zohar, 

Y., Offenbach, R., Matan, E., et al.  
(1988). A saline irrigation regime for 
improving tomato fruit quality without 
reducing yield. Journal of American Society 
Horticultural Science, 113, 202–205.

Moinuddin, , & Khanna-Chopra, R. (2004). 

Osmotic adjustment in chickpea in relation 
to seed yield and yield parameters. Crop 
Science, 44, 449–455.

Mooney, H. A., Pearcy, R. W., & Ehleringer, J. 
(1987). Plant physiological ecology today. 
BioScience, 37, 18–20.

Morgan, J. (1983). Osmoregulation as a 

selection criterion for drought tolerance in 
wheat. Australian Journal of Agricultural 
Research, 34, 607–614.

Morgan, J. M. (1984). Osmoregulation and 

water stress in higher plants. Annual Review 
of Plant Physiology, 35, 299–319.

Munns, R. (2002). Comparative physiology 

of salt and water stress. Plant, Cell & 
Environment, 25, 239–250.

Munns, R., & Tester, M. (2008). Mechanisms 

of salinity tolerance. Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 59, 651–681.

Murchie, E. H., Pinto, M., & Horton, P. (2009). 

Agriculture and the new challenges for 
photosynthesis research. New Phytologist, 
181, 532–552.

Nelson, D. E., Repetti, P. P., Adams, T. R., 

Creelman, R. A., Wu, J., Warner, D. C.,  
et al. (2007). Plant nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) 
B subunits confer drought tolerance and lead 
to improved corn yields on water-limited 
acres. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 104, 16450–16455.

Nemhauser, J. L., Hong, F., & Chory, J. (2006). 

Different plant hormones regulate similar 
processes through largely nonoverlapping 
transcriptional responses. Cell, 126, 467–
475.

Nevo, E., Gorham, J., & Beiles, A. (1992). 
Variation for 22Na uptake in wild emmer 
wheat, Triticum dicoccoides in Israel: Salt 
tolerance resources for wheat improvement. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 43, 511–
518.

Nilson, S. E., & Assmann, S. M. (2010). The 

a-subunit of the Arabidopsis heterotrimeric 
G protein, GPA1, is a regulator of 
transpiration efficiency. Plant Physiology, 
152, 2067–2077.

Oh, S.-J., Kim, Y. S., Kwon, C.-W., Park, 

H. K., Jeong, J. S., & Kim, J.-K. (2009). 
Overexpression of the transcription factor 
AP37 in rice improves grain yield under 
drought conditions. Plant Physiology, 150, 
1368–1379.

Oh, S.-J., Kwon, C.-W., Choi, D.-W., Song,  

S. I., & Kim, J.-K. (2007). Expression 
of barley HvCBF4 enhances tolerance 

284

to abiotic stress in transgenic rice. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 5, 646–656.

Oh, S.-J., Song, S. I., Kim, Y. S., Jang, H.-J.,  

Kim, S. Y., Kim, M., et al. (2005). 
Arabidopsis CBF3/DREB1A and ABF3 
in transgenic rice increased tolerance to 
abiotic stress without stunting growth. Plant 
Physiology, 138, 341–351.

Ohta, M., Hayashi, Y., Nakashima, A., 

Hamada, A., Tanaka, A., Nakamura, T., 
et al. (2002). Introduction of a Na/
H antiporter gene from Atriplex gmelini 
confers salt tolerance to rice. FEBS Letters, 
532, 279–282.

Ouyang, S.-Q., Liu, Y.-F., Liu, P., Lei, G., He, 

S.-J., Ma, B., et al. (2010). Receptor-like 
kinase OsSIK1 improves drought and salt 
stress tolerance in rice Oryza sativa plants. 
The Plant Journal, 62, 316–329.

Pardo, J. M. (2010). Biotechnology of water and 
salinity stress tolerance. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 21, 185–196.

Park, S., Li, J., Pittman, J. K., Berkowitz, G. A., 

Yang, H., Undurraga, S., et al. (2005). Up-
regulation of a H-pyrophosphatase (H-
PPase) as a strategy to engineer drought-
resistant crop plants. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 102, 18830–18835.
Parry, M. A. J., Flexas, J., & Medrano, H. 

(2005). Prospects for crop production under 
drought: Research priorities and future 
directions. Annals of Applied Biology, 147, 
211–226.

Pasapula, V., Shen, G., Kuppu, S., Paez-Valencia, 

J., Mendoza, M., Hou, P., et al. (2011) 
Expression of an Arabidopsis vacuolar H- 
pyrophosphatase gene (AVP1) in cotton 
improves drought- and salt tolerance and 
increases fibre yield in the field conditions, 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 9, 88–9.

Peleg, Z., Fahima, T., Abbo, S., Krugman, T., 
Nevo, E., Yakir, D., et al. (2005). Genetic 
diversity for drought resistance in wild 
emmer wheat and its ecogeographical 
associations. Plant, Cell & Environment, 28, 
176–191.

Peleg, Z., Fahima, T., Krugman, T., Abbo, 

S., Yakir, D., Korol, A. B., et al. (2009). 
Genomic dissection of drought resistance 
in durum wheat  wild emmer wheat 
recombinant inbreed line population. Plant, 
Cell & Environment, 32, 758–779.

Peleg, Z., Saranga, Y., Krugman, T., Abbo, 

S., Nevo, E., & Fahima, T. (2008). Allelic 
diversity associated with aridity gradient in 
wild emmer wheat populations. Plant, Cell 
& Environment, 31, 39–49.

Peleg, Z., & Blumwald, E. (2011). Hormone 

balance and abiotic stress tolerance in crop 
plants. Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 14, 
290–295.

Peleg, Z., Reguera, M., Tumimbang, E., Walia, 

H., & Blumwald, E. (2011). Cytokinin 
mediated source-sink modifications improve 
drought tolerance and increase grain yield in 
rice under water stress. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, (DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7652.2010.
00584.x). In press.

Peterson, G. A., & Westfall, D. G. (2004). 

Managing precipitation use in sustainable 

dryland agroecosystems. Annals of Applied 
Biology, 144, 127–138.

Plett, D., Safwat, G., Gilliham, M., Skrumsager 
Møller, I., Roy, S., Shirley, N., et al. (2010). 
Improved salinity tolerance of rice through 
cell type-specific expression of AtHKT1;1. 
PLoS ONE, 5, e12571.

Plett, D. C., & Moller, I. S. (2010). Na 

transport in glycophytic plants: What we 
know and would like to know. Plant, Cell & 
Environment, 33, 612–626.

Price, A. H., Cairns, J. E., Horton, P., Jones, H. 
G., & Griffiths, H. (2002). Linking drought-
resistance mechanisms to drought avoidance 
in upland rice using a QTL approach: 
Progress and new opportunities to integrate 
stomatal and mesophyll responses. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 53, 989–1004.

Price, A. H., & Tomos, A. D. (1997). Genetic 

dissection of root growth in rice (Oryza 
sativa L.). II: Mapping quantitative trait loci 
using molecular markers. Theoretical and 
Applied genetics, 95, 143–152.

Quan, R., Hu, S., Zhang, Z., Zhang, H., Zhang, 
Z., & Huang, R. (2010). Overexpression of 
an ERF transcription factor TSRF1 improves 
rice drought tolerance. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 8, 476–488.

Quan, R., Shang, M., Zhang, H., Zhao, Y., & 

Zhang, J. (2004). Engineering of enhanced 
glycine betaine synthesis improves drought 
tolerance in maize. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 2, 477–486.

Rebetzke, G. J., Condon, A. G., Richards, R. 

A., & Farquhar, G. D. (2002). Selection 
for reduced carbon isotope discrimination 
increases aerial biomass and grain yield 
of rainfed bread wheat. Crop Science, 42, 
739–745.

Richards, L. A. (1954). Diagnosis and 

improvements of saline and alkali soils 
(Vol. 60). Salinity Laboratory DA: US 
Department of Agriculture, U.S.

Riechmann, J. L., Heard, J., Martin, G., 
Reuber, L., Jiang, C., Keddie, J., et al. 
(2000). Arabidopsis transcription factors: 
Genome-wide comparative analysis among 
eukaryotes. Science, 290, 2105–2110.
Rivero, R. M., Kojima, M., Gepstein, A., 

Sakakibara, H., Mittler, R., Gepstein, S.,  
et al. (2007). Delayed leaf senescence 
induces extreme drought tolerance in a 
flowering plant. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 104, 19631–19636.

Rivero, R. M., Shulaev, V., & Blumwald, 

E. (2009). Cytokinin-dependent 
photorespiration and the protection of 
photosynthesis during water deficit. Plant 
Physiology, 150, 1530–1540.

Rivero, R. M., Gimeno, J., Van Deynze, 

A., Walia, H., & Blumwald, E. (2010). 
Enhanced cytokinin synthesis in tobacco 
plants expressing PSARK::IPT prevents the 
degradation of photosynthetic protein 
complexes during drought. Plant and Cell 
Physiology, 51, 1929–1941.

Ronin, Y. I., Korol, A. B., & Nevo, E. (1999). 
Single- and multiple-trait mapping analysis 
of linked quantitative trait loci: Some 
asymptotic analytical approximations. 
Genetics, 151, 387–396.

Integrating genomics and genetics to accelerate development of drought and salinity tolerant crops

C H A P T E R   1 8

Rostoks, N., Borevitz, J., Hedley, P., Russell, J., 

Mudie, S., Morris, J., et al. (2005). Single-
feature polymorphism discovery in the 
barley transcriptome. Genome Biology, 6, 
R54.

Sade, N., Vinocur, B. J., Diber, A., Shatil, A., 

Ronen, G., & Nissan., H., et al. (2009). 
Improving plant stress tolerance and yield 
production: Is the tonoplast aquaporin 
SlTIP2:2 a key to isohydric to anisohydric 
conversion? New Phytologist, 181, 651–661.

Sadok, W., Naudin, P., Boussuge, B., Muller, 

B., Welcker, C., & Tardieu, F. (2007). Leaf 
growth rate per unit thermal time follows 
QTL-dependent daily patterns in hundreds 
of maize lines under naturally fluctuating 
conditions. Plant, Cell Environment, 30, 
135–146.

Sakamoto, A., & Murata, A. N. (1998). 

Metabolic engineering of rice leading to 
biosynthesis of glycinebetaine and tolerance 
to salt and cold. Plant Molecular Biology, 38, 
1011–1019.

Salvi, S., & Tuberosa, R. (2005). To clone or 

not to clone plant QTLs: Present and future 
challenges. Trends in Plant Science, 10, 
297–304.

Saranga, Y., Jiang, C.-X., Wright, R. J., 
Yakir, D., & Paterson, A. H. (2004). 
Genetic dissection of cotton physiological 
responses to arid conditions and their inter-
relationships with productivity. Plant, Cell & 
Environment, 27, 263–277.

Schroeder, J. I., Kwak, J. M., & Allen, G. J. 
(2001). Guard cell abscisic acid signalling 
and engineering drought hardiness in plants. 
Nature, 410, 327–330.

Seki, M., Okamoto, M., Matsui, A., Kim, J.-
M., Kurihara, Y., Ishida, J., et al. (2009) 
Microarray analysis for studying the abiotic 
stress responses in plants, 333-355.

Serraj, R., & Sinclair, T. R. (2002). Osmolyte 
accumulation: Can it really help increase 
crop yield under drought conditions? Plant, 
Cell & Environment, 25, 333–341.

Shannon, M. C. (1997). Adaptation of plants 
to salinity. In L. S. Donald (Ed.), Advances 
in agronomy (pp. 75–120). San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press.

Shi, H., Lee, B.-h., Wu, S.-J., & Zhu, J.-

K. (2003). Overexpression of a plasma 
membrane Na/H antiporter gene 
improves salt tolerance in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Nature Biotechnology, 21, 81–85.

Su, J., & Wu, R. (2004). Stress-inducible 

synthesis of proline in transgenic rice confers 
faster growth under stress conditions than 
that with constitutive synthesis. Plant 
Science, 166, 941–948.

Tangpremsri, T., Fukai, S., & Fischer, K. S. 

(1995). Growth and yield of sorghum lines 
extracted from a population for differences 
in osmotic adjustment. Australian Journal of 
Agricultural Research, 61–74.

Tanksley, S. D., & McCouch, S. R. (1997). 

Seed banks and molecular maps: Unlocking 
genetic potential from the wild. Science, 
277, 1063–1066.

Thomas, J. C., Sepahi, M., Arendall, B., & 

Bohnert, H. J. (1995). Enhancement of seed 
germination in high salinity by engineering 

mannitol expression in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Plant, Cell Environment, 18, 801–806.

deficit in transgenic wheat. Journal of Plant 
Physiology, 164, 1367–1376.

Thompson, A. J., Andrews, J., Mulholland, 

B. J., McKee, J. M. T., Hilton, H. 
W., Horridge, J. S., et al. (2007). 
Overproduction of abscisic acid in tomato 
increases transpiration efficiency and root 
hydraulic conductivity and influences 
leaf expansion. Plant Physiology, 143, 
1905–1917.

Tian, L., Huang, C., Yu, R., Liang, R., Li, Z., 
Zhang, L., et al. (2006). Overexpression 
AtNHX1 confers salt-tolerance of transgenic 
tall fescue. African Journal of Biotechnology, 
5, 1041–1044.

Till, B., Cooper, J., Tai, T., Colowit, P., Greene, 

E., Henikoff, S., et al. (2007). Discovery 
of chemically induced mutations in rice by 
TILLING. BMC Plant Biology, 7, 19.
Till, B., Reynolds, S., Weil, C., Springer, 

N., Burtner, C., Young, K., et al. (2004). 
Discovery of induced point mutations in 
maize genes by TILLING. BMC Plant 
Biology, 4, 12.

Till, B. J., Comai, L., & Henikoff, S. (2007). 

Tilling and Ecotilling for Crop Improvement. 
In R. K. Varshney & R. Tuberosa (Eds.), 
Genomics-assisted crop improvement (pp. 
333–349). Netherlands: Springer.

Torii, K. U., Mitsukawa, N., Oosumi, T., 

Matsuura, Y., Yokoyama, R., Whittier, R. 
F., et al. (1996). The Arabidopsis ERECTA 
gene encodes a putative receptor protein 
kinase with extracellular leucine-rich 
repeats. Plant Cell, 8, 735–746.

Tuberosa, R., & Salvi, S. (2006). Genomics-

based approaches to improve drought 
tolerance of crops. Trends in Plant Science, 
11, 405–412.

Turner, N. C., Abbo, S., Berger, J. D., 

Chaturvedi, S., French, R. J., Ludwig, C.,  
et al. (2007). Osmotic adjustment in 
chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) results in 
no yield benefit under terminal drought. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 58, 187–
194.

Tyerman, S. D., Niemietz, C. M., & Bramley, H. 

(2002). Plant aquaporins: Multifunctional 
water and solute channels with expanding 
roles. Plant, Cell & Environment, 25, 
173–194.

Uauy, C., Paraiso, F., Colasuonno, P., Tran, 
R., Tsai, H., Berardi, S., et al. (2009). A 
modified TILLING approach to detect 
induced mutations in tetraploid and 
hexaploid wheat. BMC Plant Biology, 9, 
115.

Umezawa, T., Fujita, M., Fujita, Y., Yamaguchi-

Shinozaki, K., & Shinozaki, K. (2006). 
Engineering drought tolerance in plants: 
Discovering and tailoring genes to unlock the 
future. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 
17, 113–122.

Urano, K., Kurihara, Y., Seki, M., & Shinozaki, 
K. (2010). “Omics” analyses of regulatory 
networks in plant abiotic stress responses. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 13, 
132–138.

Vendruscolo, E. C. G., Schuster, I., Pileggi, M., 

Scapim, C. A., Molinari, H. B. C., Marur, 
C. J., et al. (2007). Stress-induced synthesis 
of proline confers tolerance to water 

Verma, D., Singla-Pareek, S., Rajagopal, D., 

Reddy, M., & Sopory, S. (2007). Functional 
validation of a novel isoform of Na/H 
antiporter from Pennisetum glaucum for 
enhancing salinity tolerance in rice. Journal 
of Biosciences, 32, 621–628.

Vij, S., & Tyagi, A. K. (2007). Emerging 

trends in the functional genomics of the 
abiotic stress response in crop plants. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 5, 361–380.

Vinocur, B., & Altman, A. (2005). Recent 

advances in engineering plant tolerance to 
abiotic stress: Achievements and limitations. 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 16, 
123–132.

Vorosmarty, C. J., Green, P., Salisbury, J., 

& Lammers, R. B. (2000). Global water 
resources: Vulnerability from climate 
change and population growth. Science, 289, 
284–288.

Wang, F.-Z., Wang, Q.-B., Kwon, S.-Y., Kwak, 

S.-S., & Su, W.-A. (2005). Enhanced 
drought tolerance of transgenic rice plants 
expressing a pea manganese superoxide 
dismutase. Journal of Plant Physiology, 162, 
465–472.

Wang, G.-P., Hui, Z., Li, F., Zhao, M.-R., 

Zhang, J., & Wang, W. (2010) Improvement 
of heat and drought photosynthetic 
tolerance in wheat by overaccumulation of 
glycinebetaine. Plant Biotechnology Reports, 
4, 213–222.

Wang, W. X., Vinocur, B., & Altman, A. (2003). 

Plant responses to drought, salinity and 
extreme temperatures: Towards genetic 
engineering for stress tolerance. Planta, 218, 
1–14.

Wilkinson, S., & Davies, W. J. (2010). Drought, 

ozone, ABA and ethylene: New insights 
from cell to plant to community. Plant, Cell 
& Environment, 33, 510–525.

Witcombe, J. R., Hollington, P. A., Howarth, 
C. J., Reader, S., & Steele, K. A. (2008). 
Breeding for abiotic stresses for sustainable 
agriculture. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 363, 
703–716.

Wu, X., Shiroto, Y., Kishitani, S., Ito, Y., & 
Toriyama, K. (2009). Enhanced heat and 
drought tolerance in transgenic rice seedlings 
overexpressing OsWRKY11 under the 
control of HSP101 promoter. Plant Cell 
Reports, 28, 21–30.

Wu, Y.-Y., Chen, Q.-J., Chen, M., Chen, J., & 

Wang, X.-C. (2005). Salt-tolerant transgenic 
perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne L.) 
obtained by Agrobacterium tumefaciens-
mediated transformation of the vacuolar 
Na/H antiporter gene. Plant Science, 169, 
65–73.

Xiao, B.-Z., Chen, X., Xiang, C.-B., Tang, 

N., Zhang, Q.-F., & Xiong, L.-Z. (2009). 
Evaluation of seven function-known 
candidate genes for their effects on 
improving drought resistance of transgenic 
rice under field conditions. Molecular Plant, 
2, 73–83.

Xu, D.-Q., Huang, J., Guo, S.-Q., Yang, X., 

Bao, Y.-M., Tang, H.-J., et al. (2008). 
Overexpression of a TFIIIA-type zinc finger 

285

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

et al. (2009). Stress-induced changes in the 
Arabidopsis thaliana transcriptome analyzed 
using whole-genome tiling arrays. The Plant 
Journal, 58, 1068–1082.

Zhang, H., Dong, H., Li, W., Sun, Y., Chen, 
S., & Kong, X. (2009). Increased glycine 
betaine synthesis and salinity tolerance in 
AhCMO transgenic cotton lines. Molecular 
Breeding, 23, 289–298.

Zhang, H.-X., & Blumwald, E. (2001). 

Transgenic salt-tolerant tomato plants 
accumulate salt in foliage but not in fruit. 
Nature Biotechnology, 19, 765–768.

Zhang, H.-X., Hodson, J. N., Williams, J. P., 
& Blumwald, E. (2001). Engineering salt-
tolerant Brassica plants: Characterization 
of yield and seed oil quality in transgenic 
plants with increased vacuolar sodium 
accumulation. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 98, 12832–12836.

Zhang, P., Wang, W.-Q., Zhang, G.-L., 

Kaminek, M., Dobrev, P., & Xu, J., et al. 
(2010). Senescence-inducible expression 
of isopentenyl transferase extends leaf life, 
increases drought stress resistance and alters 
cytokinin metabolism in cassava. Journal of 
Integrative Plant Biology, 52, 653–669.
Zhang, J., Nguyen, H., & Blum, A. (1999). 

Genetic analysis of osmotic adjustment in 
crop plants. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
50, 291–302.

Zhang, J.-Y., Broeckling, C. D., Blancaflor, E. B., 
Sledge, M. K., Sumner, L. W., & Wang, Z.-Y. 
(2005). Overexpression of WXP1, a putative 
Medicago truncatula AP2 domain-containing 
transcription factor gene, increases cuticular 
wax accumulation and enhances drought 
tolerance in transgenic alfalfa (Medicago 
sativa). The Plant Journal, 42, 689–707.

Zhao, F., Guo, S., Zhang, H., & Zhao, Y. 
(2006). Expression of yeast SOD2 in 
transgenic rice results in increased salt 
tolerance. Plant Science, 170, 216–224.

Zhao, F., & Zhang, H. (2006). Salt and 

paraquat stress tolerance results from co-
expression of the Suaeda salsa glutathione 
S-transferase and catalase in transgenic rice. 
Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 86, 
349–358.

Zhao, F.-Y., Zhang, X.-J., Li, P.-H., Zhao, Y.-

X., & Zhang, H. (2006). Co-expression of 
the Suaeda salsa SsNHX1 and Arabidopsis 
AVP1 confer greater salt tolerance to 
transgenic rice than the single SsNHX1. 
Molecular Breeding, 17, 341–353.

Zheng, X., Chen, B., Lu, G., & Han, B. 

(2009). Overexpression of a NAC 
transcription factor enhances rice drought 
and salt tolerance. Biochemical and 
Biophysical Research Communications, 379, 
985–989.

protein gene ZFP252 enhances drought 
and salt tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). 
FEBS Letters, 582, 1037–1043.

Xue, Z.-Y., Zhi, D.-Y., Xue, G.-P., Zhang, H., 

Zhao, Y.-X., & Xia, G.-M. (2004). Enhanced 
salt tolerance of transgenic wheat (Tritivum 
aestivum L.) expressing a vacuolar Na/H 
antiporter gene with improved grain yields 
in saline soils in the field and a reduced level 
of leaf Na. Plant Science, 167, 849–859.

Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K., & Shinozaki, 

K. (1994). A novel cis-acting element 
in an Arabidopsis gene is involved in 
responsiveness to drought, low-temperature, 
or high-salt stress. Plant Cell, 6, 251–264.
Yan, J. Q., He, C. X., Wang, J., Mao, Z. H., 

Holaday, S. A., Allen, R. D., et al. (2004). 
Overexpression of the Arabidopsis 14-
3-3 protein GF14  in cotton leads to a 
“Stay-Green” phenotype and improves 
stress tolerance under moderate drought 
conditions. Plant and Cell Physiology, 45, 
1007–1014.

Yonamine, I., Yoshida, K., Kido, K., Nakagawa, 
A., Nakayama, H., & Shinmyo, A. (2004). 
Overexpression of NtHAL3 genes confers 
increased levels of proline biosynthesis 
and the enhancement of salt tolerance 
in cultured tobacco cells. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 55, 387–395.
Zeller, G., Henz, S. R., Widmer, C. K., 

Sachsenberg, T., Rätsch, G., Weigel, D.,  

286

Bioenergy from plants and plant residues

31

Blake A. Simmons
Joint BioEnergy Institute, Emeryville, California

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 495
Biochemical Conversion   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 497
Comminution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .498
Pre-treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .499
Saccharification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .500
Fuel synthesis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .500
Thermochemical Conversion  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 501
Pyrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .501
Gasification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .502
Concluding Remarks  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 503
Acknowledgment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 503

Introduction

The  development  of  efficient  routes  of  bioenergy  production, 
defined  here  as  the  outputs  of  biofuels  (liquid  transportation 
fuels)  and  biopower  (electrons  produced  by  the  consumption 
of  biomass),  that  are  scalable,  cost-competitive,  and  sustain-
able, and can potentially displace a significant amount of petro-
leum  and  coal  within  the  global  energy  sector  has  re-emerged 
as  a  topic  of  significant  global  interest,  effort,  and  investment 
over the past decade. This renewed interest is attributed to two 
major drivers: (1) concerns over energy security and the reliance 
on finite fossil fuel supplies; and (2) the significant environmen-
tal risks associated with unabated carbon emissions of these fos-
sil fuels. In 2009, the United States consumed 94.6 quads (one 
quad  1015 BTU  1.055 exajoules [EJ]) of energy (see Figure 
31.1), with the transportation and electricity sector accounting 
for 26.98 and 38.19 quads, respectively, with biomass contrib-
uting 3.88 quads. Globally, it is calculated that more than half 
of the current energy consumption of Earth is currently met by 
the consumption of liquid fossil fuels, and in 2009 over 20% of 
global  carbon  emissions  were  generated  by  the  transportation 
sector alone (Energy Information Administration, 2009).

Recent estimates by the International Energy Agency (IEA) 
calculate  that  global  demand  for  transport  will  increase  by 
45%  by  2030,  placing  even  further  strains  on  a  global  fossil 
fuel  production  and  distribution  system  that  has  reached  its 
maximum in terms of production, and is a source of unmiti-
gated  carbon  emissions.  These  constraints  underscore  the 
need  for  the  realization  and  rapid  commercialization  of  scal-
able  and  cost-effective  means  of  generating  low-carbon  fuels 
and  energy  to  meet  the  growing  global  demand  in  a  sustain-
able  and  environmentally  responsible  fashion  that  promotes 
global energy security and environmental sustainability.

In  light  of  these  concerns,  a  significant  number  of  govern-
ments worldwide are committed to displacing fossil fuels with 
renewable,  low-carbon  fuels  produced  from  plant  biomass 
grown  on  a  sustainable  basis.  For  example,  the  U.S.  federal 
government has set a target of displacing 36 billion gallons of 
current U.S. petroleum consumption within the transportation 
sector  by  2022  under  the  Renewable  Fuel  Standard  (RFS2) 
legislation. With a production cap of 15 billion gallons per year 
placed on corn ethanol, this leaves a gap of 21 billion gallons 
of renewable liquid fuels per year that must be met by other 
sources and conversion technologies. Moreover, with total fos-
sil fuel consumption within the transportation sector currently 
running at levels of ~200 billion gallons per year in the United 
States  alone,  the  realization  of  advanced  biofuels  require 
the  development  of  a  significant  commercial  infrastructure 
capable  of  producing  about  this  level  of  non-starch  biofuels 
per  year  over  a  very  short  time  frame.  China,  New  Zealand, 
the  European  Union,  United  Kingdom,  Brazil,  Canada,  and 
Australia  are  examples  of  others  that  have  also  established 
similar renewable bioenergy production targets, although most 
of the proposed deployment schedules have either been post-
poned or revised from the originally stated scale of production 
due to the global recession that started in 2008.

There are numerous non-food biomass feedstocks that are 
considered appropriate, viable, and potentially sustainable for 
biofuel and biopower production worldwide. The current pri-
mary  metrics  used  in  determining  their  commercial  viability 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00031-6

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

Figure 31.1 l Estimated energy use in the United States by source and sector l From Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

are  cost,  energy  density,  and  availability.  These  include 
oilseeds  (e.g.,  rapeseed,  soy,  palm  oil),  agricultural  residues 
(e.g., corn stover, wheat straw, rice straw, sugarcane bagasse), 
woody  biomass  (e.g.,  loblolly  pine,  eucalyptus,  hybrid  pop-
lar), and dedicated energy crops (e.g., energy cane, sorghum, 
switchgrass, Miscanthus). The selection of the most appropri-
ate  feedstock  for  a  particular  conversion  technology  is  influ-
enced  by  regional  influences  such  as  land  availability,  land 
ownership, rainfall, disposition of water rights, soil type, and 
use of fertilizers. A summary of the major current and future 
feedstocks  by  type  and  region  is  shown  in  Table  31.1,  and 
the projections for global biofuel production are presented in 
Figure 31.2.

The  assessments  of  the  potential  impact  and  deployment 
of bioenergy, and the land required to support it, vary widely. 
In one report, it was calculated that the available global agri-
cultural  energy  is  25.9–33.5  EJ/year  with  the  production  of 
food crops accounting for 25.6 EJ/year, leaving little room for 
expanded  biofuel  production  (Johansson  et  al.,  2010).  This 
report found that the primary agricultural resources available 
for  bioenergy  production  are  residues  and  bioorganic  waste, 
and that the conversion of these resources could replace one-
fourth  of  current  global  fossil  fuel  consumption  (Johansson 
et  al.,  2010).  In  contrast,  another  report  calculated  that  by 
2050, the bioenergy potential available of land not needed for 

the production of feed and food could produce between 215–
1272  EJ/year,  with  the  majority  of  these  resources  located 
in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  the  Caribbean,  and  South  America 
(Smeets  et  al.,  2007).  Some  of  the  most  critical  (and  con-
troversial)  issues  around  the  sustainability  and  carbon  ben-
efits  of  increased  bioenergy  production  are  associated  with 
how  to  measure  and  attribute  direct  and  indirect  land  use 
change (Miller et al., 2009; Cherubini and Ulgiati, 2009). All 
energy  sources  have  direct  and  indirect  effects  that  must  be 
accounted for from a life cycle perspective, but to date most 
of  the  attention  has  been  focused  on  the  evaluation  of  bio-
fuels alone (Kim et al., 2009). Although this topic has sparked 
significant conversation and debate worldwide, there remains 
significant  uncertainty  in  the  modeling  tools  developed  to 
date that can accurately assess and attribute these effects and, 
more important, be validated against known data sets (Mullins 
et al., 2011).

As with all terrestrial systems of production, the ultimate 
potential  for  bioenergy  depends  to  a  great  extent  on  the 
land  available  for  production  and  the  realization  of  sustain-
able  methods  of  growing  and  harvesting  this  plant  biomass 
resource  responsibly.  Currently,  the  amount  of  land  devoted 
to  growing  energy  crops  for  biomass  fuels  is  calculated  to 
represent only 0.19% of the world’s total land area and only 
0.5–1.7%  of  the  available  agricultural  land.  Although  there 

496

Bioenergy from plants and plant residues

C H A P T E R   3 1

Table 31.1  Summary of global feedstock availability by type and region

Sugar, starch, and oil crops

Cellulosic feedstocks

Sugarcane

Corn

Wheat

Palm

Soybeans

Bagasse

Agricultural residue

Other

Argentina

Brazil

Canada

China

Colombia

India

Mexico

Caribbean Basin (CBI)

Share of world production 
(excluding U.S.)

✓

✓

(✓)

(✓)

✓

✓

(✓)

✓

(✓)

✓

(✓)

(✓)

✓

✓

✓

73%

55%

27%

✓

✓

(✓)

81%

(✓)

✓

3%

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

–

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

–

Source: World Biofuels Production Potential, Office of Policy Analysis, U.S. Department of Energy, 2008.

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

–

Biochemical Conversion

The biochemical conversion route to biofuels has been exten-
sively studied for centuries, primarily owing to the well-estab-
lished  route  of  converting  starches  and  grains  into  ethanol 
that we benefit from for a wide range of applications, includ-
ing  human  consumption.  So-called  “first-generation”  biofuels 
are  defined  as  those  derived  from  starches  (e.g.,  corn)  and 
vegetable  oils  (e.g.,  soybean  oil;  Rude  and  Schirmer,  2009). 
These  biofuels  have  rapidly  achieved  significant  production 
levels,  especially  in  Brazil  and  the  United  States,  and  have 
proven that biofuels are an effective means to displace fossil 
fuels.  These  first-generation  biofuels  have  also  generated  sig-
nificant concerns around sustainability, environmental impact, 
and direct and indirect land use change. This section will not 
present  any  details  of  these  “first-generation”  biofuels,  but 
will instead focus on the much more complex and challenging 
pathway  of  converting  non-food  lignocellulosic  biomass  into 
a wide range of biofuels and co-products (Plass and Reimelt, 
2007).  A  general  overview  of  the  biochemical  conversion 
pathway  for  lignocellulosic  biomass  into  biofuels  is  shown  in 
Figure 31.3.

The  plant  cell  walls  in  biomass  —  primarily  comprised 
of  cellulose,  hemicellulose,  and  lignin  —  are  more  com-
plex  and  heterogeneous  than  starches  and  therefore  require 
more  energy  as  an  input  into  the  biofuel  conversion  process 
(Himmel  et  al.,  2007).  The  polysaccharides  present  in  bio-
mass that account for between 50–75% of the dry weight of 
biomass  are  the  primary  targets  for  biofuel  conversion.  The 
5-C (e.g., xylose) and 6-C (e.g., glucose) sugars that are the 
monomeric units of hemicellulose and cellulose, respectively, 
are ideal carbon sources for several microorganisms that pro-
duce  biofuels  through  fermentation,  such  as  Saccharomyces 

497

Figure 31.2 l Projected levels of global biofuel production 
by type and conversion technology l From World Biofuels 
Production Potential, Office of Policy Analysis, U.S. Department of 
Energy (2008).

remains significant concerns around the sustainability of non-
food  feedstocks  grown  for  biofuel  and  biopower  production 
(Cherubini and Stroemman, 2010), the “food vs. fuel” debate 
(Knocke  and  Vogt,  2009),  and  other  related  issues  such  as 
centralized  versus  distributed  modes  of  bioenergy  produc-
tion  (Serio  et  al.,  2003),  there  is  little  doubt  that  plant  bio-
mass  has  a  significant  role  to  play  in  the  renewable  energy 
sector,  especially  in  biopower  and  biofuel  production  if  it  is 
realized  using  rational,  responsible,  and  reasonable  develop-
ment  and  deployment  schedules  (Larson,  2006).  This  chap-
ter breaks down the ongoing plant biomass activities into two 
main  categories  based  on  the  type  of  conversion  technology 
employed: (1) biochemical conversion; and (2) thermochemi-
cal conversion.

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

Figure 31.3 l Schematic depiction of the major unit operations and associated challenges for the efficient conversion of plant 
biomass into biofuels, such as ethanol l From U.S. Department of Energy, genomicsgtl.energy.gov/centers/brcbrochure.pdf.

cerevisiae (yeast; Argueso et al., 2009). One of the great bar-
riers to the commercialization of second-generation biofuels is 
the lack of viable technologies that can efficiently and cheaply 
liberate  these  monomeric  sugars  from  lignocellulose  (Kumar 
et  al.,  2009a).  In  addition  to  developing  new  and  improved 
methods  of  breaking  down  biomass  into  fermentable  sugars, 
there  has  been  significant  interest  in  genetically  engineering 
biomass feedstocks that are easier to break down and/or frac-
tionate into desired output streams (Vanhohlme et al., 2010; 
Lorenz et al., 2010). This section will provide a brief overview 
of the biochemical conversion pathway and highlight some of 
the challenges and opportunities for each unit operation.

Comminution

The first step in the conversion of biomass is to reduce its par-
ticle size to a manageable range, starting with the initial har-
vesting  that  breaks  down  the  whole  plant  by  chopping  and/

or  cutting.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  development  of  spe-
cialized  equipment  for  the  harvesting  of  biomass  feedstocks 
has  received  significant  attention  recently,  but  no  commer-
cial  harvesters  designed  specifically  for  proposed  dedicated 
energy  crops  such  as  switchgrass  and  Miscanthus  remain, 
although  several  appear  to  be  near  the  early  stages  of  com-
mercialization (Sokhansanj et al., 2009). Further particle size 
reduction,  or  comminution,  can  be  achieved  using  several 
approaches  such  as  milling,  grinding,  and  chipping.  Particle 
size  reduction  increases  the  active  surface  area  of  the  bio-
mass and is known to increase downstream process efficiency 
in  terms  of  sugar  yields,  but  there  is  an  inverse  relationship 
between particle size and the energy required for the opera-
tion.  The  energy  requirements  for  comminution  are  influ-
enced  by  factors  including  the  initial  and  final  particle  sizes 
desired, moisture content, biomass type, and feed rate (Miao 
et  al.,  2011).  Chipping  typically  results  in  biomass  particles 
between  10–30 mm  in  size,  while  grinding  and  milling  result 
in small biomass particles between 0.2–2.0 mm in size. If the 

498

Bioenergy from plants and plant residues

C H A P T E R   3 1

Figure 31.4 l Projected cost of a gallon of cellulosic ethanol based on biochemical conversion of corn stover that equates to a 
Minimum Ethanol Selling Price of $1.49 in 2012 l From U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Biomass Program.

targeted particle size is between 3–6 mm, the energy required 
is  ~30 kWh/tonne  biomass.  Some  of  the  more  established 
milling techniques that can efficiently generate very small par-
ticles  are  rotary  knife  and  hammer  mills  (0.2–2 mm).  It  has 
been  reported  that  the  composition  of  the  biomass  can  be 
influenced by particle size (Bridgeman et al., 2006).

Pre-treatment

Pre-treatment  is  one  of  the  critical  steps  in  the  biochemi-
cal conversion pathway, and is generally considered as one of 
the  most  costly  unit  operations  within  any  proposed  ligno-
cellulosic  biorefinery  (see  Figure  31.4).  The  primary  goal  of 
the  pre-treatment  process  is  to  increase  the  accessibility  of 
the  polysaccharides  to  hydrolytic  enzymes  and,  if  possible, 
reduce the lignin content and decrease cellulose crystallinity. 
The  majority  of  the  biomass  pre-treatment  techniques  stud-
ied have been derived from those used in the pulp and paper 
industry. These include the following list.

Dilute acid pre-treatment: The use of dilute acids to 
pre-treat biomass is one of the most mature technologies 
available. The dilute acids, typically sulfuric acid, can 
effectively solubilize the majority of the hemicellulose 
present in biomass and generate a material that is 
more readily hydrolyzed than untreated biomass (Guo 
et al., 2008; Foston and Ragauskas, 2010). Some of 
the disadvantages of this approach are the formation of 
microbial inhibitors from sugar degradation at higher 
temperatures, limited impact on lignin except at high 
temperatures (Selig et al., 2007), and retention of cellulose 
crystallinity. There have been recent examples where the 
use of concentrated acids has been shown to be effective as 
a pre-treatment alternative.
Liquid hot water pre-treatment (hydrothermolysis): 
Solvolysis by hot liquid water at 200–230°C for 15 min  
at 350–400 psig results in conversion of all hemicellulose  
to monomeric sugars, as well as the removal of 4–22%  
of the cellulose and 35–60% of the lignin (Bonn et al., 

1983; Bobleter et al., 1983; Burtscher et al., 1987). The 
remaining solids have improved enzymatic digestibility 
relative to untreated biomass. Extensive size reduction of 
biomass is not required as hot water pre-treatment causes 
lignocellulosics to break apart, but softwoods are less 
susceptible to the pre-treatment and the effects on lignin 
are poorly understood.
Ammonia fiber expansion (AFEX) pre-treatment: This 
process yields very high rates of enzymatic hydrolysis with 
low enzyme loadings, and is best suited for agricultural 
residues (Balan et al., 2009). This technique can use 
gaseous or liquid ammonia. For the gas phase pre-
treatment, gaseous ammonia is introduced into the pre-
treatment reactors at specific temperatures and pressures 
and then released and the ammonia recovered (Lau 
et al., 2010). For the liquid phase pre-treatment, typically 
a 5–15% ammonia solution at 160–180°C is passed 
through the biomass, and the aqueous ammonia reacts, 
depolymerizes, and solubilizes the lignin, thus improving 
enzymatic hydrolysis (Gupta and Lee, 2010).
Ionic liquid (IL) pretreatment: A relatively new biomass 
pre-treatment technique utilizes room temperature molten 
salts as solvents for the dissolution and pre-treatment 
of lignocellulosic biomass. Several ionic liquids show 
substantial cellulose solubility; for example, 3-methyl-N-
butylpyridinium chloride [C4ampy]Cl and 1-n-butyl-3-
methylimidazolium chloride [C4mim]Cl have reported 
cellulose solubilities of 39 and 25%, respectively (Dadi 
et al., 2007). Regenerated cellulose can be precipitated 
with antisolvents such as water or alcohols with 
significantly reduced crystallinity and lignin content 
(Cetinkol et al., 2010). Ionic liquid pre-treatment of 
switchgrass has been shown to be superior to dilute 
acid pre-treatment in terms of sugar yield and enzyme 
kinetics (Li, et al., 2010). Although IL pre-treatment is 
promising, the issues around cost and recycling of the IL 
must be fully addressed before this technology becomes 
truly competitive with other established pre-treatment 
technologies (Simmons et al., 2010).

499

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

Organosolv pre-treatment: Lignocellulosics can be 
fractionated by hot aqueous ethanol, typically with sulfuric 
or Lewis acids acting as catalysts (Zhu and Pan, 2010). The 
resulting liquor contains substantial amounts of solubilized 
lignin, and the pulp contains the residual lignin and most 
of the carbohydrates that were initially present in the 
plant biomass are separated. Whereas lignin is recovered 
from the aqueous ethanol solvent by dilution with water, 
subsequent washing of the pulp yields a material suitable 
for subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis and sugar production 
at comparatively high yields relative to untreated biomass 
(Brosse et al., 2010; Mesa et al., 2010; Park et al., 2010).

Saccharification

As with pre-treatment, the enzymes required for hydrolyzing 
the polysaccharides into monomeric sugars are one of the most 
significant  costs  at  a  biorefinery  (see  Figure  31.4;  Joergensen 
et al., 2007). Typically, there are several enzymes required to 
break  down  polysaccharides  into  monomeric  sugars,  com-
monly  referred  to  as  “enzyme  cocktails.”  For  cellulose,  the 
enzyme cocktail is comprised of 5–10 different enzymes that 
possess three general activities — endocellulase, exocellulase, 
and β-glucosidase — whereas for hemicellulose, which is much 
more  complex  in  terms  of  the  functional  groups  present,  a 
typical  enzyme  cocktail  contains  between  14  to  20  different 
enzymes.  In  some  anaerobic  microorganisms,  these  saccharo-
lytic  enzymes  are  immobilized  within  a  scaffold,  known  as  a 
cellulosome  (Hemme  et  al.,  2010;  Nataf  et  al.,  2010;  Sakka 
et al., 2010; Tamaru et al., 2010; Vodovnik and Logar, 2010), 
that  improves  overall  sugar  yields  from  biomass  and  localizes 
sugar  production  at  or  near  the  cellular  membrane.  In  addi-
tion,  the  catalytic  domains  of  the  enzymes  are  sometimes 
linked  with  a  carbohydrate  binding  module  that,  as  its  name 
implies, binds to the polysaccharide and increases the time and 
specificity of the enzyme-substrate interaction (Abbott et al., 
2009; Michel et al., 2009; Nakahira et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 
2009;  Su  et  al.,  2010).  There  are  known  synergies  between 
the  enzymes  present  (Wen  et  al.,  2010),  and  there  are  non-
catalytic  proteins  that  “boost”  enzyme  performance  dramati-
cally. Thus, the development of optimal enzyme cocktails for a 
wide range of substrates requires a comprehensive understand-
ing of the interactions and chemistries involved.

Most  of  the  commercial  cellulases  and  hemicellulases  are 
derived  from  fungal  hosts,  such  as  Trichoderma  reesei  or  T. 
viride.  These  enzymatic  “cocktails”  perform  well  in  specific 
operating  environments  and  on  certain  substrates,  but  they 
are  not  ideally  suited  for  industrial  applications  such  as  high 
temperature  and  extremes  of  pH.  The  current  approach 
taken  in  the  biofuels  community  typically  develops  a  tai-
lored enzyme cocktail for each pairing of feedstock and pre-
treatment, which is far from an optimal process. One of the 
key  components  in  realizing  improved  enzymes  relevant  to 
lignocellulose  deconstruction  is  the  establishment  of  a  fun-
damental and comprehensive library of the specific activities, 
operational  performance  limits,  and  kinetics  of  the  reactions 
that  take  place  (Wilson  et  al.,  2009).  While  the  majority  of 
the industrial enzymes known to date have been derived from 

bacteria and fungi, Archaea, which represent the third domain 
of  life,  are  increasingly  finding  applications  in  biotechnology 
(Datta et al., 2010). This is in no small part due to the fact 
that  most  of  the  archaeal  species  have  been  identified  from 
extreme  environments  such  as  geothermal  and  deep-sea  vol-
canic  sites  (80–121°C),  polar  regions  (20°C),  acidic  solfa-
tara fields (pH 4), alkaline springs (pH 8), and hypersaline 
lakes  (2–5 M NaCl),  that  were  thought  to  be  unable  to  sup-
port  life.  Recent  studies  have  indicated  that  these  environ-
ments  are  heavily  populated  with  archaeal  microorganisms 
with very specialized metabolisms. These discoveries, coupled 
with  the  advances  in  genome  sequencing  and  bioinformatics, 
offer  an  opportunity  to  harvest  genes  compatible  with  the 
integration of process steps associated with cellulosic biomass 
deconstruction  (Wu  et  al.,  2009;  Hemme  et  al.,  2010;  Hess 
et al., 2011).

This  is  especially  true  in  the  case  of  integration  of  pre-
treatment  and  hydrolysis  at  elevated  temperatures  –  a 
critical  link  that  must  be  established  and  realized  on  a  com-
mercial  scale.  Several  β-glucosidases  have  been  detected 
in  Sulfolobales  species,  an  archaeaon  that  grows  optimally 
at  high  temperatures  (70°C)  and  low  pH  (pH  2–3)  and 
offers  the  possibility  of  a  simultaneous  enzymatic  hydrolysis 
and  pre-treatment  of  cellulosic  biomass.  Also,  thermostable 
endoglucanases,  which  degrade  β-1,4  linkages  of  β-glucans 
and  cellulose,  have  been  identified  in  Pyrococcus  furiosus, 
P.  horikoshii,  and  Sulfolobus  solfataricus  (Blumer-Schuette 
et al., 2008; Chou et al., 2008). The recombinant endogluca-
nase from P. furiosus is active at 100°C and hydrolyzes β-1,4, 
but not β-1,3, glycosidic linkages, whereas the endoglucanase 
from  P.  horikoshii  has  been  shown  to  be  active  even  toward 
crystalline cellulose (Kim and Ishikawa, 2010). These archaeal 
enzymes  are  promising  candidates  to  optimize  bioconversion 
of  recalcitrant  cellulose  to  fermentable  sugars  by  running 
the  process  of  saccharification  at  lower  pH  and  higher  tem-
peratures  and  serve  as  model  systems  for  the  bioinformatics 
analysis of the process. The industrial process benefits of using 
enzymes  from  extremophiles  include  reduced  risk  of  con-
tamination, improved mass transfer rates, lower viscosity, and 
higher  solubility  of  substrates.  There  have  also  been  recent 
efforts  in  expressing  these  enzymes  in  planta  to  improve 
sugar  yields  and  decrease  the  amount  of  exogenous  enzyme 
required (Nakahira et al., 2009; Patell et al., 2010).

Fuel synthesis

The  basic  central  metabolic  pathway  at  the  heart  of  all  bio-
chemical  biofuel  production  is  the  conversion  of  sugars 
through fermentation. There are several variants of the over-
all biochemical conversion process shown in Figure 31.3, and 
some of the most promising are those that involve metabolic 
engineering  and/or  synthetic  biology  to  generate  pathways 
that  efficiently  produce  advanced  biofuels  from  sugars  that 
are  closer  in  energy  density  and  water  miscibility  to  their 
petroleum  counterparts  when  compared  to  ethanol.  The 
ability  to  simultaneously  ferment  5-C  and  6-C  sugars  is  also 
highly  desirable  from  an  operational  standpoint,  as  long  as 
the  overall  biofuel  titers  either  remain  constant  or  improve. 

500

Bioenergy from plants and plant residues

C H A P T E R   3 1

Another goal is the development of an organism that secretes 
hydrolytic  enzymes  and  ferments  the  liberated  sugars  into 
an  advanced  biofuel  (aka  consolidated  bioprocessing;  Stanley 
and Hahn-Haegerdal, 2010; Linger et al., 2010; Hyeon et al., 
2011; Anasontzis et al., 2011).

Researchers  have  engineered  and  classified  the  modular 
biological  components  that  perform  specific  input/output 
functions  in  order  to  understand  and  manipulate  the  genetic 
circuits present, and in the case of biofuels the targeted out-
put is a specific molecule suitable for use as a blendstock for 
gasoline,  diesel,  and  jet  fuels  (Peralta-Yahya  and  Keasling, 
2010).  This  effort  relies  upon  the  generation  of  a  “Parts 
Registry” that establishes and standardizes well-known meta-
bolic components as a genetic toolbox that can then be incor-
porated  into  industrially  relevant  and  genetically  tractable 
microorganisms,  such  as  S.  cerevisiae  and  Escherichia  coli. 
Once  a  basal  level  of  output  is  achieved  in  these  organisms, 
the  system  is  then  optimized  further  to  attain  higher  pro-
duction  levels  of  the  targeted  compounds,  as  well  as  further 
enhancements with other parts derived from other metabolic 
pathways  to  produce  a  commercially  viable  biofuel  technol-
ogy, such as fatty acid esters (Steen et al., 2010).

A  great  deal  of  attention  over  several  decades  has  been 
paid  to  the  production  of  cellulosic  ethanol  (Gray,  2007), 
but recently there has been a growing effort in the realization 
of  “drop-in”  biofuels  such  as  butanol  (Duerre,  2007),  isobu-
tanol  (Taylor  et  al.,  2010),  isopentanol,  farnesene,  and  fatty 
acid esters (Steen et al., 2010) that intrinsically possess higher 
energy  densities  than  ethanol  and  would  be  more  compat-
ible in terms of water miscibility with the existing petroleum 
infrastructure that stores and distributes liquid fuels (Peralta-
Yahya and Keasling, 2010).

Thermochemical Conversion

There  are  three  basic  types  of  thermochemical  conversion 
technologies  for  the  processing  of  biomass:  gasification;  pyro-
lysis; and combustion (Kumar et al., 2009b). The combustion 
of biomass is the simplest and most mature of these in terms 
of processing biomass into a desired singular output — heat — 
and the overall efficiencies are low in comparison to the other 
two.  In  comparison  to  biochemical  conversion  technologies, 
the  thermochemical  conversion  technologies  have  the  follow-
ing  advantages:  most  can  use  a  wide  range  of  biomass  feed-
stocks  with  little  or  no  impact  on  efficiency;  in  comparison 
to ethanol, the fuels typically generated are more compatible 
with  the  existing  petroleum  infrastructure;  and  the  gaseous 
volatile organic product streams can be converted into a vari-
ety  of  fuels  and  chemicals  using  known  catalytic  processes 
(Wang  et  al.,  2008).  The  primary  disadvantages  are  that  the 
thermochemical  approaches  are  typically  more  costly  than 
the  biochemical  routes  and  require  extensive  post-processing 
to remove unwanted contaminants, high energy demands due 
to  high  process  temperatures,  and  the  instability  of  some  of 
the  products  formed  (e.g.,  pyrolysis  oil).  The  thermochemi-
cal  routes  also  enable  the  realization  of  multiple  processing 
options  for  biofuel  and  biopower  generation  (Kumar  et  al., 
2008), such as an integrated gasifier combined cycle (IGCC) 

and  consolidated  heat  and  power  generation  at  biorefineries. 
There have also been recent developments around hybrid ther-
mochemical–biochemical approaches, such as the fermentation 
of  syngas  (Munasinghe  and  Khanal,  2010),  although  this  sec-
tion will focus on gasification and pyrolysis.

Pyrolysis

Pyrolysis is a technology that can trace its origins back as far 
as  ancient  Egypt,  where  pyrolysis  of  wood  was  used  to  pro-
duce  tars  for  boats  and  embalming  agents.  Wood  pyrolysis 
became  a  very  large  industry  in  the  1800s  to  produce  char-
coal,  with  a  heating  value  equal  to  coal  (~24 MJ/kg)  but  no 
sulfur  content,  which  helped  supply  power  for  the  indus-
trial revolution. Biomass pyrolysis is classically defined as the 
chemical decomposition of lignocellulose by rapid heating that 
typically occurs in the absence of oxygen, or at least reduced 
levels of oxygen relative to those required for complete com-
bustion  (Demirbas,  2009).  The  pyrolysis  process  does  not 
directly  involve  chemical  reactions  with  oxygen  or  with  any 
other chemical components and the biomass.

The biomass pyrolysis process typically results in the gen-
eration  of  a  wide  range  of  products  —  including  gases,  sol-
ids,  and  liquids  —  and  the  stoichiometric  balance  achieved 
between  these  three  products,  and  the  composition  of  each, 
is  determined  by  the  processing  conditions  used  (Mohan 
et  al.,  2006).  For  instance,  high  yields  of  the  liquid  product 
tend  to  favor  short  residence  times,  fast  heating  rates,  and 
moderate  processing  temperatures.  The  solid  pyrolysis  prod-
uct is often referred to as “bio-char,” which can be used as a 
soil amendment or as a feedstock for gasification (Demirbas, 
2006). In general, the liquid pyrolysis product is referred to as 
“pyrolysis oil” or “bio-oil” (Balat, 2011). Bio-oil from biomass 
pyrolysis consists of a mixture of more than 200 compounds 
including aliphatic, aromatic, and naphthenic hydrocarbons as 
well  as  a  variety  of  oxygenated  compounds  including  furans, 
ethers,  ketones,  and  aldehydes  (Balat,  2011).  Bio-oil  has  a 
higher energy density than the initial biomass feedstock, can 
be  readily  stored  and  transported  although  there  are  some 
stability  and  storage  issues  that  must  be  addressed,  and  can 
be used either as a renewable liquid transportation fuel and/
or  for  the  production  of  chemical  products.  These  bio-oil 
product  streams  can  theoretically  be  fed  into  a  conventional 
refinery stream and, through hydrotreating and hydrocracking 
(French et al., 2010), produce fuels equivalent and/or chemi-
cally identical to conventional petroleum products (Xu et al., 
2010).

The  basic  process  steps  for  biomass  pyrolysis  include:  (1) 
heat  transfer  from  a  heat  source  that  heats  the  biomass;  (2) 
initiation of the pyrolysis reaction in the biomass due to the 
increased  temperature;  (3)  product  formation  in  the  vapor 
phase, resulting in heat transfer between the hot vapor prod-
ucts  and  the  unreacted  biomass;  (4)  condensation  of  prod-
ucts  from  the  vapor  phase;  and  (5)  autocatalytic  reactions 
between the products (Babu et al., 2008). The kinetics of the 
pyrolysis reaction are dictated by the reaction conditions and 
reactor  configurations  (heating  rate,  feed  rate,  particle  size, 
etc.). There are three proposed reaction mechanisms for the 

501

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

pyrolysis of biomass: (1) single-step global models; (2) single-
stage  multi-reaction  models;  and  (3)  two-stage  semi-global 
models.

There are several different modes of biomass pyrolysis that 
are  being  actively  developed  by  academics  and  industry.  A 
short synopsis of each is presented in the following list.
Conventional pyrolysis: This is a comparatively low 
temperature, long residence time technology that has 
existed for thousands of years that has been optimized 
for the production of charcoal, or bio-char, from biomass, 
traditionally from woody biomass feedstocks (Demirbas 
and Arin, 2002). In a typical conventional pyrolysis 
process, the biomass is slowly heated to ~600°C, with 
residence times between 5 and 30 minutes, and the 
molecules in the vapor product continue to react as they 
are removed from the system. The bio-char product has 
been proposed as a significant means of greenhouse gas 
reduction through soil amendments that could result in 
long-term carbon sequestration. A recent report carried 
out a life cycle assessment to determine the potential 
climate change impacts and economics of bio-char pyrolysis 
systems and that the net greenhouse gas emissions for corn 
stover is   864 kg CO2e/tonne (Roberts et al., 2010).
Fast pyrolysis: This is a high temperature process that 
involves rapid heating of the biomass to generate vapors, 
aerosols, and solids. There are four characteristic steps that 
define fast pyrolysis: (1) high heating and heat transfer 
rates (~500–1000°C/s); (2) carefully controlled pyrolysis 
reaction temperature typically between 425 and 600°C; 
(3) short residence times for the vapor phase (0.5–5 s); 
and (4) bio-oil is formed through condensing the vapor 
and aerosol product streams (Yanik et al., 2007). Typical 
reaction stoichiometries for the fast pyrolysis process 
are 10–20 wt% gases, 15–25 wt% solids, and 60–75 wt% 
bio-oil. The bio-oil is produced through rapid heating and 
rapid quenching and the high reaction rates reduce char 
formation and favor the production of either gas or liquid 
products.
Catalytic fast pyrolysis: One variant of the fast pyrolysis 
process is catalytic fast pyrolysis — a technique that 
combines rapid heating and the formation of volatile 
organics, gases, and char — with zeolite catalysts to 
transform the organic pyrolysis products (Carlson et al., 
2011). The volatile organics generated are delivered to 
a zeolite catalyst bed and are converted into aromatics, 
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, water, and coke (Carlson 
et al., 2008, 2010). During the zeolite catalysis step, 
the organics undergo a series of reactions: dehydration; 
decarbonylation; decarboxylation; isomerization; 
oligomerization; and dehydrogenation reactions (Huber, 
2010). Although this technology offers several advantages 
relative to other pyrolysis technologies, challenges are 
associated with reaction selectivity and specificity, 
generation of coke as an undesired co-product, and the 
stability and cost of the catalysts. Three parameters are 
used to maximize the production of desired products in 
this process: (1) rapid heating rates; (2) identification of 
the optimal catalyst; and (3) high catalyst-to-feed ratios.

Thermal plasma pyrolysis: In this variant of pyrolysis, 
the biomass particles are exposed to very rapid heating 
in a highly reactive plasma (e.g., argon/hydrogen) arc 
discharge (Babu, 2008). The products from the thermal 
plasma pyrolysis are gases and solids with no liquid output. 
During the rapid heating stage, there is an explosive 
release of volatile organics followed by gasification 
of the homogeneous phase (Zhao et al., 2001). The 
volatile organics are converted into low molecular weight 
hydrocarbons (e.g., acetylene, methane) and hydrogen.

Gasification

There  are  four  basic  unit  operations  in  biomass  gasification: 
(1)  the  pre-processing  of  biomass;  (2)  biomass  gasification 
and generation of syngas; (3) syngas clean-up and reforming; 
and (4) gas utilization. Gasification of lignocellulosic biomass 
provides  an  extremely  flexible  way  to  produce  different  liq-
uid  fuels,  primarily  through  Fischer-Tropsch  Synthesis  (FTS) 
or mixed alcohol synthesis, of the generated syngas. Syngas is 
comprised  of  CO,  CO2,  H2O,  H2,  and  a  mix  of  impurities. 
The  FTS  technology  is  a  relatively  mature  technology  and 
has  been  applied  to  syngas  generated  from  coal  gasification 
where the syngas is converted into usable liquid fuels through 
the water–gas shift reaction coupled with CO hydrogenation 
(Lappas and Heracleous, 2011).

There are several types of gasifiers that have been studied, 
developed,  and/or  commercialized  (Wang  et  al.,  2008;  Balat 
et  al.,  2009).  The  general  classifications  divide  the  differ-
ent  types  based  on  flow  and  the  type  of  bed  utilized  —  the 
bed  can  be  fluidized  or  fixed  (updraft  or  downdraft;  Melgar 
et al., 2009). Gasification occurs at high temperatures (600–
1000°C)  and  uses  gasification  agents  (e.g.,  oxidizing  agents) 
such as steam, nitrogen, air, oxygen, carbon dioxide, or a com-
bination  of  these.  The  combination  of  high  temperature  and 
gasification agents breaks down the biomass components into 
smaller molecular weight fragments and ultimately into gases 
such  as  light  hydrocarbons,  methane,  hydrogen,  and  carbon 
monoxide  (Hanaoka  et  al.,  2008).  The  efficiency  of  syngas 
production is directly impacted by the biomass flow rate and 
type, the air and steam flow rate, and the temperature profile 
of the gasifier (Babu and Sheth, 2007).

The  conversion  of  syngas  using  FTS  enables  the  produc-
tion of a wide variety of fuels with targeted properties. FTS 
also  affords  the  production  of  multiple  products  simultane-
ously, and it is inherently more flexible than other conversion 
technologies.  As  FTS  is  an  exothermic  process,  it  should  be 
possible  to  recover  some  of  the  heat  generated  to  assist  in 
drying  the  biomass  with  a  regenerative  heat  exchanger.  The 
most significant challenges in using FTS for plant biomass are 
similar  to  those  associated  with  the  conversion  of  coal,  with 
the exception that contaminants generated by upstream proc-
ess  steps  need  to  be  removed  before  being  delivered  to  the 
FTS catalyst bed. Additionally, FTS typically requires massive 
centralization to make the process cost-competitive and maxi-
mize  efficiency.  The  most  serious  challenges  associated  with 
the FTS process are the cost of cleaning up and reforming the 
tars  that  can  develop  and  accumulate  over  time  (Carpenter 

502

Bioenergy from plants and plant residues

C H A P T E R   3 1

et al., 2008). Theses tars can create multiple problems includ-
ing  fouling  of  particulate  filters,  clogging  fuel  line  filters  in 
vehicles, and coke formation in the FTS catalyst bed (Nimlos 
et al., 2009). It has been reported that tar formation can be 
minimized  or  avoided  by  using  entrained-flow  gasifiers  that 
operate at high temperatures (Cui and Turn, 2009).

Concluding Remarks

There  is  a  pressing  need  for  the  development  of  scalable 
and  competitive  technologies  that  can  efficiently  convert 
renewable  lignocellulosic  feedstocks  into  second-generation 
(and  beyond)  biofuels.  There  are  multiple  pathways  being 
researched and developed across the globe that are based on 
biochemical,  thermochemical,  and  hybrid  approaches.  For 
the  biochemical  conversion  platform,  there  is  a  clear  need 
for  horizontally  integrated  systems  of  technologies  that  can 
efficiently  handle  a  wide  range  of  feedstocks  into  targeted 
advanced  biofuels.  This  includes  the  development  of  feed-
stocks  tailored  for  energy  production,  the  development  of 
more  efficient  enzymes  and  pre-treatments,  and  the  devel-
opment  of  robust  microorganisms  that  can  attain  high  titers 
of  these  advanced  biofuels.  To  reach  maturity  and  commer-
cial viability, a more fundamental understanding of the entire 
system of plants, pre-treatments, enzymes, and enzyme com-
plexes  responsible  for  biomass  deconstruction  must  be  real-
ized and deployed.

Despite the advances in genomics, proteomics, transcriptom-
ics, and metabolomics, currently there are an insufficient number 
of  microbial  genomes  and  synthetic  biology  transformation 
systems.  Further  advances  in  biomass  pre-treatment,  enzyme 

structure–function relationships, enzyme–enzyme interaction, sys-
tems biology, and bioinformatics will create the toolbox required 
to  generate  these  next-generation  biorefineries.  Substantial 
progress has also been made in thermochemical conversion tech-
nologies,  but  there  remain  several  obstacles  for  pyrolysis  and 
gasification that must be addressed before they are truly cost-com-
petitive and scalable. For pyrolysis, central issues are bio-oil stabil-
ity and the efficiency of catalytic upgrading of this material into 
fuels and chemicals. For gasification, the issues are those associ-
ated  with  the  requirement  for  centralized  conversion  facilities 
that are significant in scale and catalyst development.

Regardless  of  the  particulars  of  the  proposed  conversion 
pathway,  progress  that  is  made  in  the  controlled  laboratory 
environment  must  also  be  tested  and  validated  by  extensive 
pilot  scale  trials  to  generate  the  appropriate  material  and 
energy  balances  required  to  demonstrate  the  commercial 
viability of any new biofuel production technology. In conclu-
sion,  it  is  certain  that  plant  biomass  will  play  a  central  role 
in  the  development  of  low-carbon,  renewable  energy  sup-
plies  capable  of  displacing  fossil  fuels,  but  the  extent  and 
time  required  to  achieve  significant  levels  of  production  will 
be  determined  by  public  policy,  sustainability  metrics,  avail-
able capital funds, and sustained public and private funding of 
research and development activities.

Acknowledgment

This  work  conducted  by  the  joint  BioEnergy  Institute  was 
supported  by  the  Office  of  Science,  Office  of  Biological  and 
Environmental  Research,  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy 
under contract No. DE-AC02-05CH 11231.

References

Abbott, D. W., et al. (2009). Analysis of the 

structural and functional diversity of plant 
cell wall specific family 6 carbohydrate 
binding modules. Biochemistry, 48(43), 
10395–10404.

Anasontzis, G. E., et al. (2011). Homologous 

overexpression of xylanase in Fusarium 
oxysporum increases ethanol productivity 
during consolidated bioprocessing (CBP) 
of lignocellulosics. Journal of Biotechnology, 
152(1–2), 16–23.

Argueso, J. L., et al. (2009). Genome structure 
of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain widely 
used in bioethanol production. Genome 
Research, 19(12), 2258–2270.

Babu, B. V., & Sheth, P. N. (2007). Modeling 

and simulation of reduction zone of 
downdraft biomass gasifier: Effect of air to 
fuel ratio. Journal of Future Engineering and 
Technology, 2(3), 35–40.

Babu, B. V. (2008). Biomass pyrolysis: A state-
of-the-art review. Biofuels, Bioproducts and 
Biorefining, 2(5), 393–414.

Balan, V., et al. (2009). Lignocellulosic biomass 

pretreatment using AFEX. Methods in 
Molecular Biology (Totowa, NJ, U.S.), 581, 
61–77. (Biofuels).

Balat, M. (2011). An overview of the properties 

and applications of biomass pyrolysis oils. 
Energy Sources, Part A, 33(7), 674–689.
Balat, M., et al. (2009). Main routes for the 
thermo-conversion of biomass into fuels 
and chemicals. Part 2: Gasification systems. 
Energy Conversion Management, 50(12), 
3158–3168.

Blumer-Schuette, S. E., et al. (2008). Extremely 

thermophilic microorganisms for biomass 
conversion: Status and prospects. Current 
Opinion in Biotechnology, 19(3), 210–217.
Bobleter, O., Bonn, G., & Concin, R. (1983). 
Hydrothermolysis of biomass—production 
of raw material for alcohol fermentation 
and other motor fuels. Alternative Energy 
Sources, 3(3), 323–332.

Bonn, G., Concin, R., & Bobleter, O. (1983). 
Hydrothermolysis—a new process for the 
utilization of biomass. Wood Science and 
Technology, 17(3), 195–202.

Bridgeman, T. G., et al. (2006). Influence of 

particle size on the analytical and chemical 
properties of two energy crops. Fuel, 86(1–
2), 60–72.

Brosse, N., et al. (2010). Dilute sulphuric acid 

and ethanol organosolv pretreatment of 

Miscanthus x Giganteus Cellulose Chemistry 
and Technology, 44(1–3), 71–78.

Burtscher, E., et al. (1987). Chromatographic 

analysis of biomass reaction products 
produced by hydrothermolysis of poplar 
wood. Journal of Chromatography, 390(2), 
401–412.

Carlson, T. R., et al. (2010). Catalytic fast 
pyrolysis of glucose with HZSM-5: The 
combined homogeneous and heterogeneous 
reactions. Journal of Catalysis, 270(1), 
110–124.

Carlson, T. R., et al. (2011). Production of 
green aromatics and olefins by catalytic 
fast pyrolysis of wood sawdust. Energy 
Environmental Science, 4(1), 145–161.
Carlson, T. R., Vispute, T. P., & Huber, G. 
W. (2008). Green gasoline by catalytic 
fast pyrolysis of solid biomass derived 
compounds. Chem Sus Chem, 1(5), 
397–400.

Carpenter, D., et al. (2008). Temperature and 

feedstock effects on tar formation during 
pilot-scale biomass gasification. Preprint 
Symposium American Chemical Society, 
Division of Fuel Chemistry, 53(1), 
425–426.

503

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

Cetinkol, O. P., et al. (2010). Understanding 
the impact of ionic liquid pretreatment on 
eucalyptus. Biofuels, 1(1), 33–46.

Cherubini, F., & Stroemman, A. H. (2010). 
Production of biofuels and biochemicals 
from lignocellulosic biomass: Estimation of 
maximum theoretical yields and efficiencies 
using matrix algebra. Energy & Fuels, 24(4), 
2657–2666.

Cherubini, F., & Ulgiati, S. (2009). Crop 

residues as raw materials for biorefinery 
systems—A LCA case study. Applied Energy, 
87(1), 47–57.

Chou, C.-J., et al. (2008). Hydrogenesis 
in hyperthermophilic microorganisms: 
Implications for biofuels. Metabolic 
Engineering, 10(6), 394–404.

Cui, H., & Turn, S. Q. (2009). Tar 

quantification from a fluidized bed biomass 
gasification – gas chromatographic and 
gravimetric methods. Preprint Symposium 
American Chemical Society, Division of Fuel 
Chemistry, 54(1), 198–199.

Dadi, A. P., Schall, C. A., & Varanasi, S. 

(2007). Mitigation of cellulose recalcitrance 
to enzymatic hydrolysis by ionic liquid 
pretreatment. Applied Biochemistry and 
Biotechnology, 137-140, 407–421.

Datta, S., et al. (2010). Ionic liquid tolerant 
hyperthermophilic cellulases for biomass 
pretreatment and hydrolysis. Greem 
Chemistry, 12(2), 338–345.

Demirbas, A., & Arin, G. (2002). An overview 
of biomass pyrolysis. Energy Sources, 24(5), 
471–482.

Demirbas, A. (2006). Production and 

characterization of bio-chars from biomass 
via pyrolysis. Energy Sources, Part A, 28(5), 
413–422.

Demirbas, A. (2009). Pyrolysis of biomass for 
fuels and chemicals. Energy Sources, Part A, 
31(12), 1028–1037.

Duerre, P. (2007). Biobutanol: An attractive 

biofuel. Biotechnology Journal, 2(12), 
1525–1534.

Energy Information Administration 

(2009) http://www.eia.gov/FTPRoot/
environment/2009_c02_analysis.pdf.
Foston, M., & Ragauskas, A. J. (2010). 

Changes in lignocellulosic supramolecular 
and ultrastructure during dilute acid 
pretreatment of Populus and switchgrass. 
Biomass Bioenergy, 34(12), 1885–1895.

French, R. J., Hrdlicka, J., & Baldwin, R. 
(2010). Mild hydrotreating of biomass 
pyrolysis oils to produce a suitable refinery 
feedstock. Environ. Program Sustainable 
Energy, 29(2), 142–150.

Gray, K. A. (2007). Cellulosic ethanol – state of 
the technology. International Sugar Journal, 
109(1299), 145–146. 148, 150–151

Guo, G.-L., et al. (2008). Characterization of 
dilute acid pretreatment of silvergrass for 
ethanol production. Bioresource Technology, 
99(14), 6046–6053.

Gupta, R., & Lee, Y. Y. (2010). Investigation 

of biomass degradation mechanism in 
pretreatment of switchgrass by aqueous 
ammonia and sodium hydroxide. Bioresource 
Technology, 101(21), 8185–8191.

Hanaoka, T., et al. (2008). Bench-scale 

production of hydrocarbon liquid fuel from 

504

woody biomass via gasification. Journal of the 
Japan Institute Energy, 87(9), 737–743.
Hemme, C. L., et al. (2010). Sequencing of 

multiple clostridial genomes related to 
biomass conversion and biofuel production. 
Journal of Bacteriology, 192(24), 6494–6496.
Hess, M., et al. (2011). Metagenomic discovery 

of biomass-degrading genes and genomes 
from cow rumen. Science (Washington, DC, 
U.S.), 331(6016), 463–467.

Himmel, M. E., et al. (2007). Biomass 

recalcitrance: Engineering plants and 
enzymes for biofuels production. Science 
(Washington, DC, U.S.), 315(5813), 
804–807.

Huber, G. W. (2010). Green gasoline and 

petrochemicals from lignocellulosic biomass 
by pyrolysis based technologies. Preprint 
Symposium American Chemical Society, 
Division of Fuel Chemistry, 55(1), 228–229.

Hyeon, J. E., et al. (2011). Production of 

minicellulosomes for the enhanced hydrolysis 
of cellulosic substrates by recombinant 
Corynebacterium glutamicum. Enzyme and 
Microbial Technology, 48(4–5), 371–377.

Joergensen, H., Kristensen, J. B., & Felby, 

C. (2007). Enzymatic conversion of 
lignocellulose into fermentable sugars: 
Challenges and opportunities. Biofuels, 
Bioproducts and Biorefin, 1(2), 119–134.
Johansson, K., et al. (2010). Agriculture as 
provider of both food and fuel. Ambio, 
39(2), 91–99.

Kim, H., Kim, S., & Dale, B. E. (2009). 

Biofuels, land use change, and greenhouse 
gas emissions: Some unexplored variables. 
Environmental Science and Technology, 
43(3), 961–967.

Kim, H.-W., & Ishikawa, K. (2010). Complete 

saccharification of cellulose at high 
temperature using endocellulase and beta- 
glucosidase from Pyrococcus sp. Journal 
of Microbiology and Biotechnology, 20(5), 
889–892.

Knocke, C., & Vogt, J. (2009). Biofuels –  

challenges & chances: How biofuel 
development can benefit from advanced 
process technology. Engineering Life Science, 
9(2), 96–99.

Kumar, A., Jones, D. D., & Hanna, M. 

A. (2009). Thermochemical biomass 
gasification: A review of the current status 
of the technology. Energies (Basel, Switz.), 
2(3), 556–581.

Kumar, A., Flynn, P., & Sokhansanj, S. (2008). 

Biopower generation from mountain pine 
infested wood in Canada: An economical 
opportunity for greenhouse gas mitigation. 
Renewable Energy, 33(6), 1354–1363.

Kumar, S., et al. (2009). Recent advances in 

production of bioethanol from lignocellulosic 
biomass. Chemical Engineering and 
Technology, 32(4), 517–526.

Lappas, A., & Heracleous, E. (2011). 

Production of biofuels via Fischer-Tropsch 
synthesis: Biomass-to-liquids. Woodhead 
Publishing Series in Energy, 15, 493–529. 
(Handbook of Biofuels Production).

Larson, E. D. (2006). A review of life-cycle 
analysis studies on liquid biofuel systems 
for the transport sector. Energy Sustainable 
Development, 10(2), 109–126.

Lau, M. J., et al. (2010). Ammonia fiber 

expansion (AFEX) pretreatment, enzymatic 
hydrolysis, and fermentation on empty palm 
fruit bunch fiber (EPFBF) for cellulosic 
ethanol production. Applied Biochemistry 
and Biotechnology, 162(7), 1847–1857.

Li, C., et al. (2010). Comparison of dilute acid 
and ionic liquid pretreatment of switchgrass: 
Biomass recalcitrance, delignification and 
enzymatic saccharification. Bioresource 
Technology, 101(13), 4900–4906.

Linger, J. G., Adney, W. S., & Darzins, A. 
(2010). Heterologous expression and 
extracellular secretion of cellulolytic 
enzymes by Zymomonas mobilis. Applied 
and Environment Microbiology, 76(19), 
6360–6369.

Lorenz, A. J., et al. (2010). Genetic analysis of 
cell wall traits relevant to cellulosic ethanol 
production in maize (Zea mays L.). Crop 
Science, 50(3), 842–852.

Melgar, A., Perez, J., & Horrillo, A. (2009). 

Biomass gasification process in a downdraft 
fixed bed gasifier: A real time diagnosis 
model based on gas composition analysis. 
Revista Facultad de Ingeniería Universidad 
de Antioquia, 49, 9–18.

Mesa, L., et al. (2010). An approach to 

optimization of enzymatic hydrolysis from 
sugarcane bagasse based on organosolv 
pretreatment. Journal of Chemical 
Technology and Biotechnology, 85(8), 
1092–1098.

Miao, Z., et al. (2011). Energy requirement 
for comminution of biomass in relation to 
particle physical properties. Industrial Crops 
and Products, 33(2), 504–513.

Michel, G., et al. (2009). The family 6 
carbohydrate-binding modules have 
coevolved with their appended catalytic 
modules toward similar substrate specificity. 
Glycobiology, 19(6), 615–623.

Miller, C. A. (2009). Environmental impacts 

of biofuel production and use. Abstract 
of Papers, 238th ACS National Meeting, 
Washington, DC, United States, August 16-
20, 2009, p. FUEL-285.

Mohan, D., Pittman, C. U., Jr., & Steele, P. H. 

(2006). Pyrolysis of wood/biomass for  
bio-oil: A critical review. Energy & Fuels, 
20(3), 848–889.

Mullins, K. A., Griffin, W. M., & Matthews, H. 
S. (2011). Policy implications of uncertainty 
in modeled life-cycle greenhouse gas 
emissions of biofuels. Environmental Science 
and Technology, 45(1), 132–138.

Munasinghe, P. C., & Khanal, S. K. (2010). 

Biomass-derived syngas fermentation into 
biofuels: Opportunities and challenges. 
Bioresource Technology, 101(13), 
5013–5022.

Nakahira, Y., et al. (2009). The transgenic plants 

with chloroplasts expressing thermostable 
cellulase for enzymic saccharification of cell 
wall components. (Japan). Application: JP. 
p. 18pp.

Nataf, Y., et al. (2010). Clostridium 
thermocellum cellulosomal genes 
are regulated by extracytoplasmic 
polysaccharides via alternative sigma 
factors. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States 

Bioenergy from plants and plant residues

C H A P T E R   3 1

of America, 107(43), 18646–18651. 
(S18646/1-S18646/4).

Nimlos, M. R., et al. (2009). Global 

mechanisms of tar formation during 
gasification of biomass. Preprint Symposium 
American Chemical Society, Division of Fuel 
Chemistry, 54(1), 372–373.

Park, N. -H., et al. (2010). Organosolv 

pretreatment with various catalysts for 
enhancing enzymatic hydrolysis of pitch 
pine (Pinus rigida) Bioresource Technology, 
101(18), 7046–7053.

Patell, V. M., et al. (2010). Methods for 

generating transgenic plants expressing 
cellulases from diatoms for production of 
bioethanol. (Avesthagen Limited, India). 
Application: IN IN. p. 14pp.

Peralta-Yahya, P. P., & Keasling, J. D. (2010). 
Advanced biofuel production in microbes. 
Biotechnol Journal, 5(2), 147–162.

Plass, L., & Reimelt, S. (2007). Second 

generation biofuels. Hydrocarbon 
Engineering, 12(6), 71–74.

Roberts, K. G., et al. (2010). Life cycle 

assessment of biochar systems: Estimating 
the energetic, economic, and climate change 
potential. Environmental Science and 
Technology, 44(2), 827–833.

Rude, M. A., & Schirmer, A. (2009). New 
microbial fuels: A biotech perspective. 
Current Opinion in Microbiology, 12(3), 
274–281.

Sakka, M., et al. (2010). Analysis of 
a Clostridium josui cellulase gene 
cluster containing the man5A gene and 
characterization of recombinant Man5A. 
Bioscience Biotechnology and Biochemistry, 
74(10), 2077–2082.

Selig, M. J., et al. (2007). Deposition of 
lignin droplets produced during dilute 
acid pretreatment of maize stems 
retards enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose. 
Biotechnology Progress, 23(6), 1333–1339.

Serio, M. A., Kroo, E., & Wojtowicz, M. A. 
(2003). Biomass pyrolysis for distributed 
energy generation. Preprint Symposium 
American Chemical Society, Division of Fuel 
Chemistry, 48(2), 584–589.

Simmons, B. A., et al. (2010). Ionic liquid 

pretreatment. Chemical Engineering 
Progress, 106(3), 50–55.

Smeets, E. M. W., et al. (2007). A bottom-up 
assessment and review of global bio-energy 
potentials to 2050. Progress in Energy and 
Combustion Science, 33(1), 56–106.

Sokhansanj, S., et al. (2009). Large-scale 

production, harvest and logistics of 
switchgrass (Panicum virgatum L.) – current 
technology and envisioning a mature 
technology. Biofuels, Bioproducts and 
Biorefining, 3(2), 124–141.

Stanley, G., & Hahn-Haegerdal, B. (2010). Fuel 
ethanol production from lignocellulosic raw 
materials using recombinant yeasts. Biomass 
and Biofuels, 261–291.

Steen, E. J., et al. (2010). Microbial production 

of fatty-acid-derived fuels and chemicals 
from plant biomass. Nature (London, U.K.), 
463(7280), 559–562.

Su, X., et al. (2010). Mutational insights into the 
roles of amino acid residues in ligand binding 
for two closely related family 16 carbohydrate 
binding modules. Journal of Biological 
Chemistry, 285(45), 34665–34676.

Tamaru, Y., et al. (2010). Comparison of 
the mesophilic cellulosome-producing 
Clostridium cellulovorans genome with other 
cellulosome-related clostridial genomes. 
Microbial Biotechnology, 4(1), 64–73.
Taylor, J. D., Jenni, M. M., & Peters, M. 
W. (2010). Dehydration of fermented 
isobutanol for the production of renewable 
chemicals and fuels. Topics in Catalysis, 
53(15–18), 1224–1230.

Vanholme, R., et al. (2010). Engineering 

traditional monolignols out of lignin by 

concomitant up-regulation of F5H1 and 
down-regulation of COMT in Arabidopsis. 
The Plant Journal: For Cell and Molecular 
Biology, 64(6), 885–897.

Vodovnik, M., & Logar, R. M. (2010). 

Cellulosomes: Promising supramolecular 
machines of anaerobic cellulolytic 
microorganisms. Acta Chimica Slovenica, 
57(4), 767–774.

Wang, L., et al. (2008). Contemporary 

issues in thermal gasification of biomass 
and its application to electricity and fuel 
production. Biomass Bioenergy, 32(7), 
573–581.

Wen, F., Sun, J., & Zhao, H. (2010). 

Yeast surface display of trifunctional 
minicellulosomes for simultaneous 
saccharification and fermentation 
of cellulose to ethanol. Applied and 
Environment Microbiology, 76(4), 1251–
1260.

Wilson, D. B. (2009). Cellulases and biofuels. 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 20(3), 
295–299.

Wu, D., et al. (2009). A phylogeny-driven 

genomic encyclopaedia of Bacteria 
and Archaea. Nature (London, U.K.), 
462(7276), 1056–1060.

Xu, J. -M., et al. (2010). Refining and 

application of fractions of biomass-pyrolysis 
oil. Linchan Huaxue Yu Gongye, 30(2), 1–5.

Yanik, J., et al. (2007). Fast pyrolysis of 
agricultural wastes: Characterization 
of pyrolysis products. Fuel Processing 
Technology, 88(10), 942–947.

Zhao, Z., et al. (2001). Biomass pyrolysis in an 
argon/hydrogen plasma reactor. Engineering 
in Life Sciences, 1(5), 197–199.

Zhu, J. Y., & Pan, X. J. (2010). Woody 
biomass pretreatment for cellulosic 
ethanol production: Technology and energy 
consumption evaluation. Bioresource 
Technology, 101(13), 4992–5002.

505

An engineering view to micropropagation 
and generation of true to type and 
pathogen-free plants

15

Eli Khayat
Rahan Meristem Ltd., Israel

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface ................................................................................ 229
Shoot Multiplication Through Meristem Culture . . . . . . . . 229
Stage 0: Disinfection and start of axenic culture . . . . 230
Stage I: Initiation of culture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230
Stage II: Multiplication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230
Stage III: Elongation and promotion of shoot  
and root development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Stage IV: Acclimatization and hardening . . . . . . . . . . 231
Automation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Energy and Lights  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
Photoautotrophic Cultures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
Micropropagation in Liquid Media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
Plant–Microbe Interaction During in vitro and ex vitro 
Stages of Micropropagation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
Inoculation with Beneficial Microorganisms . . . . . . . . . . . 234
Elimination of Viruses by in vitro Techniques . . . . . . . . . . 238
Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238

Preface

The premise that in vitro propagation will replace seed propa-
gation  has  yet  to  become  reality.  Despite  the  great  advan-
tages  of  micropropagated  plants,  tissue-culture  technologists 
have  not  succeeded  in  adapting  this  mode  of  propagation  to 
a large industrialized scale. Pursuing micropropagation in four 
stages  was  first  suggested  by  Murashige  and  Skoog  (1974). 
The  four  stages  include:  explant  preparation  (stage  I);  mul-
tiplication  (stage  II);  rooting  and  elongation  (stage  III);  and 
hardening  (stage  IV).  This  partitioning  is  still  employed  by 
most production laboratories. Tens of thousands of protocols 
have been developed for in vitro propagation of a wide range 
of  crop  species.  Regardless  of  the  enormous  advances  in  the 
biological  aspects,  in  almost  four  decades  of  existence,  the 

major obstacles to modernizing the micropropagation industry 
remain  unresolved.  High  labor  costs  in  developed  countries 
play a major economic factor when considering tissue culture 
over  alternative  modes  of  propagation.  The  expenditure  on 
labor  in  micropropagation  laboratories  situated  in  developing 
countries  is  50–60%  of  the  total  production  cost  (Anderson 
et al., 1977; Ilan and Khayat, 1997; Standaert de Metsenaere, 
1991).  Consequently,  in  recent  years  the  commercial  micro-
propagation industry migrated from developed to underdevel-
oped  countries.  Other  industrial  constraints  such  as  loss  due 
to microbial contamination, failure to sustain phenotypic con-
formity,  and  high  operational  costs  contributed  to  confining 
the  commercial  application  of  micropropagation  to  a  narrow 
range of crop species.

The  increase  in  volume  of  micropropagated  plants  is  con-
fined to a short list of species that greatly gain from the tech-
nology including banana, date palm, orchid, ferns, ornamental 
greens, and Prunus and Malus root-stocks. Other alternatives 
for propagating these species are too complex and entail high 
cost.  The  biological  technology  for  propagating  these  species 
has  been  perfected,  mainly  in  commercial  laboratories,  and 
consequently has not been disclosed publicly.

On the other hand, protocols for explantation, multiplica-
tion, rooting, and hardening have been published for a broad 
range of crops. Unfortunately, most published protocols solely 
address  developmental  aspects,  leaving  the  industrial  aspects 
largely ignored. It would be fair to say that in the last 15–20 
years the engineering aspects of the micropropagation indus-
try have regressed rather than advanced.

This  chapter  will  highlight  commercial  micropropagation 
from an engineering point of view rather than the biological side.

Shoot Multiplication Through 
Meristem Culture

Meristem  culture,  when  possible,  is  by  far  the  safest,  most 
rapid,  and  most  effective  mode  of  micropropagation.  At 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00015-8

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

the  apex  of  all  shoots,  whether  terminal  or  lateral,  there 
are  dome-shaped  masses  of  cells  known  as  meristems.  Cells 
of  apical  meristems  have  large  nuclei,  a  compact  cytoplasm, 
and small vacuoles. While the cells in the shoot tip meristem 
are actively dividing, the axillary meristems in dormant buds 
are  quiescent.  When  conditions  are  favorable,  cells  in  axil-
lary meristems divide rapidly and the daughter cells increase 
in size, becoming in most instances larger than the cells from 
which they originated.

The  efficiency  of  micropropagation  by  subculturing  of  de 
novo  generated  meristems  (culture  of  apical  buds  or  nodal 
segments) is influenced by several genetic and external factors 
including ex vitro (e.g., genotype and physiological state) and 
in vitro conditions (e.g., media constituents, temperature, and 
light; Dobránszki and Teixeira da Silva, 2010).

Stage 0: Disinfection and start of axenic 
culture

Initially stage 0 was set up as a means for introducing uncon-
taminated  and  true  to  type  initials.  To  assure  cultures  start 
with  minimal  contamination,  mother  stock  plantations  are 
often used. Using mother stock collections having a high level 
of  sanitation  reduces  the  risk  of  introducing  infected  mate-
rial into the culture. Disinfecting the initials could start in the 
mother  stock  greenhouses  or  in  the  field  collection.  In  con-
tained  facilities,  mother  plants  are  sprayed  with  pesticides 
two  to  three  weeks  prior  to  the  introduction  of  explants  to 
the tissue-culture laboratory (Nasib et al., 2008).

Mortality of initials can also occur due to secretion of oxi-
dizing compounds from the wounded tissue. The oxidation of 
polyphenols  to  quinones  is  common  in  many  species,  and  is 
well documented in the literature (Romano et al., 1992; Titov 
et al., 2006; North et al., 2010).

Although  almost  any  tissue  could  regenerate  into  a  com-
plete  plant,  shoot  tips  and  axillary  buds  are  most  often 
used  as  explant  material.  In  a  few  species,  leaves  are  used 
as  explants  (Anthurium  spp.,  Pierik  and  Steegmans,  1976; 
Ficus  lyrata,  Debergh  and  De  Wael,  1977;    Saintpaulia, 
Margara and Poillat, 1985; Stevia, Ferreira and Handro, 1988; 
Cryptanthus, Koh and Davies, 1997; Atak and Celik, 2009).

Stage I: Initiation of culture

Following disinfection, initials are placed in axenic conditions 
for monitoring microbial growth from weeks 4–12. The con-
cept of microbial indexing (reviewed by Leifert and Cassells, 
2001)  is  particularly  practical  in  cases  when  a  vast  number 
of plants is propagated from a single initial (e.g., ornamental 
ferns),  or  in  cases  in  which  the  value  of  each  initial  is  very 
high (e.g., date palms).

Typically, the medium of choice for shoot branching and elon-
gation  in  stage  I  is  MS  (Murashige  and  Skoog,  1962)  supple-
mented with both auxins and cytokinins. These media are often 
supplemented with antioxidation reagents such as PVP (Rabha 
Abdelwahd et al., 2008), 8-hydroxy quinoline citrate (8-HQC; 
Alizadeh  et  al.,  2010)  at  a  concentration  of  200 mg  l1,  and 

230

ascorbic and citric acids. Dark cultivation is helpful for inhibiting 
oxidation, as well as preventing degradation of the auxin compo-
nent in the medium.

Stage II: Multiplication

In  stage  II  micropropagators  aim  at  high  proliferation  of 
unrooted propagules. A high cytokinin to auxin ratio is often 
applied to enhance shoot proliferation. Depending on the gen-
otype and mode of propagation, propagators provide from 0.5 
to  10 mg   l1.  However,  since  the  total  number  of  transfers, 
as  well  as  the  rate  of  multiplication  in  each  transfer  cycle, 
induces  somaclonal  variations,  it  is  customary  to  normalize 
both  parameters  by  regulating  the  levels  of  cytokinins,  plan-
ning the total number of transfers per explant and setting up 
an optimal time of incubation between transfer cycles.

There  is  a  debate  among  researchers  regarding  the  effect 
of excess cytokinins on off-types. Bairu et al. (2006) reported 
that  higher  levels  of  BAP  and  IBA  elevated  the  percentages 
of  somaclonal  variants  in  “Cavendish”  banana.  On  the  other 
hand,  Reuveni  and  Israeli  (1990)  showed  opposite  results. 
These discrepancies could stem from differences in the sensi-
tivity to BAP of different genotypes. Regardless of the cause, 
the correlation between the number of propagules per explant 
and the frequency of somaclonal variation is decisive. Certain 
plant species are more prone to somaclonal variation. In this 
regard strawberries are a good example (Boxus et al., 2000).

The  genetic  mechanisms  for  somaclonal  variation  were 
extensively studied in micropropagated banana plants (Hwang, 
1986; Cote et al., 1993; Krikorian et al., 1993; Khayat et al., 
2004).  Plant  architecture  is  greatly  affected  by  somaclonal 
variation. Plant size greatly fluctuates in Cavendish populations 
(Musa  acuminata  Cavendish  AAA)  produced  by  tissue  cul-
ture. “Dwarf ” or “tall” mutants are very common. In general, 
the dwarf mutants develop a small deformed bunch (Reuveni 
et al., 1996; Khayat et al., 2004). For practical reasons, lower 
stature  plants  are  considered  advantageous.  However,  in  most 
cultivars,  taller  plants  are  positively  correlated  with  a  larger 
bunch.  A  somaclonal  mutant  of  “Zelig,”  (a  Cavendish  selec-
tion), registered under the name “Adi,” was selected for a com-
bined  low  stature  and  large  bunch.  The  average  plant  height 
of  the  selected  clone  is  approximately  230 cm,  compared  to 
315 cm  of  its  originator  Zelig.  The  average  bunch  weight  and 
finger size of Adi are both larger than Zelig (Khayat, 2010). The 
dwarf and tall mutants in Cavendish have been characterized as 
under- or oversensitive to the hormone Gibberellic acid (GA), 
respectively.  An  in  vitro  bioassay  was  developed  where  a  low 
concentration of GA3 was included in the growth medium dur-
ing the elongation stage of the tissue culture. Wild-type plants 
in  the  GA3-containing  medium  elongated  above  the  plants 
that  were  placed  on  a  substrate  devoid  of  the  hormone  (con-
trol treatment). Dwarf mutants on the hormone medium grew 
below  the  height  of  the  control,  while  oversensitive  mutants 
grew above (Khayat et al., 2004). A mutant that was depicted 
as “Long and Narrow Leaves” (LNL) was created by exhaustive 
cycling of tissue culture leading to induction of retrotransposon 
expression and transposition. These experiments (Khayat et al., 
2004) led to the conclusion that the long internodes mutation 

An engineering view to micropropagation and generation of true to type and pathogen-free plants

C H A P T E R   1 5

is caused by insertions of retroelements in a chromosomal locus 
having an effect on plant height. An extensive number of cycles 
in tissue culture enhance the activity of retrotransposable ele-
ments  in  the  genome.  Similar  results  were  reported  in  rice 
where specific genes were mutated by transposition of Tos 17, 
a  rice  retrotransposon  activated  by  tissue  culture  (Hirochika 
et al., 1996). Interestingly, in rice, at least 50% of the Tos 17 
landing  sites  were  detected  as  coding  regions.  The  “Landing 
Pad”  hypothesis  of  retrotransposable  elements  may  explain 
the high frequency of dwarf mutants in Musa. The conserved 
Ty1-copia group of retrotransposons, highly expressed in banana 
(Khayat  et  al.,  2004),  is  ubiquitous  to  various  dicotyledo-
nous  and  monocotyledonous  plant  species  including  potatoes, 
onions, fava beans, barley, and rye (Kumar et al., 2004).

The process of tissue culture also induces mutations medi-
ated by DNA methylation (Peraza-Echeverria et al., 2001). It 
was pointed out that the source of explants had an effect on 
the  degree  of  polymorphism.  In  vitro  plants  produced  from 
floral meristems showed greater frequencies of methylation in 
comparison to sucker meristems.

Stage III: Elongation and promotion of 
shoot and root development

leaf  anatomy  that  includes  underdeveloped  stomata  and 
lack  of  a  cuticle  (Wetzstein  and  Sommer,  1982;  Gilly  et  al., 
1997).  Consequently,  the  unhardened  plants  are  susceptible 
to rapid water loss. In addition, the photosynthetic machinery 
is  impaired.  The  transition  to  autotrophic  existence  is  often 
possible only in photosynthetic organs that were developed in 
ex  vitro  conditions.  In  many  cases,  the  success  of  hardening 
depends  on  the  survival  capability  of  the  in  vitro  developed 
tissues until ex vitro organs (mainly roots and leaves) differen-
tiate (reviewed by Pospisilova et al., 1999).

Susceptibility of unacclimatized plants to airborne, as well 
as soil-borne, pathogens could cause rapid death in the hard-
ening greenhouses. Due to the sterility of the tissue-cultured 
plants  they  tend  to  be  more  vulnerable  to  pathogens  that 
benefit from the lack of competing microbes on the host. In 
recent  years  commercial  producers  have  realized  the  benefit 
of inoculating ex vitro plants with beneficial microorganisms.

Finally,  the  choices  of  soil  substrate  and  plug  parameters 
are  highly  important.  Susceptibility  to  waterlogging  is  often 
overlooked. Due to the small size of the plug, there is a ten-
dency  to  keep  the  plants  under  continuous  flooding,  which 
severely  impairs  the  rate  of  survival.  Especially  in  warm  cli-
mate zones, due to the small plug size, water loss through the 
plug could be rapid and difficult to handle.

Given  that  rooting  is  the  final  in  vitro  stage,  the  efficacy  of 
the entire process often relies on the success of root and shoot 
formation.  Commercial  laboratories  consider  stage  III  the 
most expensive stage, since it is the most labor intensive part 
of the in vitro process.

It is widely accepted that roots and leaves formed in vitro 
have  a  limited  functionality  in  ex  vitro  conditions  (Wardle 
et al., 1979; Grout et al., 1985; Fila et al., 1998). Water con-
ductivity  is  impaired  due  to  discontinuous  vessels  between 
the stem and adventitious roots formed in vitro. However, the 
process  of  in  vitro  root  induction  is  crucial  for  formation  of 
secondary functional roots outside of the in vitro conditions.

Given  that  for  most  species  rooting  and  elongation 
require  a  high  ratio  of  auxin/cytokinins;  for  recalcitrant  spe-
cies  removal  of  excess  cytokinins  demands  an  intermediate 
medium  containing  activated  charcoal  (Ouma  et  al.,  2004; 
Dobránszki  and  Teixeira  da  Silva,  2010;  North  et  al.,  2010). 
Various soil substrates have been experimentally used in stage 
III,  but  none  have  been  utilized  by  commercial  micropropa-
gators. The main advantage of non-agar substrates in stage III 
is  avoiding  damaging  roots  upon  transplanting.  Since  in  vitro 
produced  roots  do  not  function  during  hardening,  producers 
often prefer short and stubby roots rather than long roots that 
would be prone to entanglement and ripping.

Stage IV: Acclimatization and hardening

The eco-physiological parameters for hardening ex vitro plant-
lets differ greatly between plant species. For many species this 
is the most crucial stage, in which losses are very significant. 
The anatomy and physiology of leaves developed in vitro are 
not tolerant of normal ambient conditions. As a result of the 
indulging in vitro conditions, the plants develop an abnormal 

Automation

The process of micropropagation requires a mesh of integrated 
processes  extending  from  explantation,  media  preparation, 
sterilization  of  media  and  vessels,  media  pouring,  cutting  the 
propagules in the multiplication stage, planting in a new vessel, 
growing the plants in environmentally controlled growth rooms, 
screening out contaminated vessels, size sorting, and hardening. 
Several attempts at limiting manual labor in micropropagation 
were reported (Deleplanque et al., 1985; Kutz, 1986; Watake 
and Kinase, 1988; Kinase and Watake, 1991; Peleg et al., 1993; 
Alchanatis  et  al.,  1994;  Sobey  et  al.,  1997;  Sluis,  2006).  The 
main constraint for robotics is the inverse relationship between 
the volume of production versus the cost per propagule.

A detailed description of the Vitron™ 501 (developed for 
ForBio)  was  described  by  Sobey  et  al.(1997).  The  instru-
ment  comprises  a  box-loader  that  unloads  a  stack  of  vessels. 
The lids of the vessels are individually opened by a pneumatic 
cap opener, and a set of grippers and scissors cut the tip and 
lower nodes of the plant and place them in media-containing 
vessels.  A  CCD  camera  visualizes  the  plant  and  calculates 
the  exact  position  of  cutting.  Color-based  artificial  visualiza-
tion has been proposed by Alchanatis et al. (1993) and Peleg 
et al. (1993). Colors and shades were analyzed by a computer 
program  that  determines  the  exact  chopping  position  of  the 
micropropagated  plants.  The  processing  rate  of  the  Vitron 
501  apparatus  is  approximately  six  million  plants  per  year,  a 
moderate  volume  considering  the  capital  investment  for  the 
apparatus.  In  addition,  the  Vitron  501  is  merely  suitable  for 
excision of internodes.

Wang et al. (1998) developed a robust computer algorithm 
for identification, selection and separation of clustered sugar-
cane shoots in stage II meristem culture.

231

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

Hood

Focu sing 

head

Working 

table

Control

Laser

C
h

i
l
l

e
r

Figure 15.1 l Schematic drawing of the laser beam 
cutter l Schematic presentation of a laser apparatus for 
mechanical cutting of meristems. The apparatus is designed 
to fit a laminar flow hood under aseptic conditions. 

Other  geometric  structures  such  as  globular  meristems 
(i.e., banana meristem culture, bulbous plants, etc.) require a 
different cutting apparatus. The multiple meristems are clus-
tered into randomly arranged, compact spheres that are easily 
separated manually. However, random cutting with a mechan-
ical  instrument  requires  passage  through  very  dense  tissue. 
We  have  tried  a  CO2  laser-beam  cutting  apparatus  (Rahan 
Meristem, unpublished data) with a beam diameter of 20 mm. 
Surprisingly, the required beam intensity for cutting submeri-
stems of a banana is in the magnitude of 2 kW. Consequently, 
the apparatus (described in Figure 15.1), requires a chiller of 
25 kW.  To  utilize  the  cutting  tool  in  a  practical  manner  and 
efficiently, the culture would require morphological and phys-
iological adjustments that combine vigorous growth with com-
pact clamps comprised of numerous meristems.

Automated  tissue-culture  systems  developed  for  plants 
without  distinguishable  nodes  have  also  been  investigated 
by  other  researchers.  Miwa  and  Mitsubishi  Heavy  Industries 
developed  a  tissue-culture  robot  that  handles  bulbous  plants 
(Takayama  et  al.,  1991).  Cooper  and  Grant  (1992)  devel-
oped  an  automated  system  of  cutting  and  placing  clustered 
propagules. The system was designed for the compact multi-
meristematic  form  of  growth  in  conjunction  with  a  range  of 
conventional  plastic  vessels.  McFarlane  (1993)  described  an 
image-guided  robotic  harvesting  system  of  micropropagation 
plants. The vision system used a stem location algorithm and 
directed a Cartesian robot to perform the harvesting.

Energy and Lights

A  significant  expense  in  micropropagation  laboratories  is 
related  to  energy.  Energy  consumption  is  mainly  due  to  air 
conditioning,  air  filtration,  and  lights.  The  energy  compo-
nent  of  the  production  cost  depends  mainly  on  the  climate 
in  which  the  laboratory  is  situated.  As  a  rule,  micropropaga-
tion laboratories require low humidity (60%) and moderate 
temperatures (20–24°C). High humidity in the ambient air is 
conducive to fungal contaminations. In tropical regions, under 
warm and humid climate conditions, a large portion of the air-
conditioning wattage is used for air drying.

Most  stage  II  and  III  protocols  require  lighting  in  the 
growth  rooms.  Although  various  types  of  lamps  were  tested 
in  tissue-culture  laboratories,  fluorescent  bulbs  are  the  most 
common  light  source  in  the  industry  (Tanaka  et  al.,  2009). 

Until  recently,  when  compared  to  other  light  sources,  for 
example,  incandescent  and  luminescent  bulbs  (high  pressure 
sodium), fluorescent bulbs are relatively efficient with respect 
to  PPF  and  chlorophyll  absorption  spectrum.  However,  even 
with  electronic  ballasts  and  starters,  cool  white  fluores-
cent  bulbs  emit  significant  excess  heat.  In  Israeli  laborato-
ries approximately 60% of air-conditioning BTUs are used to 
remove excess heat load produced by the light bulbs (unpub-
lished  data).  In  addition  to  the  high  cost  of  air  cooling,  the 
heat emitted by the bulbs damages the plants and induces the 
growth of endogenous bacteria that otherwise would not grow 
on the growth medium.

In Mediterranean type climates, the expenditure of energy 
is  in  the  range  of  15  to  20%  of  the  total  cost  of  production 
(Ilan and Khayat, 1997). With increasing energy cost the rela-
tive expenditure on energy is proportionally higher.

Photoautotrophic Cultures

Sucrose  or  hexoses  have  traditionally  been  included  in  the 
medium of micropropagated plants as a source of carbon and 
energy. Inclusion of sugars alleviates the need to provide envi-
ronmental conditions that support photosynthesis. This tradi-
tion  of  photoheterotrophic  or  photomixotrophic  cultures  has 
been  challenged  since  1988  (Kozai  et  al.,  1988).  It  is  argued 
that for many plant species, including Calla lilies (Zantedeschia 
elliottiana)  and  China  firs  (Cunningghamia  lanceolata),  plant 
growth and development is inhibited in photomixotrophic con-
ditions due to the lack of fixed carbon, low evapotranspiration, 
low rate of nutrient uptake, and ethylene accumulation in the 
vessels (Kozai et al., 2005). The advantages of autotrophic cul-
tures  include  reduced  losses  due  to  microbial  contamination, 
easier  rooting  and  hardening,  and  the  possibility  of  growing 
plants  more  economically  in  larger  vessels  with  reduced  risk 
of contamination (Kozai et al., 2005). In fact, several reports 
show that under forced ventilation, growth and multiplication 
of  photoautotrophic  cultures  is  faster  than  with  mixotrophic 
cultures  (Nguyen  et  al.,  1999;  Nguyen  and  Kozai,  2001; 
Zobayed et al., 2004; Kozai et al., 2005).

Kozai  and  co-workers  (1988)  showed  that  the  limiting 
factors  for  autotrophic  cultures  are  mainly  environmental. 
Chlorophyllus  in  vitro  plantlets  are  capable  of  supplying  their 
carbon and energy needs under a photon flux of 50–200 μmoles.
m2.sec1  (compared  to  30 μmoles.m2.sec1),  air  humidity 

232

An engineering view to micropropagation and generation of true to type and pathogen-free plants

C H A P T E R   1 5

below  70%,  and  ambient  levels  of  CO2.  Despite  many  advan-
tages  in  using  photoautotrophic  cultures  in  large-scale  pro-
duction,  the  technology  was  not  adopted  due  to  unresolved 
technical and logistic difficulties. The relatively high photosyn-
thetic  photon  flux  needed  for  autotrophic  cultures  generates 
a  high  heat  load  in  the  laboratory.  To  supply  adequate  carbon 
the vessels require high ventilation, which is hard to achieve in 
small containers. It was therefore suggested to increase the ves-
sels  size.  Fujiwara  (1988)  developed  a  20 L  vessel  with  forced 
ventilation  for  micropropagation  of  strawberry  plants  (for  a 
review  of  culture  vessels  see  Zobayed  et  al.,  2000).  A  greater 
impact  on  growth  is  achieved  in  a  CO2  enriched  environment 
(Kozai et al., 1987; Kozai and Iwanami, 1988; Woltering, 1990). 
This would not be practical when the culture is in small vessels 
(Kozai et al., 2005). Normally, tissue-culture vessels are capped 
with  an  airtight  plastic  film.  Plant  aeration  is  attained  by  slow 
diffusion  of  the  gas  molecules  over  a  concentration  gradient 
between the outside and inside air. Installing small membranes 
(with a pore size of 0.2–0.5 microns) on the surface of the lid 
greatly  improved  aeration.  Alternatively,  ambient  air  could  be 
forced through a filter to the vessel. Yue et al. (1993) developed 
a forced ventilation system for micropropagated cultures. Aside 
from  the  higher  levels  of  CO2,  it  was  possible  to  reduce  the 
relative humidity in the cultures from almost 100 to 46%. This 
concept was later used in photoautotrophic cultures (Armstrong 
et al., 1997; Heo and Kozai, 1999).

Interestingly,  for  the  case  of  employing  a  temporary 
immersion  system,  the  inclusion  of  sucrose  in  the  medium 
of micropropagated plantains was beneficial to the hardening 
process  (ex  vitro  stage)  even  at  high  PPF  and  enriched  CO2 
(Aragón et al., 2010).

Micropropagation in Liquid Media

The  rates  of  growth  and  multiplication  determine  the  effi-
ciency  of  tissue  cultures.  These  parameters  are  largely  influ-
enced by the ability of the plants to absorb nutrients from the 
growth  medium.  Solid  media  necessitates  diffusion  of  nutri-
ents from the medium to the plants. The gradual depletion of 
nutrients in the vicinity of the plant requires frequent trans-
fers of plants to new media. Recurrent preparation of media is 
laborious, costly, and promotes microbial contaminations.

For  large-scale  plant  cell  culture,  liquid  media  offer  many 
advantages  over  solid  or  semi-solid  matrices  (Yesil-Celiktas 
et al., 2010). In liquids the plant cells benefit from intimate 
contact  with  the  medium,  providing  a  long-lasting  continu-
ous  supply  of  nutrients.  Consequently,  provided  that  aera-
tion  is  adequate,  growth  and  multiplication  rates  are  higher. 
However,  liquid  media  introduce  morphological  and  physi-
ological  abnormalities  stemming  from  hyperhydration  of  the 
tissue  leading  to  dysfunctional  stomata  and  protocorm-like 
structures  that  do  not  differentiate  into  complete  plants.  In 
addition,  super  hydrated  plants  have  a  “glassy”  phenotype 
(Ziv, 2000). Poor aeration is a severe drawback in liquid cul-
tures. Due to the low solubility of oxygen in water, vigorous 
agitation or air bubbling does not provide adequate aeration of 
the growth medium. Consequently, the plantlets often suffer 
under the stress of anoxia.

The  invention  of  the  temporary  immersion  system  (TIS) 
signifies major progress in the field of micropropagation in liq-
uid  media.  Similar  technologies  in  which  the  plant  material 
is  intermittently  flooded  preceded  TIS.  Weathers  and  Giles 
(1988)  proposed  the  use  of  nutrient  mist  culture  in  Daucus, 
Lycopersicon,  Ficus,  Cinchona,  and  Brassica.  All  of  the  plants 
grew  at  least  as  well  as  they  did  on  an  agar-based  medium 
and the rate of multiplication was greater. Another innovative 
approach  introduced  propagation  of  potato  plantlets  in  slowly 
rotating  bioreactors  (Akita  and  Ohta,  1998).  TIS  was  first 
introduced by Alvard et al. (1993) in micropropagated banana 
plants. Since then, it has been tested for micropropagation of 
pineapples  (Escalona  et  al.,  2003),  plantains  (Aragón  et  al., 
2005), Hevea brasiliensis (Etienne et al., 1997), Psidium gua-
java (Kosky et al., 2005), and Cacao (Niemenak et al., 2008). 
Small  TIS  bioreactors  are  commercialized  under  the  name 
RITA® 
(http://plantstissueculture.blogspot.com/2008/11/
rita-temporary-immersion-system.html).  Apparently,  due  to 
proper aeration, the physiology and morphology of the in vitro 
plants growing in TIS bioreactors do not show hyperhydration 
symptoms (Teisson et al., 1996; Etienne and Berthouly, 2002; 
Ziv, 2005) and gain better absorption of the nutrients.

Plant—Microbe Interaction During 
in vitro and ex vitro Stages of 
Micropropagation

Commercial  tissue-culture  laboratories  realize  that  although 
sanitation is effective for reducing microbial contamination, it 
does  not  eliminate  contaminants.  Experience  teaches  us  that 
endophytic  bacteria  could  express  latently,  appearing  on  the 
medium  in  advanced  cycles  of  multiplication  (Khayat  et  al., 
1996).  Despite  a  harsh  process  of  disinfection,  explants  are 
often  introduced  to  the  in  vitro  culture  “contaminated”  with 
fungi and bacteria. Indexing the culture for non-fastidious con-
taminants  is  laborious  and  expensive,  whereas  separation  of 
axenic to contaminated cultures is not always achievable (Reed 
et  al.,  1995;  Cassells  and  Tahmatsidou,  1996).  Most  latent 
endophytic  bacteria  are  opportunistic  but  not  pathogenic. 
Given  the  right  conditions  they  will  slow  down  growth  and 
proliferation of the culture (Leifert et al., 1994). Furthermore, 
commercial laboratories often fail to detect contaminating bac-
teria  that  do  not  manifest  visual  symptoms  other  than  slow 
growth (Debergh and Vanderschaeghe, 1988).

Although  some  success  has  been  reported  using  antibiot-
ics  (Young  et  al.,  1984;  Falkiner,  1990;  Leifert  et  al.,  1991; 
Kneifel and Leonhardt, 1992), it is largely agreed among com-
mercial  micropropagators  that  the  damage  to  the  plants  out-
weighs  the  benefit.  When  selecting  the  proper  antibiotic,  the 
micropropagator  should  consider  the  effect  on  the  plant  and 
the bacteria. Another consideration is the nature of the chosen 
antibiotic. Pollock et al. (1983) reported that on tobacco cells 
the family of β-lactam antibiotics (e.g., penicillin and carbeni-
cillin)  was  least  toxic  among  20  different  antibiotics.  Leifert 
et al. (1992) reported that carbenicillin was toxic to a variety 
of  ornamental  plants.  Aminoglycosides  such  as  streptomycin, 
neomycin, and gentamicin undergo complex interactions with 

233

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

Figure 15.2 l Effect of bacterial strains and 
Fusarium oxysporum on banana plants l (A) 
control, (B) cocktail combination of bacterial strains 
and G. intraradices, (C) Glomus intraradices, and (D) F. 
oxysporum. 

polyribosomes. But the phytotoxic effects are species-specific. 
After six days in culture Reed et al. (1995) observed that neo-
mycin caused severe damage to mint shoots, rifampicin slightly 
inhibited growth, and streptomycin had no effect.

The choice of bacteriostatic compounds is considered safer 
for use in comparison to most antibiotics. To this end, quater-
nary ammonium cations are successful against a wide range of 
gram negative bacteria (unpublished results). Although there 
is a risk of the contaminants reappearing at a later stage, this 
class  of  compounds  is  relatively  effective  and  safe  to  use  in 
most plant species.

In many cases, a useful strategy to combat endophytic bac-
terial contaminations is by modifying the environmental con-
ditions  of  the  cultured  plants.  This  would  be  effective  after 
the  bacteria  has  been  isolated,  identified,  and  characterized. 
Upon  recognition  of  the  contaminating  species,  arresting  its 
growth could be achieved by changes of pH, ambient temper-
ature, aeration, and so forth.

Inoculation with Beneficial 
Microorganisms

Micropropagation  techniques  reduce  or  even  eliminate  the 
population  of  beneficial  microorganisms  such  as  mycorrhizal 
fungi and plant growth promoting bacteria in the rhizosphere, 
at least during the early stages of the post in vitro acclimation. 
The  lack  of  beneficial  microorganisms  can  adversely  affect 
the  survival  and  growth  of  in  vitro  produced  plantlets.  Soil 
microorganisms are integral components in agricultural, horti-
cultural, and forest ecosystems, fulfilling critical roles in nutri-
ent cycling, maintenance of soil structure, regulation of plant 
growth,  and  combating  harmful  pathogens.  Microbial  activ-
ity is particularly intense in the rhizosphere; the nutrient rich 
zone of soil surrounding plant roots that accumulates a variety 
of  organic  compounds  due  to  root  exudation,  secretion,  and 
decomposition.  They  stimulate  plant  growth  through  various 
mechanisms  including  enhancing  nutrient  and  water  uptake, 
producing plant growth regulators, acting as biological control 
agents against root pathogens, helping plants to tolerate various 

stresses (salt, drought, and toxic chemicals), and are helpful to 
plants growing on industrial waste and degraded lands (bioreme-
diation; Granger et al., 1983; Chavez and Ferrera-Cerrato, 1990; 
Vidal et al., 1992; Lucy et al., 2004; Kapoor et al., 2008).

Plant-growth-promoting bacteria enhance plant growth and 
development  by  increasing  nitrogen  and  phosphorus  uptake, 
synthesizing  plant-growth-promoting  substances,  and  pro-
ducing  antibiotics  in  the  rhizosphere  to  combat  against  root 
pathogens.

Mycorrhizal  fungi  are  soil-borne  and  form  beneficial  sym-
biosis  with  host  plants.  The  fungal  hyphae  grow  within  the 
plant roots and extend out into the surrounding soil acting as 
an extension of the roots, which increases the absorptive sur-
face area of the root system. In mycorrhizal associations, both 
partners (plant and fungus) benefit from each other. The host 
plants  receive  mineral  nutrition  and  water  supply  from  the 
fungus  while  the  fungus  obtains  photosynthetically  derived 
carbohydrates from the host plant. Because of the mycorrhizal 
association, plants also become resistant to certain root patho-
gens  and  can  tolerate  stressful  conditions  such  as  drought, 
salt, or toxic chemicals. In general, mycorrhizal fungi help in 
the  development  of  a  stronger  root  system.  Several  types  of 
mycorrhizal  associations  have  been  recognized,  but  the  two 
most common types are ecto- and endo- (or arbuscular) myc-
orrhizae.  Ectomycorrhizal  fungal  hyphae  develop  externally 
forming  dense  mycelial  growths  or  sheaths  in  the  epidermal 
layer  (fungal  mantle).  The  fungal  hyphae  also  grow  between 
the  cortical  cells  (Hartig  net)  without  penetrating  them. 
Ectomycorrhizal associations are common in conifers and sev-
eral  hardwood  trees.  Endomycorrhizal  fungi  grow  between 
the cells of plant roots and penetrate the cortical cells form-
ing  vesicles  and  arbuscules  (VA).  Vesicles  serve  as  storage 
organs  for  lipids,  whereas  arbuscules  serve  as  major  meta-
bolic exchange points between the plant root and the fungus. 
Endomycorrhizal associations are common in certain conifers, 
hardwood and horticultural trees, and most agricultural crops.
Inoculation  of  ex  vitro  plants  of  various  species  with  bac-
teria  and  mycorrhizal  fungi  has  been  found  to  have  a  syner-
gistic beneficial effect on plant growth, mineral nutrition, and 
disease  resistance  (see  Figure  15.2  and  Tables  15.1–15.3). 

234

Table 15.1  Morphological parameters of 8-week-old ex vitro banana (Musa acuminata AAA) plantlets produced by meristem culture at Rahan Meristem, Rosh Hanikra Israel

Treatment

Control (A)

Enterobacter cloacae
(CAL2) (B)

Enterobacter cloacae
(UW4) (C)

UWF-ACC deaminase (D)

Pseudomonas putida
ATTC  pRK 415 (E)

P. putida  pRK 415  ACC 
deaminase from UW4 (F)
Glomus intraradices (G)

G  B

G  C

G  D

G  E

G  F

G  B  C  D  E  F

Survival (%)

Shoot length 
 (cm)

Root length 
 (cm)

100a

100a

100a

100a

100a

100a

100a

100a

100a

100a

100a

100a

100a

5.5dc

7.0bcd

9.0ab

5.0d

8.0abc

8.0abc

9.0ab

10.0a

9.5ab

9.0ab

8.5ab

9.0ab

9.5ab

8.5a

8.0a

9.0a

8.0a

8.0a

8.1a

8.5a

9.0a

8.5a

8.0a

9.0a

9.0a

9.0a

Shoot dry  
wt. (g)

0.091f

Root dry  
wt. (g)

0.042f

Total dry  
wt. (g)

0.133f

S:R ratio

2.17ab

0.115cd

0.061cd

0.l76cd

1.88cd

0.119bc

0.090f

0.113de

0.107e

0.125b

0.120bc

0.123b

0.122b

0.125b

0.123b

0.198a

0.065c

0.039f

0.057de

0.052e

0.089b

0.090b

0.089b

0.088b

0.085b

0.088b

0.110a

0.184c

0.129f

0.170d

0.159e

0.214b

0.210b

0.212b

0.210b

0.210b

0.211b

0.308a

1.83d

2.30a

1.97bcd

2.05bc

1.40e

1.33e

1.38e

1.38e

1.47e

1.39c

1.79d

Mycorrhizal 
colonization (%)

0.0c

0.0c

0.0c

0.0c

0.0c

0.0c

87.0ab

85.0ab

88.0a

88.0a

83.0b

88.0a

87.0ab

Values are the means of eight plants. Means followed by the same letter for a particular parameter are not significantly (P  0.001) different from each other.
The plants were inoculated with different strains of bacteria and fungi prior to transfer to a plastic covered greenhouse for hardening. The bacteria were kindly provided by Professor B. Glick, University of Waterloo, Canada.

i

A
n
 
e
n
g
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
 
v
e
w

i

i

 

 
t
o
m
c
r
o
p
r
o
p
a
g
a
t
i
o
n
 
a
n
d
g
e
n
e
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
o

 

 

f
 
t
r
u
e
 
t
o
 
t
y
p
e
 
a
n
d
p
a
t
h
o
g
e
n
-
f
r
e
e
 
p
a
n
t
s

l

2
3
5

C
H
A
P
T
E
R

 

1
5

2
3
6

S
E
C
T

I

O
N

 

C

l

P
a
n
t
 
g
e
r
m
p
a
s
m

l

Table 15.2  Analysis of macro- and microelements in leaf samples of 8-week-old ex vitro banana (Musa acuminata AAA) plants

Treatment

Control (A)

Enterobacter cloacae
(CAL2) (B)

Enterobacter cloacae
(UW4) (C)

UWF-ACC deaminase (D)

Pseudomonas putida
ATTC  pRK 415 (E)

P. putida  pRK 415  ACC 
deaminase from UW4 (F)

Glomus intraradices (G)

G  B

G  C

G  D

G  E

G  F

G  B  C  D  E  F

N (%)

1.82g

P (cm)

0.170j

K (cm)

3.80f

Ca (%)

0.80d

Mg (%)

0.35b

3.20e

0.285g

5.10abc

0.99c

0.75a

3.50d

1.79g

2.59f

2.60f

3.62d

4.00b

4.09b

3.60d

3.80c

3.75c

4.32a

0.270h

0.180i

0.300f

0.272h

0.450b

0.430d

0.440c

0.430d

0.450b

0.420e

0.460a

5.05abcd

3.51g

4.98de

5.00bcde

5.12a

5.09abcd

4.99cde

4.93e

5.00bcde

5.11ab

5.00bcde

0.105e

0.82d

0.100e

0.101e

1.57a

1.60a

1.55ab

1.47b

1.53ab

1.52ab

1.53ab

0.82a

0.38b

0.80a

0.78a

0.81a

0.79a

0.82a

0.80a

0.83a

0.81a

0.80a

B (ppm)

Cu (ppm)

Fe (ppm)

Mn (ppm)

Zn (ppm)

60a

62a

58a

59a

60a

62a

60a

62a

61a

60a

59a

60a

62a

10d

19bc

20ab

11cd

20ab

21ab

27ab

28a

25ab

27ab

27ab

27ab

25ab

80e

200c

179d

85e

205c

272b

305a

298a

300a

302a

300a

302a

300a

300a

302a

299a

301a

303a

300a

298a

300a

303a

299a

300a

300a

302a

75.2d

101bc

110b

80d

95c

109b

129a

130a

132a

132a

130a

129a

132a

Values are the means of five replicates. Means followed by the same letter for a particular parameter are not significantly (P    0.001) different from each other.
The plants were produced by meristem culture at Rahan Meristem, Rosh Hanikra Israel. The plants were inoculated with different strains of bacteria and fungi prior to transfer to a plastic covered greenhouse for hardening. The bacteria 
were kindly provided by Professor B. R. Glick of the University of Waterloo, Canada.

Table 15.3  Analysis of macro- and microelements in leaf samples of 6-month-old ex vitro banana (Musa acuminata AAA) plants

Treatment

Control (A)

Enterobacter cloacae
(CAL2) (B)

Enterobacter cloacae
(UW4) (C)

UWF-ACC deaminase (D)

Pseudomonas putida
ATTC    pRK 415 (E)

P. putida    pRK 415   ACC 
deaminase from UW4 (F)

Glomus intraradices (G)

G    B

G    C

G    D

G    E

G    F

G  B  C  D  E  F

N (%)

1.9ef

P (cm)

0.170e

K (cm)

3.74c

Ca (%)

0.804d

Mg (%)

0.38e

B (ppm)

Cu (ppm)

Fe (ppm)

Mn (ppm)

Zn (ppm)

72.2b

12.4f

91.6c

351.6a

81.8c

3.16bcd

0.27de

5.18abc

0.97cd

0.80de

82.4ab

21.4abcdef

210.4b

360.2a

105.2b

3.54bcd

1.78f

2.3def

2.50def

4.04abc

4.22abc

4.46ab

3.82abc

4.22abc

4.08abc

4.86a

0.28cde

0.188e

0.32abcde

0.306bcde

0.46ab

0.424abcd

0.444ab

0.398abcd

0.434abc

0.418abcd

0.476a

5.5abc

3.80bc

5.00abc

5.06abc

6.26a

6.04a

5.92a

6.06a

5.78a

5.68ab

6.60a

1.01cd

0.85d

1.10bcd

1.00cd

1.82a

1.76a

1.79a

1.56abc

1.69ab

1.73a

1.83a

0.77d

0.42e

0.84bcd

0.86abcd

0.97ab

0.92abcd

0.98ab

0.90abcd

0.948abc

0.90abcd

1.02a

85.2ab

85.4ab

82.8ab

83.2ab

89ab

84.4ab

86.6ab

83ab

81.2ab

83.8ab

93.4a

25abcdef

17.2ef

20.6cdef

19.2def

36abc

32.4abcde

37.2ab

34.8abcd

34abcd

34abcd

38.40a

194.2b

96c

207.8b

236.4b

324.8a

316.6a

322.8a

319.2a

319.2a

324.8a

338.8a

371a

356.2a

361a

369.8a

384.4a

384.2a

387a

379a

380a

381.2a

397.8a

115b

98bc

97bc

1000bc

141a

139.2a

143.2a

134.4a

136a

135a

145a

Values are the means of five replicates. Means followed by the same letter for a particular parameter are not significantly (P  0.001) different from each other.
The plants were produced by meristem culture at Rahan Meristem, Rosh Hanikra Israel. The plants were inoculated with different strains of bacteria and fungi prior to transfer to a plastic covered greenhouse for hardening. The bacteria 
were kindly provided by Professor B. R. Glick of the University of Waterloo, Canada.

i

A
n
 
e
n
g
n
e
e
r
i
n
g
 
v
e
w

i

i

 

 
t
o
m
c
r
o
p
r
o
p
a
g
a
t
i
o
n
 
a
n
d
g
e
n
e
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
o

 

 

f
 
t
r
u
e
 
t
o
 
t
y
p
e
 
a
n
d
p
a
t
h
o
g
e
n
-
f
r
e
e
 
p
a
n
t
s

l

2
3
7

C
H
A
P
T
E
R

 

1
5

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

The  synergistic  effect  was  due  to  plant  growth  substances 
produced  by  the  bacteria  and  fungi  rather  than  the  soluble 
phosphate ions released. The author found that co-inoculation 
with bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi can significantly decrease 
the incidence of root rot diseases of certain agricultural crops 
and forest trees compared to single inoculation.

Elimination of Viruses by in vitro 
Techniques

In  light  of  the  wide  spread  of  viral  diseases  in  intense  crop-
ping  systems,  combined  with  tighter  governmental  regula-
tions imposed on nurseries, virus elimination is a crucial part 
of vegetative propagation. For some important crops that are 
propagated  vegetatively,  stock  plants  are  kept  in  specialized 
greenhouses protected from the invasion of virus-transmitting 
insects  and  mites.  Stock  plants  are  commonly  cleaned  from 
viruses using in vitro tissue-culture procedures and the clean 
stock  is  then  transferred  to  nuclear  greenhouses.  Nuclear 
plants are the source of foundation plantations and following 
labeling  and  certification,  propagation  material  is  distributed 
to field nurseries. Several in vitro techniques have been devel-
oped  for  virus  elimination  in  plant  material.  Most  methods 
take advantage of the fact that plant viruses use vascular tracts 
for mobility. Given that apices do not contain vascular differ-
entiated cells, they are virus free. This phenomenon has been 
realized in a very broad array of plant species including banana 
and  plantains  (Helliot  et  al.,  2001),  potatoes  (Matthews 
et al., 1992; Faccioli, 2001), grapes (Sahar et al., 2009), lau-
rel  trees  (Lloyd  and  McCown,  1980),  strawberries  (Khanam 
et al., 1998; Biswas et al., 2007), citrus (Navarro, 1992; Fifaei 
et al., 2007), and bamboo (Hsu et al., 2000). Shoot tip cul-
ture  is  often  combined  with  thermotherapy.  Using  this  pro-
cedure meristematic cells grow faster than the differentiation 
of vascular cells, reducing the risk of infected excised shoots. 
In recent years, numerous antiviral compounds have been dis-
covered  and  effectively  used  for  virus  elimination  in  plants 
(Borissenko  et  al.,  1985;  Wambugu,  1985;  Bittner  et  al., 
1989).  The  most  common  compound  is  1-β-ribofuranosyl-
1,2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide (Virazole; Sidwell et al., 1972). 
Virazole is included in the growth medium of the shoot tips 
(Cassels, 1987; Khayat et al., 1999). This compound is lethal 
to viruses due to inhibiting RNA replication as a base analog 
of cytosine (Elia et al., 2008). The use of Virazole combined 
with  thermotherapy  and  shoot  tip  culture  was  highly  effec-
tive in elimination of artichoke latent virus (ALV) in compari-
son to each of the techniques alone (Khayat et al., 1999; see 
Tables 15.4 and 15.5).

Concluding Remarks

Table 15.4  Effect of thermotherapy and Virazole® on artichoke latent 
virus (ALV) elimination in Globe artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.)

Treatment 

Virazole® 
(ppm)

Thermotherapy

Clean plants after 5 
weeks in culture (%)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

  0

  0

10

20

  0

  0

10

20

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  40

  55

  71

100

  57

  40

100

100

Thermotherapy: 31 consecutive days: 10 hours @ 42°C (light); 14 hours @ 10°C 
(dark).

Table 15.5  Effect of thermotherapy and explant size on artichoke 
latent virus (ALV) elimination in Globe artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.)

Explant size 
(mm)

Thermotherapy

Clean plants after 5 
weeks of culture (%)

1

2

3

4

  

  

  

  

100

  66

  50

  29

Thermotherapy: 31 consecutive days: 10 hours @ 42°C (light); 14 hours @ 10°C 
(dark).

combination of automated systems with modern visual intel-
ligence  aided  by  computer  technology  would  properly  coun-
ter  the  high  cost  of  manual  labor  in  micropropagation  and 
open the path for efficient in vitro plant production. Thus the 
emphasis  for  development  should  shift  from  the  biological 
aspects to a new focus on engineering.

Acknowledgments

In  light  of  recent  changes  in  world  agriculture  and  incorpo-
ration  of  genetic  engineering  as  a  tool  of  plant  breeding,  it 
behooves  us  to  take  a  fresh  look  at  micropropagation.  The 

The  author  would  like  to  thank  Mrs.  Lyn  Marantz  and  
Ms. Yonat Tal-Or for their helpful comments.

238

An engineering view to micropropagation and generation of true to type and pathogen-free plants

C H A P T E R   1 5

References

Akita, M., & Ohta, Y. (1998). A simple method 

for mass propagation of potato (Solanum 
tuberosum L.) using a bioreactor without 
forced aeration. Plant Cell Reports, 18(1), 
284–287.

Alchanatis, V., Peleg, K., & Ziv, M. (1993). 
Classification of tissue culture segments 
by colour machine vision. Journal of 
Agricultural Engineering Research, 55(4), 
299–311.

Alchanatis, V., Peleg, K., & Ziv, M. (1994). 

Morphological control and mensuration of 
potato plantlets from tissue-cultures for 
automated micropropagation. Plant Cell 
Tissue and Organ Culture, 36(3), 331–338.

Alizadeh, M., Singh, S. K., & Patel, V. B. 

(2010). Comparative performance of in 
vitro multiplication in four grape (Vitis spp.) 
rootstock genotypes. International Journal of 
Plant Production, 4(1), 41–50.

Alvard, D., Cote, F., & Teisson, C. (1993). 

Comparison of methods of liquid medium 
culture for banana micropropagation. Plant 
Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 32, 55–60.

Anderson, W. C., Meagher, G. W., & Nelson, 
A. G. (1977). Cost of propagating broccoli 
plants through tissue culture. HortScience, 
12, 543–544.

Aragón, C. E., Escalona, M., Capote, I., Pina, 

D., Cejas, I., & Rodriguez, R., et al. (2005). 
Photosynthesis and carbon metabolism in 
plantain (Musa AAB) plantlets growing in 
temporary immersion bioreactors and during 
ex vitro acclimatization. In Vitro Cellular 
& Developmental Biology-Plant, 41(4), 
550–554.

Aragón, C. E., Escalona, M., Rodriguez, R., 

Cañal, M. J., Capote, I., & Pina, D., et al. 
(2010). Effect of sucrose, light, and carbon 
dioxide on plantain micropropagation in 
temporary immersion bioreactors. In Vitro 
Cellular & Developmental Biology–Plant, 46, 
89–94.

Armstrong, J., Lemos, E. E. P., Zobayed, S. 
M. A., Justin, S. H. F. W., & Armstrong, 
W. (1997). A humidity induced convective 
through-flow ventilation system benefits 
Annona squamosa L. explants and coconut 
calloid. Annals of Botany, 79, 31–40.

Atak, C., & Celik, O. (2009). Micropropagation 

of Anthurium andraeanum from leaf 
explants. Pakistan Journal of Botany, 41(3), 
1155–1161.

Bairu, M. W., Fennell, C. W., & van Staden, 

I. (2006). The effect of plant growth 
regulators on somaclonal variation in 
Cavendish bananas (Musa AAA cv. “Zelig”).
Biswas, M. K., Hossain, M., & Islam, R. (2007). 
Virus free plantlets production of strawberry 
through meristem culture. World Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences, 3, 757–763.

Bittner, H., Schenk, G., Schuster, G., & Kluge, 
S. (1989). Elimination by chemotherapy of 
potato virus S from potato plants grown in 
vitro. Potato Research, 32, 175–179.

Borissenko, S., Schuster, G., & Schmygla, 
W. (1985). Obtaining a high percentage 
of explants with negative serological 
reactions against viruses by combining 
potato meristem culture with antiphytoviral 

chemotherapy. Journal of Phytopathology, 
114, 185–188.

Boxus, P., Jemmali, A. J., Terzi, M., & Arezki, 

O. (2000). Drift in genetic stability in 
micropropagation: The case of strawberry. 
Acta Horticulturae, 530, 155–161.

Cassells, A., & Tahmatsidou, V. (1996). The 
influence of local plant growth conditions 
on non-fastidious bacterial contamination 
of meristem-tips of Hydrangea cultured in 
vitro. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 
47(1), 15–26.

Cassels, A. C. (1987). In vitro induction of 

virus-free potatoes by chemotherapy. In Y. 
P. S. Bajaj (Ed.), Biotechnology in agriculture 
and forestry (pp. 40–50). Springer Verlag.

Chavez, M. C. G., & Ferrera-Cerrato, F. 
(1990). Effect of vesicular-arbuscular 
mycorrhizae on tissue culture-derived 
plantlets of strawberry. HortScience, 25(8), 
903–905.

Cooper, P. A., & Grant, J. E. (1992). 

Development of prototype automated 
cutting and placing system for tissue culture 
multiplication. Combined Proceedings of the 
International Plant Propagators Society, 42, 
309–313.

Cote, F. X., Sandoval, J. A., Marie, Ph., 
& Auboiron, E. (1993). Variations in 
micropropagated bananas and plantains: 
Literary survey. Fruits, 48, 15–22.
Debergh, P. C., & De Wael, J. (1977). 

Mass propagation of Ficus lyrata. Acta 
Horticulturae, 78, 361–364.

Debergh, P. C., & Vanderschaeghe, A. M. 

(1988). Some symptoms indicating the 
presence of bacterial contaminants in plant 
tissue culture. Acta Horticulturae, 225, 
77–81.

Deleplanque, H., Bonnet, P., Postaire, J. G. 

(1985). An intelligent robotic system for in 
vitro plantlet production. Proceedings fifth 
international conference Robot Vision and 
sensory controls (pp. 305–314).

Dobránszki, J., & Teixeira da Silva, J. A. (2010). 

Micropropagation of apple – a review. 
Biotechnology Advances, 28, 462–488.
Elia, G., Belloli, C., & Cirone, F. (2008).  

In vitro efficacy of ribavirin aganst canine 
distemper virus. Antiviral Research, 77(2), 
108–113.

Escalona, M., Samson, G., Borroto, C., & 

Desjardins, Y. (2003). Physiology of effects 
of temporary immersion bioreactors on 
micropropagated pineapple plantlets.  
In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology–
Plant, 39(6), 651–656.

Etienne, H., & Berthouly, M. (2002). 

Temporary immersion systems in plant 
micropropagation. Plant Cell Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 69, 215–231.

Etienne, H., Lartaud, M., MichauxFerriere, 

N., Carron, M. P., Berthouly, M., & 
Teisson, C. (1997). Improvement 
of somatic embryogenesis in Hevea 
brasiliensis (Mull Arg) using the temporary 
immersion technique. In Vitro Cellular & 
Developmental Biology-Plant, 33(2), 81–87.
Faccioli, G. (2001). Control of Potato viruses 
using meristem and stem-cutting cultures, 

thermotherapy and chemotherapy. In G. 
Loebenstein (Ed.), Virus and Virus-like 
diseases of Potatoes and production of seed-
potatoes (pp. 365–390).

Falkiner, F. R. (1990). The criteria for choosing 
an antibiotic for control of bacteria in plant 
tissue culture. International Association for 
Plant Tissue Culture, Newsletter, 60, 14–21.

Ferreira, C. M., & Handro, W. (1988). 

Micropropagation of Stevia rebaudiana 
through leaf explants from adult plants. 
Planta Medica, 54(2), 157–160.

Fifaei, R., Golein, B., Taheri, H., & Tadjvar, Y. 
(2007). Elimination of Citrus tristeza virus 
of Washington navel orange (Citrus sinensis 
[L] Osbeck) through shoot-tip grafting. 
International Journal of Agriculture and 
Biology, 9(1), 27–30.

Fila, G., Ghashghaie, J., Hoarau, J., & 

Cornic, G. (1998). Photosynthesis, leaf 
conductance and water relations of in vitro 
cultured grapevine rootstock in relation 
to acclimatization. Physiologia Plantarum, 
102(3), 411–418.

Fujiwara, K., Kozai, T., & Watanabe, T. (1988). 
Development of a photoautotrophic tissue 
culture system for shoots and/or plantlets 
at rooting and acclimatization stages. Acta 
Horticulturae, 230, 153–158.

Gilly, C., Rohr, R., & Chamel, A. (1997). 

Ultrastructure and radiolabelling of leaf 
cuticles from ivy (Hedera helix L.) plants 
in vitro and during ex vitro acclimatization. 
Annals of Botany, 80(2), 139–145.

Granger, R. L., Plenchette, C., & Fortin, J. A.  

(1983). Effect of vesicular-arbuscular 
endomycorrhizal fungus Glomus epigaeum on 
the growth and leaf mineral content of two 
apple clones propagated in vitro. Canadian 
Journal of Plant Science, 63, 551–555.

Grout, B. W. W., & Millam, S. (1985). 

Photosynthetic development of 
micropropagated strawberry plantlets 
following transplanting. Annals of Botany, 
55(1), 129–131.

Helliot, B., Panis, B., Locicero, A., Reyniers, 
K., Muylle, H., & Vandewalle, M., et al. 
(2001). Development of in vitro techniques 
for elimination of virus diseases from Musa. 
Acta Horticulturae, 560, 535–538.

Heo, J., & Kozai, T. (1999). Forced ventilation 

micropropagation system for enhancing 
photosynthesis, growth and development 
of sweet potato plantlets. Environmental 
Control in Biology, 37(1), 83–92.

Hirochika, H., Sugimoto, K., Otsuki, Y., 

Tsugawa, H., & Kanda, M. (1996). 
Retrotransposons of rice involved in 
mutations induced by tissue culture. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
93(15), 7783–7788.

Hsu, Y. H., Annamalai, P., Lin, C. S., Chen, 
Y. Y., Chang, W. C., & Lin, N. S. (2000). 
A sensitive method for detecting bamboo 
mosaic virus (BaMV) and establishment 
of BaMV-free meristem-tio cultures. Plant 
Pathology, 49, 101–107.

Hwang, S. C. (1986). Variations in banana 

plants propagated through tissue culture. 

239

S E C T I O N   C

Plant germplasm

Journal of the Chinese Society for 
Horticultural Science, 32, 117–125.

Ilan, A., & Khayat, E. (1997). An overview of 

commercial and technological limitations to 
marketing of micropropagated plants. Acta 
Horticulturae, 447, 643–648.

Kapoor, R., Sharma, D., & Bhatnagar, A. 

K. (2008). Arbiscular mycorrhizae 
in micropropagation systems and 
their potential applications. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 116, 227–239.

Khanam, D., Khatun, M. M., Faisal, S. M., & 
Hoque, M. A. (1998). In vitro propagation 
of strawberry through meristem tip culture. 
Plant Tissue Culture, 8(1), 35–39.

Khayat, E. (1999). Effective cleaning of globe 
artichoke and strawberry plants from viral 
and bacterial contaminants. Phytoparasitica, 
27(2), 128–129.

Khayat, E., (2010). Banana plant named 

“ADI”. In USPTO, USPTO, (Eds.), Rahan 
Meristem (1998) Ltd.: USA.

Khayat, E., Abdul Razek, A., Halevy, D., & 

Gontmakher, T. (1996). Effective cleaning 
of strawberry plants from pathogenic fungal 
and endophytic bacterial contaminants. Acta 
Horticulturae, 439, 369–372.

Khayat, E., Duvdevani, A., Lahav, E., & 

Ballesteros, B. A. (2004). Somaclonal 
variation in banana (Musa acuminata cv. 
Grande Naine). Genetic mechanism, 
frequency and application as a tool for 
clonal selection. In M. S. Jain & R. Swennen 
(Eds.), Banana improvement: Cellular, 
molecular biology, and induced mutations 
(pp. 97–110). Enfield, USA: Science 
Publishers Inc.

Kinase, A., Watake, H. (1991). Robot for 

mass propagation. Proceedings of the IFAC 
mathematical and control applications in 
agriculture and horticulture (pp. 225–230).

Kneifel, W., & Leonhardt, W. (1992). Testing of 

different antibiotics against Gram-positive 
and Gram-negative bacteria isolated from 
plant tissue culture. Plant Cell, Tissue and 
Organ Culture, 29(2), 139–144.
Koh, Y. C., & Davies, J. F. T. (1997). 

Micropropagation of Cryptanthus with 
leaf explants with attached intercalary 
meristems excised from greenhouse stock 
plants. Scientia Horticulturae, 70(4), 
301–307.

Kosky, R., Perozo, J., Valero, N., Peñalver, D. 

(2005). Somatic embryo germination of 
Psidium guajava L. in the Rita® temporary 
immersion system and on semisolid 
medium. In Liquid Culture Systems for 
in vitro Plant Propagation, Hvoslef-Eicle, 
A. K., & Preil, W. (eds), 225–229. The 
Netherlands: Springer.

Kozai, T., & Iwanami, Y. (1988). Effects of 

CO2 enrichment and sucrose concentration 
under high photon fluxes on plantlet growth 
of Carnation (Dianthus caryuphyllus L.) 
in tissue culture during the preparation 
stage. Journal of the Japanese Society for 
Horticultural Science, 57, 279–288.

Kozai, T., Kubota, C., & Watanebe, I. (1988). 

Effect of basal medium composition 
on the growth of carnation plantlets in 
auto- and mixotrophic tissue culture. Acta 
Horticulturae, 230, 159–166.

240

Kozai, T., Oki, H., Fujiwara, K. (1987). Effects of 

CO2 enrichment and sucrose concentration 
under high photosynthetic photonfluxes on 
growth of tissue-cultured Cymbidium plantlet 
during the preparation stage. Symposium 
Florizel on plant micropropagation in 
horticultural industries, 135-141.

Kozai, T., Xiao, Y., Nguyen, Q. T., Afreen, F., & 
Zobayed, S. M. A. (2005). Photoautotrophic 
(sugar-free medium) micropropagation 
systems for large-scale commercialization. 
Propagation of Ornamental Plants, 5(1), 
25–34.

Krikorian, A. D., (1993). Banana and plantain 

breeding program, Annual report 1992.

Kumar, A., Pearce, S. R., McLean, K., Harrison, 

G., Heslop-Harrison, J. S., & Waugh, 
R., et al. (1997). The Ty1-copia group 
of retrotransposons in plants: Genomic 
organisation, evolution, and use as molecular 
markers. Genetica, 100(1–3), 205–217.
Kutz, L. J. (1986). Robottic transplanting. 

ASAE paper 86:1088.

Leifert, C., Camotta, H., & Waites, W. M. 

(1992). Effect of combinations of antibiotics 
on micropropagated Clematis, Delphinium, 
Hosta, Iris and Photinia. Plant Cell, Tissue 
and Organ Culture, 29(2), 153–160.

Leifert, C., Camotta, H., Wright, S. M., Waites, 

B., Cheyne, V. A., & Waites, W. M. (1991). 
Elimination of Lactobacillus plantarum, 
Corynebacterium spp., Staphylococcus 
saprophyticus and Pseudomonas 
paucimobillis from micropropagated 
Hemerocallis, Choisya and Delphinium 
cultures using antibiotics. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology, 71(4), 307–330.

Leifert, C., & Cassells, A. C. (2001). Microbial 
hazards in plant tissue and cell cultures. In 
Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology–
Plant, 37(2), 133–138.

Leifert, C., Morris, C. E., & Waites, W. M. 

(1994). Ecology of microbial saphrophytes 
and pathogens in tissue-culture and field-
grown plants–reasons for contamination 
problems in vitro. Critical Reviews in Plant 
Sciences, 13, 139–183.

Lloyd, G., & McCown, B. (1980). 

Commercially feasible micropropagation of 
mountain laurel, Kalmia latifolia, by use 
of shoot tip culture. Combined Proceedings 
of the Plant Propagators Society, 30, 
421–426.

Lucy, M., Reed, E., & Glick, B. R. (2004). 
Applications of free living plant growth-
promoting rhizobacteria. Antonie van 
Leeuwenhoek, 86(1), 1–25.

Margara, J., & Poillat, M. T. (1985). Evolution 

de l’aptitude a l’organogenese in vitro a 
partir de feuilles de Saintpaulia ionantha 
au cours des cultures successives. Comptes 
Rendus de l’Academie des sciences Paris, 
301, 265–268.

Matthews, S., Stuchbury, T., & Thompson, W. J. 
(1992). The application of micropropagation 
to seed potato production in Northern 
Scotland. Research Investigations and Field 
Trials, 1992–1993, 192–196.

McFarlane, N. J. B. (1993). Image-guidance 
for robotic harvesting of micropropagated 
plants. Computers and Electronics in 
Agriculture, 8(1), 43–56.

Murashige, T., & Skoog, F. (1974). Plant 

propagation through tissue culture. Annual 
Review of Plant Physiology, 25, 135–166.

Nasib, A., Ali, K., & Khan, S. (2008). In 

vitro propagation of Croton (Codiaeum 
variegatum). Pakistan Journal of Botany, 
40(1), 99–104.

Navarro, L. (1992). Citrus shoot tip grafting 
in vitro. Biotechnology in Agriculture and 
Forestry, 18, 327–338.

Nguyen, Q. T., & Kozai, T. (2001). Growth of 
in vitro banana (Musa spp.) shoots under 
photomixotrophic and photoautotrophic 
conditions. In Vitro Cellular & 
Developmental Biology–Plant, 37, 824–829.

Nguyen, Q. T., Kozai, T., Nguyen, K. L., & 

Nguyen, U. V. (1999). Effects of sucrose 
concentration, supporting material and 
number of air exchanges of the vessel on 
the growth of in vitro coffee plantlets. Plant 
Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture, 58, 51–57.
Niemenak, N., Saare-Surminski, K., Rohsius, 

C., Ndoumou, D. O., & Lieberei, R. 
(2008). Regeneration of somatic embryos in 
Theobroma cacao L. in temporary immersion 
bioreactor and analyses of free amino acids 
in different tissues. Plant Cell Reports, 27, 
667–676.

North, J. J., Ndakidemi, P. A., & Laubscher, C. 
P. (2010). The potential of developing an in 
vitro method for propagating Strelitziaceae. 
African Journal of Biotechnology, 9(45), 
7583–7588.

Ouma, J. P., Young, M. M., & Reichert, 

N. A. (2004). Rooting of in vitro 
regenerated cotton (Gossypium hirsutum 
L.) is influenced by genotype, medium 
composition, explant type and age. African 
Journal of Biotechnology, 3(6), 313–318.
Peleg, K., Cohen, O., Ziv, M., & Kimmel, E. 
(1993). Machine identification of buds in 
images of plant shoots. Machine Vision and 
Applications, 6(4), 224–232.

Peraza-Echeverria, S., Herrera-Valencia, V. A., 

& Kay, A. -J. (2001). Detection of DNA 
methylation changes in micropropagated 
banana plants using methylation-sensitive 
amplification polymorphism (MSAP). Plant 
Science, 161(2), 359–367.

Pierik, R. L. M., & Steegmans, H. H. M. 

(1976). Vegetative propagation of Anthurium 
scherzerianum Schott through callus cultures. 
Scientia Horticulturae, 4(3), 291–292.

Pollock, K., Barfield, D. G., & Shields, L. R. 

(1983). The toxicity of antibiotics to plant 
cell cultures. Plant Cell Reports, 2, 36–39.
Posposilova, J., Tichá, I., Kadleček, P., Haisel, 
D., & Plzáková, Š. (1999). Acclimatization 
of micropropagated plants to ex vitro 
conditions. Biologia Plantarum, 42(4), 
481–497.

Rabha Abdelwahd, R. N., Hakam., M., 

Labhilili, , & Udupa, S. M. (2008). Use of 
an adsorbent and antioxidants to reduce 
the effects of leached phenolics in in vitro 
plantlet regeneration of faba bean. African 
Journal of Biotechnology, 7(8), 997–1002.
Reed, B., Buckley, P., & DeWilde, T. (1995). 
Detection and eradication of endophytic 
bacteria from micropropagated mint plants. 
In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology–
Plant, 31(1), 53–57.

An engineering view to micropropagation and generation of true to type and pathogen-free plants

C H A P T E R   1 5

Reuveni, O., & Israeli, Y. (1990). Measures 
to reduce somaclonal variation in in vitro 
propagated bananas. Acta Horticulturae, 
275, 307–313.

Reuveni, O., Israely, Y., & Lahav, E. (1996). 

Somaclonal variation in banana and plantains 
(Musa species). In Y. P. S. Bajaj (Ed.), 
Biotechnology in agriculture and forestry, vol 
36. Somaclonal varation in crop improvement 
II (pp. 174–195). Berlin Heidelberg New 
York: Springer.

Romano, A., Naroha, C., Martins, L., & Aucao, 
M. A. (1992). Influence of growth regulators 
on shoot proliferation in Quercus ruber l. 
Annals of Botany, 70(6), 531–536.

Sahar, A. Y., Al-Dhaher, M. M. A., & Shalaby, 

A. A. (2009). Elimination of Grapevine 
fanleaf virus (GFLV) and Grapevine leaf roll-
associated virus-1 (GLRaV-1) from infected 
Grapevine plants using meristem tip culture. 
International Journal of Virology, 5(2), 89–99.
Sidwell, R., Huffman, J. H., Khare, G. P., Allen, 

L. B., Wittkowski, J. T., & Robuns, R. K. 
(1972). Broad-spectrum antiviral activity of 
Virazole: 1-β-D-ribofuranosyl-1,2,4-triazole-
3-carboxamide. Science, 177, 705–706.
Sluis, C. J. (2006). Integrating automation 

technologies with commercial 
micropropagation. In Plant Tissue Culture 
Engineering, Dutta Gupta, S & Ibaraki, 
Y. (eds), pp. 231-251. The Netherlands: 
Springer.

Sobey, P. J., Harter, B., Hinsch, A. (1997). 
Automated micro-propagation of plant 
material. Proceedings of the fourth annual 
conference on mechatronics and machine 
vision in practice, 60-65.

Standaert de Metsenaere, R. E. A. (Ed.). 

(1991). Economic considerations. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Takayama, S., Swedlund, B., & Miwa, Y. (1991). 

Automated propagation of microbulbs of 
lilies. In I. K. Vasil (Ed.), Cell culture and 
somatic cell genetics of plants (pp. 112–131). 
New York: Academic Press Inc..

Tanaka, M., Norikane, A., & Watanabe, T. 

(2009). Cold cathode fluorescent lamps 
(CCFL): Revolutionary light source for 
plant micropropagation. Biotechnology & 
Biotechnological Equipment, 23(4), 1497–
1503.

Teisson, C., Alvard, D., Berthouly, B., Côte, F., 
Escalant, J. V., & Etienne, H., et al. (1996). 
Simple apparatus to perform plant tissue 
culture by temporary immersion. Acta 
Horticulturae, 440, 521–526.

Titov, S., Bhowmik, S. K., Mandal, A., Alam, 
S. M., & Uddin, S. N. (2006). Control of 
phenolic secretion and effect of growth 
regulators for organ formation from Musa 
spp. cv. Kanthali Floral Bud Explants. 
American Journal of Biochemistry and 
Biotechnology, 2(3), 97–104.

Vidal, M. T., Azcon-Aguilar, C., Barea, J. M., 

& Pliego-Alfaro, F. (1992). Mycorrhizal 
inoculation enhances growth and 
development of micropropagated plants of 
avocado. HortScience, 27, 785–787.

Wambugu, F. M. (1985). Eradication of potato 
virus Y and S from potato by chemotherapy 
of cultured axillary bud tips. American 
Potato Journal, 62, 667–672.

Wang, Z., Heinemann, P. H., Morrow, C. T., 
& Heuser, C. (1998). Identification and 
separation of micropropagated sugarcane 
shoots based on the Hough transform. 
Transactions of the Asae, 41(5), 1535–1541.
Wardle, K., Quinlan, A., & Simpkins, I. (1979). 

Abscisic acid and the regulation of water 
loss in plantlets of Brassica oleracea L. 
var. botrytis regenerated through apical 
meristem culture. Annals of Botany, 43(6), 
745–752.

Watake, H., & Kinase, A. (1988). Robot for 

tissue culture. Robot, 64, 74–79.

Weathers, P., & Giles, K. (1988). Regeneration 

of plants using nutrient mist culture. In Vitro 
Cellular & Developmental Biology–Plant, 
24(7), 727–732.

Wetzstein, H. Y., & Sommer, H. E. (1982). Leaf 

anatomy of tissue-cultured Liquidambar 
styraciflua (Hamamelidaceae) during 
acclimatization. American Journal of Botany, 
69, 1579–1586.

Woltering, E. J. (1990). Beneficial effects of 

carbon dioxide on development of gerbera 
and rose plantlets grown in vitro. Scientia 
Horticulturae, 44, 341–345.

Yesil-Celiktas, O., Gurel, A., Vardar-Sukan, F. 
(2010). Large scale cultivation of plant cell 
and tissue culture in bioreactors. Transworld 
Research Network Kerala. 1–54.

Young, P. M., Hutchins, A. S., & Canfield, M. L. 
(1984). Use of antibiotics to control bacteria 
in shoot cultures of woody plants. Plant 
Science Letters, 34(1–2), 203–209.
Yue, D., Gosselin, A., & Desjardins, Y. 

(1993). Effects of forced ventilation at 
different relative humidities on growth, 
photosynthesis and transpiration of 
geranium plantlets in vitro. Canadian 
Journal of Plant Science, 73, 249–256.
Ziv, M. (2000). Bioreactor technology for 

plant micropropagation. In J. Janick (Ed.), 
Horticultural reviews (pp. 1–30). John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc..

Ziv, M. (2005). Simple bioreactors for mass 

propagation of plants. In A. K. Hvoslev-Eide 
& W. Preil (Eds.), Liquid culture systems 
for in vitro plant propagation (pp. 79–94). 
Berlin: Springer.

Zobayed, S. M. A., Afreen, F., ZXiao, Y., & 

Kozai, T. (2004). Recent advancement 
in research on photoautotrophic 
micropropagation using large vessels with 
forced ventilation. In Vitro Cellular and 
Developmental Biology–Plant, 40, 450–458.

Zobayed, S. M. A., Afreen-Zobayed, F., Kubota, 

C., & Kozai, T. (2000). Mass propagation 
of Eucalyptus camaldulensis in a scaled 
up vessel under in vitro photoautotrophic 
condition. Annals of Botany, 85, 587–592.

241

Regulatory issues of biotechnologically 
improved plants

34

Elizabeth E. Hood1   Deborah Vicuna Requesens1   Kellye A. Eversole2
1Arkansas Biosciences Institute, Arkansas State University, Jonesboro, Arkansas
2Eversole Associates, Bethesda, Maryland

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 541
Commercializing an Agricultural Biotechnology  
Product  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 542
The Regulatory Framework  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 543
The U.S. Coordinated Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  545
Perspectives  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 547

Specialty crops regulatory  
assistance: A new paradigm  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .547
Standardization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  548
Conclusions   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 548

Introduction

Plant  biotechnology  can  be  defined  in  many  ways,  but  it 
is  most  often  considered  the  genetic  engineering  of  plants 
through the use of recombinant DNA (rDNA; Sharma et al., 
2002;  Lemaux,  2008;  Akhond  and  Machray,  2009).  For  the 
technology  to  work  properly,  many  factors  must  be  consid-
ered including which plant is being altered and for what pur-
pose, which molecular factors will best express the gene when 
and where it is needed, and what germplasm can be used to 
enhance gene expression of the input or output trait of inter-
est. Each of these issues is addressed in other chapters in this 
volume. Here, we focus on regulatory requirements for genet-
ically engineered (GE) plants.

Modern  agriculture  faces  the  grand  challenge  of  meeting 
the  increasing  demand  for  food,  feed,  and  non-food  products 
in  an  environmentally  sustainable  manner  while  maintain-
ing  quality  and  yield,  although  pest  and  disease  stress  is  ris-
ing  and  extreme  weather  patterns  are  surfacing,  putting  even 
greater  demands  on  the  system.  To  meet  these  demands  for 
the  growing  human  population,  plant  breeders  must  have 
access  to  a  complete  toolbox,  the  wherewithal  to  exploit  all 
available  technologies,  and  the  opportunity  to  commercialize 

results. During the last 25 years, biotechnology has allowed the  
production of genetically improved varieties to begin to address 
some  of  these  challenges.  Although  field  trials  of  GE  traits 
have been conducted for 130 plant species, only 4 crops (soy-
bean,  maize,  cotton,  and  rapeseed  or  canola)  account  for  the 
overwhelming  majority  of  all  acreage  planted  with  GE  crops. 
Over  the  past  20  years,  there  has  been  a  dramatic  reduction 
in  the  number  of  firms  conducting  GE  field  trials,  partially 
due to the increasing costs of development but also because of 
high regulatory costs (Arundel and Sawaya, 2009). Most crop 
developers  encounter  significant  barriers  to  commercialization 
as  they  cannot  afford  the  high  cost  of  regulatory  approval  for 
GE crops, in addition to development and marketing costs. To 
be  commercialized  and  grown  without  restrictions,  GE  crops 
must  go  through  an  extensive  food,  feed,  and  environmental 
safety assessment process to prove that they are “substantially 
equivalent” to comparable non-GE crops (OECD, 1993; ILSI, 
2004, 2008). Achieving substantial equivalence requires a pro-
hibitive amount of data, some of which may duplicate existing 
data. Estimates of the cost of meeting regulatory requirements 
for  GE  crops  range  from  $20–30  million  (McElroy,  2003)  to 
over  $100  million  (The  Economist,  2009).  According  to  the 
Phillips McDougall consultancy, the global seed market in 2008 
was  worth  $26  billion,  with  $9  billion  coming  from  sales  of 
corn  seed  alone  (Kaskey  and  Ligi,  2010).  In  comparison,  the 
Context  Network  (http://www.contextnet.com)  estimated 
that the 2008 value of the global seed market for all of the dif-
ferent vegetables produced was approximately $4 billion. Thus, 
specialty crops represent a significant percentage of total agri-
cultural receipts, and although several GE specialty crops have 
received initial regulatory approval, only a few have been mar-
keted (Miller and Bradford, 2010). Miller and Bradford (2010) 
reported  that  GE  research  is  underway  on  46  species  of  spe-
cialty  crops,  but  the  additional  regulatory  costs  per  insertion 
event is “out of proportion” to the additional market value for 
these  crops.  Unfortunately,  the  prohibitive  cost  of  achieving 
regulatory  approval  has  limited  the  commercialization  of  GE 
crops  to  a  few  multi-national  biotechnology  companies  and  a 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00034-1

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

few traits on a few crops that have a market value high enough 
to recover the cost of deregulation and development.

The  process  of  genetic  engineering  was  developed  to 
improve traits for agronomic performance — disease, insect, 
and  herbicide  resistance.  These  traits  have  led  to  a  signifi-
cant reduction in the environmental impact associated with 
insecticide  and  herbicide  use  and  greenhouse  gas  emis-
sions  at  the  same  time  that  yields  were  enhanced  (James, 
2009,  2010;  Lemaux,  2009;  Brookes  and  Barfoot,  2010; 
Carpenter,  2010).  Genetic  engineering  also  can  be  used 
to  alter  metabolism  to  enhance  nutrition  or  to  make  small 
molecule  pharmaceuticals.  Protein  production  in  plants 
through  genetic  engineering  can  be  utilized  for  pharma-
ceutical  proteins,  vaccines,  and  industrial  enzymes  (ILSI, 
2004;  Howard  and  Hood,  2005;  Chapotin  and  Wolt,  2007; 
Akhond and Machray, 2009). These output traits are human-
pathogen-free and inexpensive to produce. Many interesting 
input  and  output  traits  have  been  developed  by  academic 
labs,  and  although  research  is  interesting,  impact  is  better. 
Nevertheless, most results from genetic engineering have not 
been  commercialized,  thus  the  full  potential  impact  of  this 
research has not been realized.

Commercializing an Agricultural 
Biotechnology Product

Moving  from  a  concept  to  a  marketed  product  is  a  complex 
process  regardless  of  the  nature  of  the  product.  When  the 
product is derived from a scientific application, the complex-
ity goes up many-fold. Scientific experimentation often leads 
to  interesting  discoveries  that  are  predicted  to  have  a  useful 
outcome. However, to achieve this outcome, the idea should 
be protected so that the business/developer can have a chance 
to develop a strong business foundation. Even though an idea 
is  interesting  and  novel,  it  may  not  be  marketable.  Market 
considerations  must  be  addressed  to  understand  if  the  idea 
has merit in the business world (i.e., scientific, health-related, 
industrial,  or  agricultural)  or  if  it  will  be  acceptable  to  con-
sumers.  If  the  research  being  conducted  is  to  fill  a  specific 
need, such as building resistance in wheat to Hessian fly infes-
tations, a market pull probably drove the research and hence 
a market is likely to develop because wheat is a large volume 
crop and Hessian fly is a major pest. However, if one is explor-
ing  powdery  mildew  resistant  okra,  the  same  investment  of 
time and money is required to develop the trait and push it to 
market. In contrast to the wheat market, the okra seed market 
is small, perhaps not over $2 million annually. Thus the return 
on  investment  for  these  plants  must  be  carefully  considered 
before investing in trait-improvement technology.

Regardless  of  the  type  of  crop  developed,  the  process  of 

commercialization requires significant effort in several areas:
l  Scientific capability: Is it possible to develop the crop/trait 

combination to yield the desired result?

l  Intellectual property: Does the developer have the freedom 

to use the transformation method, and can the developer 
establish and maintain intellectual property on the 
invention or crop?

l  Market realities: Is there a market for the crop?
l  Regulations: Can the developer afford the costs associated 
with the various governmental regulatory requirements and 
can these be achieved?
In  this  chapter,  we  are  focusing  on  the  last  step  in  this 
process,  that  is,  regulatory  requirements,  as  they  relate  spe-
cifically to GE crops. For scientists, particularly public sector 
and small company scientists, this is the most daunting chal-
lenge  partially  because  a  simple  checklist  of  tasks  does  not 
exist, and even when the developer begins to see the light at 
the  end  of  the  tunnel,  the  regulators  can  request  even  more 
data  and  testing.  Some  of  the  regulatory  barriers  that  crop 
developers face in commercializing GE crops include the:
l  Complex regulatory framework
l  Lack of a road map that delineates how to navigate through 

the regulatory framework to achieve the freedom to 
commercialize (e.g., in the United States, achieving non-
regulated status from the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s 
Animal Plant Health Inspection Service, APHIS)

l  Costs associated with meeting the safety standard of 

“substantial equivalence”

l  Challenges and costs related to collecting extensive, 

relevant, and comprehensive data sets

l  Lack of standardization for data collection and analysis.

Generally,  regulations  cover  the  environmental  release  of 
plants  produced  through  genetic  engineering.  In  the  United 
States,  the  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture  (USDA)  regu-
lates these GE products, protecting agriculture from potential 
plant  pests  including  weeds;  the  Environmental  Protection 
Agency  (EPA)  protects  human  health  and  the  environment 
from adverse effects; and the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) ensures safe food and feed. Each agency must be satis-
fied that the product the scientist is developing is safe before 
the product is allowed in the environment and to be in food 
or  feed  products.  Thus,  the  opportunity  and  promise  of 
genetic  engineering  has  many  hoops  through  which  to  jump 
before it can be commercialized.

The goals of a regulatory system should be and often are flex-
ibility,  science-based  rigor,  stakeholder-responsiveness,  nation-
ally  and  internationally  coordinated,  and  risk-proportional. 
However, one of the difficulties in establishing public policies 
is that they typically are the culmination of inputs from many 
often  competing  sectors  and  stakeholders  (e.g.,  governmen-
tal  representatives,  elected  representatives,  citizens,  general 
media,  courts,  industry,  consumers,  and  scientists),  with  dif-
ferent levels of awareness and knowledge, and with different 
goals and objectives. The resulting legislation and implement-
ing  regulations  that  emerge  are  often  complex  and  occasion-
ally have contradictory policies with many checkpoints. Public 
opinion, often uninformed, has been a significant factor in the 
development  of  regulations  and  in  the  commercialization  of 
GE crops (Fedoroff and Brown, 2004; Fedoroff et al. 2010). 
Several  activists  and  non-representative  groups  have  taken 
advantage  of  public  doubts  and  lack  of  confidence,  spread-
ing fear of the potential threats of GE crops to the environ-
ment  and  human  health.  To  address  these  issues,  regulatory 
agencies  require  rigid  testing  of  GE  crops  and  regulatory 

542

Regulatory issues of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 4

decisions  are  always  taken  on  a  case-by-case  basis  (Trewavas 
and  Leaver,  2001).  In  the  EU,  in  an  effort  to  impose  public 
opinion,  especially  the  opinions  of  activist  anti-GE  crop 
groups  on  the  marketing  of  GE  crops,  politicians  play  a 
major  role  in  GE-crop  approvals.  In  particular,  after  a  GE 
crop  has  gone  through  a  rigorous  risk  and  safety  assessment, 
the  European  Commission  (EC)  and  the  individual  Member 
States  must  individually  approve  market  entry  (Rommens, 
2009). Layered on top of these regulatory considerations are 
the  market  drivers  that  either  embrace  or  reject  biotechnol-
ogy-derived  crops  and  the  specific  politics  of  those  markets 
(Kalaitzandonakes and Bijman, 2003).

The Regulatory Framework

The  focus  in  this  chapter  is  primarily  on  the  United  States 
regulatory  system,  because  the  first  steps  toward  regulating 
GE crops were taken in the United States in the 1970s. Three 
regulatory agencies require different and sometimes duplicate 
data despite operating under a “Coordinated Framework” (see 
the  section  The  U.S.  Coordinated  Framework).  The  major-
ity of the events that are marketed today were approved first 
in  the  United  States,  and  almost  half  of  the  global  acreage 
devoted to GE crops is planted there (James, 2009). Further, 
many  of  the  concepts  that  are  operating  today  in  all  of  the 
regulatory frameworks for GE crops are the result first of the 
United  States  system,  and  secondly  of  the  responses  to  that 
system,  particularly  in  Europe.  To  understand  where  we  are 
now,  it  is  first  necessary  to  gain  an  appreciation  for  how  we 
arrived at this point.

The  various  United  States  and  international  regulatory 
requirements for GE crops are the result of concerns expressed 
in the mid-1970s about the uncertainties of the new technol-
ogies  that  involved  the  use  of  recombinant  DNA  in  research. 
As  molecular  biologists  began  to  use  restriction  enzymes  to 
study animal viruses, concerns arose about laboratory practices, 
potential hybrid organisms, and the possibility for infecting lab-
oratory workers with deadly viruses (Singer and Soll, 1973). A 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  committee  recommended  that 
the  U.S.  National  Institutes  of  Health  (NIH)  form  an  advi-
sory  committee  on  rDNA  to  evaluate  the  potential  biological 
and ecological hazards. In 1974, the NIH responded by estab-
lishing  the  Recombinant  DNA  Advisory  Committee  (RAC) 
to  assist  in  the  development  of  guidelines  or  procedures  that 
would minimize the risks. The first draft guidelines were pre-
sented in December 1975 and have been revised several times. 
Agriculture  was  not  the  first  target,  and  the  guidelines  did 
affect agricultural research by banning experiments to increase 
the  pathogenicity  of  plant  pathogens,  requiring  certain  con-
tainment  practices,  and  by  prohibiting  the  deliberate  release 
into  the  environment  of  an  organism  containing  rDNA  (Tolin 
and  Vidaver,  1989).  Waiver  authority  was  granted  in  a  subse-
quent  revision  to  the  guidelines  under  which  the  NIH  devel-
oped  a  process  for  determining  the  conditions  for  permitting 
the deliberate release into the environment (Tolin and Vidaver, 
1989). This “waiver authority” was used for the first transgenic 
plants  and  serves  as  the  precursor  to  current  U.S.  regulations 
governing GE crops.

The  first  transgenic  plants  were  produced 

in  1982, 
announced at the Miami Winter Symposium in January 1983, 
and later described in detail in several journal articles (Herrera-
Estrella et al., 1983; Fraley et al., 1983a,b; Schell et al. 1983; 
Barton et al., 1983). The first environmental release of a geneti-
cally modified organism for agricultural applications was an ice-
minus  bacterium  (Pseudomonas  syringae),  which  prohibited 
the formation of ice crystals. With NIH approval in mid-1983, 
it  was  tested  first  on  potatoes  and  several  years  later  gained 
EPA approval for use on strawberries (McHughen and Smyth, 
2008).

Protests  and  court  cases  emerged  immediately  question-
ing the authority of the NIH to approve this field test. With 
respect  to  the  court  cases,  claimants  alleged  that  the  NIH 
had not prepared a specific Environmental Impact Statement 
(EIS) as required under the National Environmental Policy Act 
(42 U.S.C. §4321 et seq. 1969) for all major Federal actions 
significantly  affecting  the  quality  of  the  human  environment. 
In  response  to  the  challenges  and  the  continuing  rapid  tech-
nology  developments,  the  White  House  Office  of  Science 
and  Technology  Policy  (OSTP)  established  the  Biotechnology 
Science  Coordinating  Committee  (BSCC)  in  1984  with  rep-
resentatives from 18 agencies including the NIH, the USDA, 
the EPA, the FDA, and the U.S. National Science Foundation 
(Tolin  and  Vidaver,  1989;  McHughen  and  Smyth,  2008). 
After  two  years  of  effort,  the  Coordinated  Framework  for 
Regulation of Biotechnology was published in the U.S. Federal 
Register  and  included  policy  statements  from  the  agencies 
involved,  as  well  as  a  proposed  USDA  regulation  governing 
the introduction of organisms and products developed through 
genetic engineering (plant pests; Kingsbury, 1986).

included 

in 

Several 

important  concepts  were 

the 
Coordinated  Framework.  First,  there  was  agreement  that 
genetically  engineered  organisms  are  not  inherently  risky  and 
thus  regulations  should  focus  on  the  products  and  not  the 
process  used  for  their  generation.  Secondly,  rDNA  modi-
fied  organisms  should  be  evaluated  on  a  case-by-case  basis 
for  potential  risk  prior  to  applications  in  agriculture  and 
the  environment,  and  not  every  case  will  require  a  review  as 
some  instances  may  be  excluded.  Thirdly,  despite  consider-
able debate about whether new laws were needed, the BSCC 
determined that existing statutes and agencies were adequate 
for  regulating  biotechnology.  Fourthly,  the  USDA,  the  EPA, 
and  the  FDA  would  share  responsibility  for  regulating  bio-
technology under their own statutes (Kingsbury, 1986; OSTP, 
1986; Belson, 2000; McHughen and Smyth, 2008).

Perhaps the most significant aspect of the U.S. framework 
was the decision to base regulations and safety considerations 
on  “product”  and  without  regard  to  the  technology  used  to 
develop  the  crop.  In  and  of  itself,  this  theoretically  did  not 
target GE crops; rather, it targeted the products that had not 
been  in  the  environment  and  not  previously  consumed.  The 
assumption  is  that  food  and  feed  crops  existing  before  the 
advent  of  biotechnology  are  safe  (i.e.,  generally  recognized 
as  safe,  GRAS),  and  thus  the  safety  questions  regarding  GE 
crops focus on whether these new products have impacts dif-
ferent from non-GE crops that had been in the environment 
before  —  specifically,  determining  whether  the  GE  crop  is 
substantially equivalent to the comparable non-GE crop.

543

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

The  Organization 

for  Economic  Development  and 
Cooperation  (OECD)  began  to  focus  on  genetically  engi-
neered  plants  beginning  in  1983  with  discussions  that  cul-
minated  with  the  publication  of  the  OECD  publication 
“Recombinant  DNA  Safety  Considerations,”  referred  to  as 
the “OECD Blue Book” and occurring at the same time as the 
development  of  the  U.S.  Coordinated  Framework  (OECD, 
1986).  Importantly,  the  OECD  Blue  Book  included  key  risk 
assessment concepts such as “case-by-case” and “step-by-step” 
approaches  (Bergmans,  2006).  The  “step-by-step”  approach 
refers to the process of progressively decreasing physical con-
tainment of genetically modified organisms (i.e., from the lab, 
to  contained  research  environments,  small-scale  field  test-
ing, and subsequently large field testing) during which safety 
assessments and performance data can be assessed (Bergmans, 
2006).  Subsequent  to  the  publication  of  the  OECD  Blue 
Book,  an  effort  was  undertaken  to  collect  a  body  of  knowl-
edge from traditional crop breeding practices that could serve 
as  a  baseline  for  assessments  (Bergmans,  2006).  The  OECD 
followed  with  an  update  in  1992  (OECD,  1992)  and  the 
release  in  1993  of  another  document  that  detailed  the  con-
cepts and principles for evaluating the safety of foods derived 
from biotechnology (OECD, 1993). The basic premise under-
lying  the  OECD  recommendations  was  that  regulations 
should  be  based  on  an  assessment  of  the  product  (and  not 
the technology), and the OECD concluded that no scientific 
basis exists to require specific legislation to regulate the use of 
rDNA organisms (Tzotzos et al., 2009).

In  contrast  to  the  U.S.  framework,  regulations  in  Europe 
are focused first and foremost on the kind of technology used 
to develop the crop without regard to whether it may be safer 
than a conventionally bred crop. This “process-based” system 
is dependent upon the breeding technique used to create the 
crop, and a genetically modified organism (GMO) is one that 
is genetically modified in a way that does not occur naturally 
by crossing or natural recombination (European Commission, 
2001;  Devos  et  al.,  2010).  Whether  this  definition  is  an 
appropriate one is beyond the scope of this chapter. Suffice it 
to say that all crops have been genetically modified in one way 
or another through natural selection, crossing, natural recom-
bination,  induced  mutations,  or  genetic  engineering  (NAS, 
2004). The point of the EC regulations is that if genetic engi-
neering  is  used,  it  is  thus  genetically  modified.  The  opera-
tional  framework  of  the  European  Union  (EU)  is  principally 
defined  by  Directive  2001/18/EC  and  a  number  of  specific 
regulations (Tzotzos, 2009; Devos et al., 2010).

Several of these so-called “process-based” regulatory frame-
works incorporate the “Precautionary Principle,” including the 
EU  regulations.  With  the  adoption  of  Directive  2001/18/EC, 
the  EU  replaced  previous  directives  and  explicitly  adopted 
the  precautionary  principle  as  a  guide  for  assessment.  Among 
other things, risk assessment criteria were broadened to include 
direct, indirect, immediate, delayed, and cumulative long-term 
adverse  effects.  Further,  post-market  environmental  moni-
toring  became  mandatory  (Devos  et  al.,  2010).  As  applied  in 
the  EU,  the  precautionary  principle  applies  where  scientific 
evidence  is  insufficient,  inconclusive,  or  uncertain,  and  pre-
liminary evaluation indicates that there are reasonable grounds 
for  concern  (European  Commission,  2003;  Tzotzos,  et  al., 

2009). In the case of some advocacy groups, the precautionary 
principle has been interpreted to require absolute certainty of 
no possible harm. Under the precautionary principle, the bur-
den of proof to demonstrate no possible harm is placed directly 
on the developer of the GE crop. GE crop opponents, on the 
other  hand,  do  not  have  to  substantiate  their  claims  of  harm; 
rather, they can merely raise the possibility of future harm and 
stall the marketing of GE crops (Tzotzos et al., 2009). Despite 
the  fact  that  no  consensus  exists  on  the  exact  interpretation 
of  the  precautionary  principle  and  how  it  should  be  applied, 
most  recent  international  environmental  agreements  have 
incorporated  the  principle,  including  the  Cartagena  Protocol 
on  Biosafety  that  regulates  international  trade  of  GE  crops 
(McAllister, 2005). Another regulatory concept that is becom-
ing increasingly challenging is the demand for absolutely no GE 
presence in non-GE agricultural products. This concept of zero 
tolerance,  driven  by  fear  of  GE  crops,  is  essentially  unachiev-
able using current farming practices (Kershen and McHughen, 
2005; Gaines et al., 2007). Adventitious presence refers to the 
presence  of  “other”  matter  in  a  seed  lot  that  occurs  through 
non-intended  means,  possibly  by  cross-pollination,  volunteer 
regrowth,  or  mechanical  mixing  from  machinery.  The  com-
ingling  of  foreign  materials  with  a  crop  can  be  among  con-
ventional  farm  produce,  organic  produce,  and  genetically 
engineered products. Because deregulated GE crops have been 
extensively tested, the issue is not related to food or environ-
mental  safety,  but  rather  to  economic  concerns  (Kershen  and 
McHughen,  2005).  Standards  for  seed  production  exist  with 
allowances  for  adventitious  presence.  For  example,  certified 
wheat seed allows up to 0.1% adventitious presence to remain 
certified  as  “pure”  (Gaines  et  al.,  2007).  This  level  of  purity 
is  required  in  the  seed  industry  and  can  be  achieved  through 
conventional  agricultural  practices  with  diligent  stewardship. 
Establishment of an accepted level of adventitious presence of 
GE  material  in  non-GE  harvested  products  would  drive  the 
establishment of cultural practices that would achieve such lev-
els. Currently in the United States, the onus of stewardship is 
on the farmer that wishes to avoid having the adventitious GE 
material  in  their  product  (Endres,  2005).  Coexistence  would 
be  highly  possible  if  regulations  on  the  amount  of  acceptable 
“contamination” were established.

Although the theories underpinning product- and process-
based regulatory frameworks are fundamentally different, the 
data  and  information  required  for  risk  assessment  are  gener-
ally comparable and follow the basic principles of risk assess-
ment  (Bergmans,  2006;  Johnson  et  al.,  2007;  Tzotzos  et  al., 
2009; Raybould et al., 2010). In the United States, the basis 
for  formal  regulatory  risk  assessment  began  with  the  publi-
cation  in  1983  of  the  “Red  Book”  by  the  National  Research 
Council  (National  Research  Council,  1983;  Nickson,  2008). 
The  two  essential  elements  that  form  the  basis  of  regula-
tions  are  outlined  in  the  Red  Book  —  risk  assessment  and 
risk  management.  Risk  assessment  is  the  process  of  using 
factual  information  to  define  the  effects  of  exposure  to  haz-
ardous  materials  and  situations;  whereas  risk  management 
is  the  process  of  weighing  policy  alternatives  and  selecting 
the  most  appropriate  regulatory  action  (National  Research 
Council, 1983). The management of risk or the determination 
of what is an acceptable risk level is not a scientific decision 

544

Regulatory issues of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 4

as it balances the interest of society with the results of a risk 
assessment (National Research Council, 1983; Johnson et al., 
2007). It is important to keep this distinction in mind as one 
prepares dossiers for regulatory agencies.

A  model  was  published  recently  for  determining  risk  of 
proteins in transgenic plants and is based not only on the pro-
tein,  but  also  on  the  likelihood  of  exposure  to  that  protein 
(Howard and Donnelly, 2004). The benefits to society of the 
products  generated  through  genetic  engineering  have  largely 
been ignored in the emotional fights over the technology. The 
focus  in  this  chapter  is  on  the  process  of  risk  assessment  as 
required  by  various  regulatory  agencies.  The  regulations  that 
have been implemented by the various agencies for managing 
the potential risks to human health and the environment asso-
ciated with GE crops all rely on these principles: risk assess-
ment  should  be  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  analysis  should  be 
“stepwise”  (i.e.,  performed  on  diminishing  levels  of  physical 
containment), and risk should be measured on the effects of 
the product in relation to a non-GE comparator crop.

Comparative risk assessment is a fundamental principle of 
GE  safety  assessments  with  end  point  measurements  made 
relative to comparator plants and growth practices (Wolt et al. 
2010), and the basic premise is that there are no biologically 
meaningful differences between a GE phenotype and the non-
GE comparator. Phenotypic changes that may arise from the 
molecular change must be identified (Nickson, 2008). To do 
this  efficiently,  the  parameters  of  the  assessment  are  deter-
mined and the risks of greatest relevance are defined, that is, 
a  problem  formulation  (Raybould,  2006;  Wolt  et  al.,  2010). 
To develop meaningful case-specific attributes of the GE crop 
under  conditions  of  release  and  to  define  the  scope  of  the 
assessment, all available and existing knowledge from product 
development,  field  trials,  and  compositional  analyses;  previ-
ous regulatory decisions; and peer reviewed literature should 
be  applied  (Wolt  et  al.,  2010).  By  effectively  using  existing 
data, crop developers do not submit a deluge of new data of 
negligible  utility  in  characterizing  the  risks;  they  can  reduce 
the  costs  of  regulatory  studies  and  avoid  opportunity  costs 
from delays in the regulatory review (Raybould, 2006, 2010; 
Romeis et al., 2009; Raybould et al., 2010).

The  assessment  for  a  particular  GE  crop  is  based  on  very 
specific hypotheses regarding the amount of risk to particular, 
clearly defined assessment end points, that is, a particular envi-
ronmental element that is measurable and is considered impor-
tant  to  society  (e.g.,  wildlife;  Johnson  et  al.,  2007;  Raybould 
et al., 2010). To perform the analysis, risk is characterized and 
scientific knowledge is acquired by tests that attempt to falsify 
the hypotheses (Raybould, 2006; Raybould et al., 2010). GE 
crop risk assessments are most effective when the hypothesis 
is  a  finding  of  no  harm,  the  assessment  end  points  are  clear, 
and adverse effects to the end points are defined, as opposed 
to merely comparing the GE crop with a non-transgenic com-
parator (Raybould et al., 2010; Raybould, 2010).

The U.S. Coordinated Framework

The majority of commercialized GE crops have achieved regu-
latory  clearance  in  the  United  States  under  the  Coordinated 

Framework.  As  discussed  earlier,  the  United  States  concurred 
with the OECD recommendation that new legislation was not 
necessary for GE crops. The United States opted instead to reg-
ulate GE crops on the basis of existing statutes administered by 
three  different  regulatory  agencies.  Thus,  GE  crops  and  prod-
ucts derived from them are under the jurisdiction of the USDA, 
the EPA, and the FDA. Each of these agencies was established 
to  fulfill  specific  missions,  and  it  is  within  the  scope  of  these 
missions  that  regulations  governing  GE  crops  and  their  prod-
ucts were implemented. The USDA has jurisdiction over plant 
pests, plants, and veterinary products; the EPA has jurisdiction 
over planting and food/feed uses of pesticidal plants, new uses 
of existing pesticides, and novel microorganisms; and the FDA 
regulates food and food additives, feed, and veterinary products 
(McHughen  and  Smyth,  2008;  Lemaux,  2009;  Tzotzos  et  al., 
2009). Which agencies have jurisdiction over a given GE crop 
is dependent upon the nature of the crop and its intended uses.

USDA–APHIS
APHIS is the primary regulatory arm of the USDA that deals 
with  plants  and  crops.  Protecting  United  States  agriculture, 
food,  and  natural  resources  is  a  particular  focus  of  APHIS, 
and it is in this context that it regulates GE crops (Nestmann 
et al., 2002). APHIS is primarily involved with regulating spe-
cific GE organisms capable of posing risks to plant or animal 
health. It has an important role in biotechnology and the mod-
ification  of  living  organisms  through  genetic  engineering  and 
the use of recombinant DNA technology.

The  U.S.  Plant  Protection  Act  (Title  IV  Public  Law  106-
224,  114  Statute  438,  7  U.S.C.  §7701–7772)  requires  the 
USDA to prevent the introduction and dissemination of plant 
pests into the United States and provides the specific author-
ity  to  prohibit  or  restrict  the  importation,  exportation,  and 
interstate movement of plants, plant products, certain biologi-
cal control organisms, noxious weeds, and plant pests. As dis-
cussed previously, the U.S. guidelines for rDNA prohibits the 
deliberate release into the environment of an organism contain-
ing rDNA; however, it provides for the authority to waive this 
prohibition. APHIS regulations under 7 CFR §339.1 stipulate 
that  any  organism  that  has  been  altered  or  produced  through 
genetic  engineering  is  considered  a  regulated  article  if  the 
donor  organism,  recipient  organism,  or  vector  or  vector  agent 
meets the definition of a plant pest, or is an unclassified organ-
ism and/or an organism whose classification is unknown, or any 
product that contains such an organism, or any other organism 
or  product  altered  or  produced  through  genetic  engineering 
that  the  Administrator  determines  is  a  plant  pest  or  has  rea-
son  to  believe  is  a  plant  pest  (Cowan,  2010).  APHIS  defines 
plant  pests  broadly  to  include  any  organisms  that  can  dam-
age or cause injury to plants or plant parts. Since many plant 
pathogens are used as vectors or promoters in genetic engineer-
ing, they are considered plant pests. APHIS regulation 7 CFR 
Part 339.6 permits an applicant to petition APHIS to evaluate 
submitted data to determine that a particular regulated article 
does not present a plant pest risk and should no longer be regu-
lated (McHughen and Smyth, 2008; Cowan, 2010).

As a regulated article, before a GE crop can be field tested 
or  released  into  the  environment  in  any  way,  the  developer 

545

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

must  obtain  an  authorization  through  either  the:  (1)  permit 
process;  or  (2)  notification  process.  Movement  and  planting 
restrictions are imposed by permits, whereas notification can 
be used in lieu of a permit when the plant is not considered a 
noxious weed (Cowan, 2010). Notifications are used primarily 
for field trial approval, as well as importation and transport of 
certain GE plants within the United States. To be eligible for 
a notification, specific criteria as well as designated perform-
ance and characteristics standards must be met. For example, 
a GE plant cannot be considered a noxious weed under USDA 
regulations or a weed in the area of release if these criteria are 
met: the function of the genetic material must be known and 
its expression must not cause plant disease, the modification 
should not contain human or animal pathogenic sequence, and 
the  GE  crop  cannot  express  a  plant-made  pharmaceutical  or 
a  plant-made  industrial  product  (Belson,  2000).  Permits  are 
used when the GE plant does not meet the requirements for 
notification.  As  with  the  notifications,  developers  must  pro-
vide APHIS scientists with details about the nature of the GE 
organism. The main consideration for field trials is biosafety or 
the possibility of unintended release and spread of a potential 
plant pest to the environment.

Once a developer has sufficient evidence that its GE organ-
ism  does  not  pose  more  risks  than  the  equivalent  non-GE 
organism,  the  developer  may  petition  APHIS  for  a  determi-
nation  of  non-regulated  status  to  introduce  the  GE  organ-
ism  into  U.S.  agriculture  and  commerce  without  oversight 
from  APHIS  (i.e.,  to  become  “deregulated”).  Petitions  must 
contain,  among  other  information,  details  about  plant  genet-
ics,  the  nature  and  origin  of  the  genetic  material,  field  test 
reports, and effects on other plants. Petitions are reviewed by 
APHIS  with  a  focus  on  environmental  impact,  including  the 
potential for cross-pollination, the effect on wildlife, and the 
potential  for  the  GE  plant  to  become  a  weed  or  plant  pest 
(Belson,  2000;  Cowan,  2010).  During  the  process  of  evalu-
ation,  APHIS,  at  a  minimum,  prepares  an  Environmental 
Assessment  (EA)  and  a  “Determination  of  Non-Regulated 
Status” as well as considering comments from the public.

A  list  of  Petitions  of  Non-regulated  Status  Granted  or 
Pending  by  APHIS  can  be  found  at  http://www.aphis.usda.
gov/biotechnology/not_reg.html.

EPA
The main role of the EPA is to ensure that all Americans are 
protected  from  significant  risks  to  human  health  and  to  the 
environment  where  they  live,  learn,  and  work.  EPA  regula-
tions  contribute  to  making  American  communities  and  eco-
systems  diverse,  sustainable,  and  economically  productive 
(Nestmann et al., 2002). The regulatory activities of the EPA 
are  governed  by  the  authorities  and  requirements  of  specific 
environmental  laws.  These  laws  direct  the  EPA  to  regulate 
many  kinds  of  “pollution,”  including  pesticides,  with  a  focus 
on  how  they  affect  different  aspects  of  the  environment. 
“Environment” is generally defined in these statutes as includ-
ing  human  health,  plant  and  animal  wildlife,  water  quality, 
and  air  quality  (National  Research  Council,  2009).  There  is 
a general recognition by the courts, the scientific community, 
and the regulatory community that the EPA should consider 

other factors along with the science when it makes decisions 
about risk management (EPA, 2005).

Under  the  Federal  Insecticide,  Fungicide,  and  Rodenticide 
Act (FIFRA; (7 U.S.C. §135 et seq., 1972), before a pesticide, 
including  a  GE  pesticide,  can  be  registered  for  use  and  com-
mercialized, the EPA must determine that the pesticide is able 
to perform its intended function without unreasonable adverse 
effects  on  human  health  and  the  environment  (FIFRA  §3). 
Plant  incorporated  protectants  (PIPs),  such  as  the  Bt  toxin  in 
corn,  are  considered  pesticides  under  FIFRA  because  they 
are  introduced  into  plants  with  the  intention  of  preventing, 
destroying, repelling, or mitigating a pest (FIFRA §2). In 2001, 
the EPA published a rule that established the regulatory frame-
work  for  PIPs  and  included:  (1)  an  exemption  from  FIFRA 
requirements  for  those  PIPs  that  are  derived  entirely  through 
conventional breeding between sexually compatible plants; and 
(2)  an  exemption  from  the  requirement  of  the  Federal  Food, 
Drug,  and  Cosmetic  Act  (FFDCA;  21  U.S.C.  §  301  et  seq.) 
for the establishment of a residue tolerance level for pesticides 
(McHughen and Smyth, 2008).

In contrast to the APHIS process of “deregulation,” a devel-
oper of a crop that contains a pesticidal property must submit 
an application to the EPA to register a PIP. This involves regu-
lating  GE  plants  with  obvious  herbicide-tolerance,  designed 
to be sprayed with a pesticidal chemical, as well as GE virus-
resistant plants that are not to be sprayed with new pesticidal 
substances or have them synthesized internally.

The  EPA  evaluates  each  submission  to  deregulate  a  GE 
plant  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  It  requires  data  related  to  the 
product characterization that are similar to the data required 
by  other  agencies  regarding  the  description  of  the  GE  plant 
and the details of its modification, such as an organic source of 
the pesticidal gene construct (promoter, terminator, enhancer, 
marker  genes,  and  other  inserted  DNA).  Molecular  tech-
niques should be utilized to demonstrate genetic stability and 
integrity, assuring number and location of insertion of foreign 
DNA. The dossier should include information on the biology 
of  the  plant  and  the  anti-nutritional  substances  produced  by 
the plant, among others.

Additionally, the EPA requires data on mammalian toxicity, 
the  effects  on  non-target  organisms,  environmental  metabo-
lism, and an insect resistance management program for plants 
specifically expressing Bt products. Since the EPA focuses on 
the pesticidal properties, developers should include a full bio-
chemical and amino acid description of the pesticidal protein. 
Since  most  PIPs  are  proteins,  the  issue  of  mammalian  aller-
genicity  is  highly  important.  Acute  digestibility  assays  and 
amino acid sequence homology are necessary to demonstrate 
the  absence  of  allergenicity  concerns.  The  EPA  is  also  con-
cerned with gene flow issues as they may result in expanded 
exposure to novel pesticidal substances, as well as the environ-
mental  fate  of  PIP  substances  and  their  effect  on  non-target 
organisms (McHughen and Smyth, 2008).

In  addition  to  the  requirement  for  a  PIP  to  be  registered 
before use unless it is exempted (as previously noted), FIFRA 
Section  7  requires  that  the  producers  of  pesticides  register 
the facilities where the pesticide is produced and report the 
amount produced. Comparable to APHIS requirements, pre-
commercial regulation is through a system of notifications for 

546

Regulatory issues of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 4

small-scale field tests, or experimental use permits for larger 
field trials. In an effort to delay the onset of resistance to pes-
ticides,  the  EPA  considers  management  strategies  after  com-
mercialization.  Farmers  cultivating  GE  crops  with  PIPs  are 
required  to  follow  the  appropriate  insect  resistance  manage-
ment (IRM) practices required and approved by the EPA that 
may include refuge areas.

The Pesticide Registration Improvement Act of 2003 (PRIA), 
contained  in  P.L.  108–199  (HR  2673),  created  a  registration 
service  fee  system  for  pesticide  applications  and  establish-
ment of tolerances under FIFRA and FFDCA. PRIA was reau-
thorized  in  2007  via  the  Pesticide  Registration  Improvement 
Renewal Act (PRIA 2). PRIA 2 requires the payment of reg-
istration  fees  to  be  made  at  the  time  of  application  to  the 
agency,  and  an  application  that  does  not  include  the  pay-
ment is required to be rejected. Under PRIA 2, the category 
or type of application and the type of action (e.g., PIP with a 
new food use) determines the registration service fee and the 
decision  review  period.  For  fiscal  years  2011–2012,  an  appli-
cation that requests an experimental use permit, the registra-
tion  of  an  active  ingredient,  and  the  establishment  or  waiver 
of tolerances with review by an independent science advisory 
panel requires a fee of more than $390,000 (Federal Register 
75–154, pp. 48672–48683). Registration fees can be reduced 
by up to 75% for small businesses. Federal and State agencies 
are  exempted  from  the  fee  and  minor  use  applications  asso-
ciated  with  the  Inter-Regional  Project  4  (IR-4)  program  for 
minor uses may be exempt as well if it is determined to be in 
the public interest. Once registered by the EPA, all registrants 
are also required to pay an annual maintenance fee to the EPA 
pursuant to FIFRA Section 4.

FDA
The FDA is an agency within the U.S. Department of Health 
and  Human  Services.  It  primarily  ensures  the  safety,  effec-
tiveness,  and  security  of  food,  animal  feed  additives,  and 
human  and  animal  drugs  under  the  regulatory  authority  of 
the FFDCA (21 U.S.C. § 301 et seq.) and the Public Health 
Service  Act  (42  U.S.C.  §  201  et  seq;  Cowan,  2010).  They 
also  regulate  tobacco  products  and  help  the  public  obtain 
accurate, science-based information for their use of medicines 
and  foods  to  improve  their  health  (www.fda.org;  Nestmann 
et al., 2002). Under the FFDCA, food and feed manufacturers 
must ensure the safety and proper labeling of their products.

In 1992, the FDA issued a new policy statement (Federal 
Register,  May  29,  1992,  57  FR  22984)  indicating  that  it 
would  regulate  foods  and  feeds  regardless  of  their  method 
of  breeding,  and  it  would  not  require  special  labeling  of  GE 
foods unless the composition of the food differed significantly 
from its conventional comparator (FDA, 1992; Belson, 2000). 
The FDA regulates the presence of allergens and any changes 
in  composition  or  levels  of  nutritional  and  anti-nutritional 
substances.  This  means  that  any  food  with  nearly  identical 
composition to the regular version is not considered “adulter-
ated,” therefore it is not regulated by the FDA. The method 
for producing the new food or feed is not a consideration for 
this  statement,  which  means  bioengineered  foods  composed 
of  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  substances  as  their  available 

counterpart  are  not  considered  adulterated  (Belson,  2000; 
Smyth and McHughen, 2008; Cowan, 2010).

Nonetheless, the FDA recommended that developers con-
sult with the agency about bioengineered foods under devel-
opment;  the  FDA  review  is  considered  to  be  “voluntary.” 
Since 1992, all developers of genetically modified foods have 
routinely consulted the FDA. A list of the FDA consultations 
is  available  on  the  FDA  Web  site  http://www.fda.gov/Food/
Biotechnology/Submissions/default.htm.

The FDA is divided into five centers that focus on differ-
ent  regulatory  targets  such  as  food  or  drugs.  The  Center  for 
Food Safety and Nutrition (CFSAN) regulates food and color 
additives  and  has  been  the  primary  regulatory  focus  for  GE 
crops (Belson, 2000). CFSAN and the Center for Veterinary 
Medicine evaluate new foods and feed composition, including 
those from GE plants. This agency follows the requirements 
of the FFDCA with respect to human foods and animal feeds 
derived  from  new  plant  varieties,  and  provides  guidance  to 
industry  on  scientific  and  regulatory  issues  related  to  these 
foods.  The  FDA  regulations  are  applied  to  all  foods  derived 
from all new plant varieties, including varieties that are devel-
oped using rDNA technology (e.g., bioengineered foods).

The  FDA  describes  the  procedures  as  useful  for  devel-
opers  who  intend  to  commercialize  a  bioengineered  food. 
The  agency  is  interested  in  relevant  safety,  nutritional,  or 
other  regulatory  issues  regarding  the  bioengineered  food. 
Developers  should  submit  a  summary  of  the  scientific  and 
regulatory  assessment  of  the  food.  The  dossier  must  include 
information  regarding  the  genetic  stability  of  the  plant, 
nutritional  and  compositional  analyses,  and  allergenicity  and 
toxicology  studies,  as  well  as  a  complete  assessment  of  the 
introduced gene products. In addition to these compositional 
analyses,  the  FDA  might  require  information  regarding  the 
expected  dietary  exposure  to  any  risk  groups,  such  as  chil-
dren or immunosuppressed patients, or particular religious or  
ethnic groups that might be overly exposed to the new food.

It is important to remark that up until now, the FDA has 
not identified any new food or feed produced by rDNA tech-
nology that has unexpected changes in composition or in the 
presence  of  allergens  and  other  toxicants  when  compared  to 
the same naturally occurring type of food (NAS, 2004).

After  careful  review,  the  FDA  issues  a  “memo”  indicating 
the characteristics of the new food and summarizing the pos-
sible safety concerns. They do not formally approve the new 
food or feed to be safe per se. Instead, they indicate it is not 
materially different from the unmodified version with respect 
to  composition  or  safety  as  it  is  “as  safe  as  its  non-modified 
counterparts” (McHughen and Smyth, 2008).

Perspectives

Specialty crops regulatory assistance:  
A new paradigm

The  regulatory  system  has  evolved  into  a  system  in  which 
regulations are approached on a case-by-case basis. Each new 
crop/gene  combination  requires  a  separate  data  package  and 

547

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

petition  to  the  USDA  as  a  starting  point,  then  to  either  the 
FDA  and/or  the  EPA  depending  on  the  crop  (food  or  feed) 
and  the  gene  (plant  incorporated  protectant),  respectively. 
The  current  climate  in  regulatory  affairs  assumes  that  the 
genetically modified crop is not substantially equivalent to the 
non-modified  crop  and  that  there  is  a  greater  risk  associated 
with  the  newly  formed  crop,  in  contrast  to  the  Coordinated 
Framework  recommendations  in  1986.  Baseline  studies  are 
not available for most crops other than the major commodity 
crops,  so  comparative  data  must  be  generated  for  each  new 
species moving through the regulatory system. The costs asso-
ciated  with  each  of  these  petitions  for  non-regulated  status 
are  staggering  —  in  the  tens  of  millions  of  dollars  (McElroy, 
2003)  and  possibly  even  more  (The  Economist,  2009).  For 
academics  or  small  crop  developers,  the  possibility  of  the 
product of interest making it to market is very slim since each 
non-commodity  crop  such  as  peas,  squash,  okra,  or  tomato, 
has  a  small  market  and  very  little  chance  of  recovering  the 
money invested in deregulation.

A  new  paradigm  is  needed  for  data  collection  and  coordi-
nation  to  simplify  and  standardize  the  petition  process  for 
federal  agencies  —  fulfilling  data  needs  for  crop  assessment 
while  ensuring  safety  of  the  product.  The  barrier  to  regula-
tory  approval  for  non-commodity  or  specialty  crops  was  rec-
ognized by the USDA in the early 2000s. The Specialty Crops 
Regulatory  Initiative  (SCRI)  was  formed  as  the  outcome  of 
the  workshop  Public  Research  and  the  Regulatory  Review  of 
Small Market (Specialty) Biotechnology Derived Crops, which 
was held in November 2004 at the USDA APHIS headquar-
ters in Riverdale, Maryland. This workshop was organized and 
initially  funded  through  cooperation  among  several  govern-
ment  agencies  (http://www.csrees.usda.gov/nea/biotech/in_
focus/biotechnology_if_smallmarket.html).  A  working  group 
was  established  to  continue  discussing  and  revising  models 
and  plans  for  structuring  an  organization  that  would  benefit 
the specialty crop community. It was and is essential to engage 
the  stakeholders  —  specialty  crop  developers  in  the  public 
and  private  sector  —  who  have  participated  in  this  organiza-
tion. A steering committee of volunteers was formed from the 
working group and an executive committee identified to con-
tinue working toward developing the SCRI concept. Follow-up 
workshops  were  held  and  initial  funding  to  launch  the  SCRI 
concept  was  provided  by  the  USDA  Chief  Economist  and 
the USDA Office of the Secretary. Because this was a volun-
tary  association,  the  steering  committee  used  funds  provided 
by the USDA to identify a consultant to help build the SCRI 
structure. One was engaged in 2006 to work with the group.

Because  the  SCRI  acronym  was  used  by  a  number  of 
entities  not  associated  with  the  Specialty  Crops  Regulatory 
Initiative,  the  steering  committee  approved  changing  the 
name  of  the  group  to  Specialty  Crops  Regulatory  Assistance 
(SCRA).  The  SCRA  mission  is  to  facilitate  regulatory  clear-
ance  for  biotechnology-derived  specialty  crops,  including 
assistance in the scientific and business categories as monetary 
and personnel resources permit. To accomplish the mission of 
this public sector assistance organization, private organizations 
must be designed and built to support the goals.

A  recent  study  commissioned  by  the  Specialty  Crop 
Regulatory Assistance initiative (www.specialtycropassistance.org) 

indicated that there are 46 different crops and a multitude of 
unique biotechnology-derived traits in the development pipe-
line in the United States alone. Despite this robust pipeline, 
small crop developers have nicknamed the deregulation proc-
ess the “Valley of Death” in the development of GE specialty 
crops because deregulation may be achieved only after a sig-
nificant  number  of  studies  have  been  conducted.  These  may 
include  molecular  characterization  of  the  genetic  modifica-
tion, compositional assessments, protein production and char-
acterization,  studies  of  impact  on  non-target  organisms,  and 
toxicology studies. These studies are expensive and time-con-
suming, and for developers of small market crops, prohibitive. 
Some studies could be expedited significantly if there was an 
established concept of “the normal range of values” for each 
crop characteristic that could be targeted.

Standardization

To  facilitate  the  curation  of  data  and  develop  extremely 
robust  databases,  standard  formats  for  entering  basic  agro-
nomic and compositional information about a GE crop would 
be  extremely  useful.  Currently,  there  are  no  standard  for-
mats for reporting or describing the results of field and labo-
ratory  analyses  of  GE  crops.  Throughout  the  field  of  human 
genomics, there is a growing interest in developing standards 
for  reporting  information.  For  example,  to  ensure  that  data 
are  captured  electronically  in  a  standard  format,  a  Genomic 
Standards Consortium was launched and it proposed the min-
imum information about a genome sequence (MIGS) specifi-
cation (Field et al. 2008). The FDA, in partnership with IBM, 
created  JANUS  (http://crix.nci.nih.gov/projects/janus/),  a 
standards-based clinical data repository that forms the basis of 
a  clinical  trial  review  application.  The  objectives  for  JANUS 
include more efficient submissions-based, custom datasets for 
analysis;  less  data  redundancy;  less  ambiguity  in  information; 
easier peer review; and the overall use of common standards. 
It would be useful to both the crop developer and the regula-
tory agencies if comparable standards were established to sup-
port the development of regulatory dossiers.

Conclusions

A basic road atlas from which a specific regulatory plan can be 
derived should be created. Certain data are required in every 
petition, and standardization of the reporting of that informa-
tion  will  greatly  simplify  the  process.  Experiments  still  need 
to  be  conducted  for  each  GE  event,  and  how  to  collect  the 
data and conduct the experiments can be a part of a custom-
ized regulatory plan based on the general regulatory atlas pre-
pared  by  an  independent  group  such  as  SCRA.  With  more 
products from GE plants on the market without incident, the 
social fears surrounding genetic engineering can be allayed.

In  the  end,  the  ultimate  goal  of  genetic  engineering  of 
plants  is  to  benefit  society  through  improvements  in  agri-
cultural  practices,  plant  health,  and  plant  productivity. 
Additional  benefits  can  be  reaped  through  improved  nutri-
tion  and  products  derived  from  renewable  plant  resources. 
In  all  regulations  of  transgenic  (GE)  plants,  the  GE  plant  is 

548

Regulatory issues of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 4

compared to its non-GE counterpart. The question is whether 
or  not  this  is  the  correct  comparator  or  if  the  improvement 
in agronomic practices and productivity outweigh any poten-
tial  drawbacks  of  the  plants  produced  through  GE  technol-
ogy.  Agriculture  itself  has  had  an  enormous  impact  on  land 
use  and  biodiversity  (Edwards  and  Hilbeck,  2001).  The  bal-
ance  between  positive  and  negative  impacts  of  GE  plants  in 

the  environment  and  on  human  health  should  be  considered 
in  this  broader  agronomic  context  to  define  the  full  costs 
and  benefits  of  agricultural  systems  (Pretty,  2008).  The  goal 
should be to make the regulations reflect the measured rather 
than  the  perceived  risks  to  allow  the  benefits  of  this  new 
technology to be realized.

References

Akhond, M. A. Y., & Machray, G. C. (2009). 
Biotech crops: Technologies, achievements 
and prospects. Euphytica, 166, 47–59.

Arundel, A., & Sawaya, D. (2009). 

Biotechnologies in agriculture and related 
natural resources to 2015. OECD Journal: 
General Papers, 7–111.

Barton, K. A., Binns, A. N., Matzke, A. J. M., & 

Chilton, M. -D. (1983). Regeneration of 
intact tobacco plants containing full length 
copies of genetically engineered T-DNA, and 
transmission of T-DNA to R1 progeny. Cell, 
32, 1033–1043.

Belson, N. A. (2000). US Regulation of 

agricultural biotechnology: An overview. 
AgBioForum, 3, 268–280.

Bergmans, H. (2006). Basic framework for risk 
assessment for transgenic plants developed 
by the OECD: 20 years after the OECD 
“Blue Book”. Environmental Biosafety 
Research, 5, 213–219.

Brookes, G., & Barfoot, P. (2010). Global 

impact of biotech crops: Environmental 
effects, 1996–2008. AgBioForum, 13, 76–94.

Carpenter, J. E. (2010). Peer-reviewed surveys 
indicate positive impact of commercialized 
GM crops. Nature Biotechnology, 28, 319–321.

Chapotin, S. M., & Wolt, J. D. (2007). 
Genetically modified crops for the 
bioeconomy: Meeting public and regulatory 
expectations. Transgenic Research, 16, 
675–688.

Cowan, T. (2010). Agricultural biotechnology: 

Background and recent issues. (Development, 
N. R. a. R.). Washington, DC: Congressional 
Research Service.

Devos, Y., Lheureux, K., & Schiemann, J. 

(2010). Regulatory oversight and safety 
assessment of plants with novel traits. In 
F. Kempken & C. Jung (Eds.), Genetic 
modification of plants (pp. 553–574). Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer.

Economist. (2009).  The parable of the sower. 

The Economist, November 19, 71–73.

Edwards, P. J., & Hilbeck, A. (2001). 

Biodiversity of agroecosystems: Past, present 
and uncertain future. In J. Nosberger, H. H. 
Geiger & P. C. Struik (Eds.), Crop science: 
Progress and prospects (pp. 213–229). 
London, UK: CABI Publishing.

Endres, A. (2005). Revising seed purity laws 

to account for the adventitious presence of 
genetically modified varieties: A first step 
towards coexistence. Food Law and Policy, 
1, 131–139.

EPA. (2005).  An examination of EPA risk 

assessment principles and practices. (Risk 
Assessment Task Force, O. o. t. S. A.). 
Washington, DC: Environmental Protection 
Agency.

European Commission. (2001). Directive 

2001/18/EC of the European parliament 
and of the council of 12 March 2001 on the 
deliberate release into the environment of 
genetically modified organisms and repealing 
Council Directive 90/220/EEC. (EC, O. J.,). 
pp. 1–39.

European Commission. (2003). Communication 

from the commission on the precautionary 
principle. European Commission.

FDA. (1992). Statement of policy: Foods 

derived from new plant varieties. pp. 984–
923 005, US Federal Register.

Fedoroff, N. V., Battisti, D. S., Beachy, R. N., 

Cooper, P. J. M., Fischhoff, D. A.,  
Hodges, C. N., et al. (2010). Radically 
rethinking agriculture for the 21st century. 
Science, 327, 833–834.

Fedoroff, N. V., & Brown, N. M. (2004). 

Mendel in the ktichen: A scientist’s view of 
genetically modified foods. Washington, 
DC: Joseph Henry Press.

Field, D., Garrity, G., Gray, T., Morrison, N., 

Selengut, J., Sterk, P., et al. (2008). The 
minimum information about a genome 
sequence (MIGS) specification. Nature 
Biotechnology, 26, 541–547.

Fraley, R. T., Rogers, S. B., & Horsch, R. B. (1983). 

Use of a chimeric gene to confer antibiotic 
resistance to plant cells. In K. Downey (Ed.), 
Advances in gene technology: Molecular genetics 
of plants and animals: Proceedings of the Miami 
Winter Symposium (pp. 211–221). Miami: 
Academic Press.

Fraley, R. T., Rogers, S. G., Horsch, R. B., 

Sanders, P. R., Flick, J. S., Adams, S. P.,  
et al. (1983). Expression of bacterial genes 
in plant cells. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 80, 4803–4807.

Gaines, T., Preston, C., Byrne, P., Henry, 

W. B., & Westra, P. (2007). Adventitious 
presence of herbicide resistant wheat in 
certified and farm-saved seed lots. Crop 
Science, 47, 751–754.

Herrera-Estrella, L., Depicker, A., Van 
Montagu, M., & Schell, J. (1983). 
Expression of chimaeric genes transferred 
into plant cells using a Ti-plasmid-derived 
vector. Nature, 303, 209–213.

Howard, J. A., & Donnelly, K. C. (2004).  

A quantitative safety assessment model for 
transgenic protein products produced in 
agricultural crops. Journal of Agricultural 
and Environmental Ethics, 17, 545–558.

Howard, J. A., & Hood, E. (2005). Bioindustrial 
and biopharmaceutical products produced in 
plants. Advances in Agronomy, 85, 91–124.

ILSI. (2004).  Nutritional and safety assessments  

of foods and feeds nutritionally 

improved through biotechnology: An 
executive summary a task force report 
by the international life sciences institute 
Washington, D.C. Comprehensive 
Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 3, 
35–104.

ILSI. (2008). Nutritional and safety 

assessments of foods and feeds nutritionally 
improved through biotechnology: Case 
studies. Comprehensive Reviews in Food 
Science and Food Safety, 7, 50–113.

James, C. (2009). Global status of 

commercialized biotech/GM crops. Ithaca, 
NY: ISAAA.

James, C. (2010). A global overview of biotech 

(GM) crops: Adoption, impact and future 
prospects. GM Crops, 1, 8–12.

Johnson, K. L., Raybould, A. F., Hudson, M. D., &  

Poppy, G. M. (2007). How does scientific 
risk assessment of GM crops fit within the 
wider risk analysis? Trends in Plant Science, 
12, 1–5.

Kalaitzandonakes, N., & Bijman, J. (2003). Who 
is driving biotechnology acceptance? Nature 
Biotechnology, 21, 366–369.

Kaskey, J., & Ligi, A. (2010). Monsanto, 

DuPont race to win $2.7 billion drought-
corn market. Bloomberg Businessweek.

Kershen, D., & McHughen, A. (2005). 

Adventitious presence: Inadvertent co-
mingling and co-existence among farming 
methods in CAST commentary. Ames, 
Iowa: Council for Agricultural Science and 
Technology.

Kingsbury, D. T. (1986). The regulatory 

“Coordinated Framework” for biotechnology. 
Bio/Technology, 4, 1071–1073.

Lemaux, P. G. (2008). Genetically engineered 

plants and foods: A scientist’s analysis of 
the issues (Part I). Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 59, 771–812.

Lemaux, P. G. (2009). Genetically engineered 

plants and foods: A scientist’s analysis of 
the issues (Part II). Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 2009, 511–559.

McAllister, L. K. (2005). Judging GMOs: Judicial 

application of the precautionary principle in 
Brazil. Ecology Law Quarterly, 32, 149.

McElroy, D. (2003). Sustaining agbiotechnology 

through lean times. Nature Biotechnology, 
21, 996–1002.

McHughen, A., & Smyth, S. (2008). US 

regulatory system for genetically modified 
organisms (GMO), rDNA or transgenic 
crop cultivars. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 
6, 2–12.

Miller, J. K., & Bradford, K. J. (2010). The 

regulatory bottleneck for biotech specialty 
crops. Nature Biotechnology, 28, 1012–1014.

549

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

NAS. (2004). Safety of genetically engineered 
foods: Approaches to assessing unintended 
health effects. Washington: National 
Academies Press.

National Research Council. (1983). Risk 
assessment in the federal government: 
Managing the process. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press.

National Research Council. (2009). Science and 
decisions: Advancing risk assessment. (EPA, 
C. o. I. R. A. A. U. b. t. U.). Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press.

Nestmann, E., Copeland, T., & Hlywka, J. 

(2002). The regulatory and science-based 
safety evaluation of genetically modified 
food crops; A USA perspective. In K. T. 
Atherton (Ed.), Genetically modified crops, 
assessing safety (pp. 1–44). London, UK: 
Taylor and Francis.

Nickson, T. E. (2008). Planning environmental 

risk assessment for genetically modified 
crops: Problem formulation for stress-
tolerant crops. Plant Physiology, 147, 
494–502.

OECD. (1986). Recombinant DNA safety 

considerations. Paris, France: Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development.

OECD. (1992). Safety considerations for 

biotechnology. Paris, France: Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development.

OECD. (1993). Safety evaluation of foods 

derived by modern biotechnology: Concepts 
and principles. Paris, France: Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and 
Development.

OSTP. (1986). Coordinated framework for 

regulation of biotechnology: Announcement 
of policy and notice for public comment. 
Federal Register, 51, 302–323. 393

Pretty, J. (2008). Agricultural sustainability: 

Concepts, principles and evidence. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B, 363, 447–466.

Raybould, A. (2006). Problem formulation 
and hypothesis testing for environmental 
risk assessments of genetically modified 
crops. Environmental Biosafety Research, 5, 
119–125.

Raybould, A. (2010). Reducing uncertainty in 
regulatory decision-making for transgenic 
crops: More ecological research or shrewder 
environmental risk assessment? GM Crops, 
1, 1–7.

Raybould, A., Tuttle, A., Shore, S., & Stone, T.  

(2010). Environmental risk assessments 
for transgenic crops producing output trait 
enzymes. Transgenic Research, 19, 595–609.

Romeis, J., Lawo, N. C., & Raybould, A. 

(2009). Making effective use of existing 
data for case-by-case risk assessments of 
genetically engineered crops. Journal of 
Applied Entomology, 133, 571–583.

Rommens, C. M. (2009). Barriers and paths 

to market for genetically engineered crops. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 8, 101–111.
Schell, J., Van Montagu, M., Holsters, M., 
Zambryski, P. H. J., Inze, D., Herrera-
Estrella, L., et al. (1983). Ti plasmids as 
experimental gene vectors for plants. In  
K. Downey (Ed.), Advances in gene. 

technology: Molecular genetics of plants and 
animals: Proceedings of the Miami Winter 
Symp (pp. 191–209). Miami: Academic Press.

Sharma, H. C., Crouch, J. H., Sharma, K. K., 

Seetharama, N., & Hash, C. T. (2002). 
Applications of biotechnology for crop 
improvement: Prospects and constraints. 
Plant Science, 163, 381–395.

Singer, M. F., & Soll, D. (1973). Guidelines for 
DNA hybrid molecules. Science, 181, 1114.
Smyth, S., & McHughen, A. (2008). Regulating 
innovative crop technologies in Canada: The 
case of regulating genetically modified crops. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 6, 213–225.

Tolin, S. A., & Vidaver, A. K. (1989). 

Guidelines and regulations for research with 
genetically modified organisms: A view from 
academe. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 
27, 551–581.

Trewavas, A., & Leaver, C. (2001). Is 

opposition to GM crops science or politics? 
An investigation into the arguments that 
GM crops pose a particular threat to the 
environment. EMBO Reports, 2, 445–459.

Tzotzos, G. T., Head, G. P., & Hull, R. (2009). 
Genetically modified plants: Assessing safety 
and managing risks. San Diego: Academic 
Press.

Wolt, J., Keese, P., Raybould, A., Fitzpatrick, J.,  

Burachik, M., Gray, A., et al. (2010). 
Problem formulation in the environmental 
risk assessment for genetically modified 
plants. Transgenic Research, 19, 425–436.

550

Growth Control of Root Architecture

24

Christopher N. Topp  Philip N. Benfey
Department of Biology and Institute for Genome Science and Policy, Center for Systems Biology, 
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction to Root System Architecture. . . . . . . . . . . . . 373
Genetic and Developmental Aspects of Root Growth . . . 373
Stereotypical organization of root tissues . . . . . . . . . .374
Architectural possibilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .374
Signaling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .375
Systems biology concept of cell identity . . . . . . . . . . .376
Plant–Environment Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 376
Environmental sensing and root exudation . . . . . . . . .376
Microbial interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .377
Architectural responses to nutrient availability  . . . . . .378
Crop Root Systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 379
Types of root systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .379
Embryonic and post-embryonic root systems . . . . . . .379
Evolutionary strategies and trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . .380
Approaches to Study Root Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 380
Quantitative analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .380
High-throughput sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .381
Phenomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .381
Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 382

Introduction to Root System 
Architecture

Root  systems  provide  the  foundation  for  shoot  growth  and 
reproductive  success.  Environmental  forces  above  and  below 
ground  constantly  shape  the  landscape  from  which  a  plant 
must extract water and nutrients. How a plant integrates its 
endogenous  developmental  program  with  environmental  per-
ceptions  to  deploy  its  root  system  is  a  central  question  of 
plant  biology.  This  question  also  bears  heavily  on  mankind’s 
ability  to  develop  crop  varieties  that  can  improve  current 
yields and thus satisfy rapidly increasing world food demand. 
New  challenges  have  arisen  since  the  research-driven  Green 

Revolution  that  fed  hundreds  of  millions  in  decades  past. 
Today’s climate is hotter, rainfall is less predictable, and soils 
have  deteriorated  from  decades  of  intensive  farming  and 
industrial  waste  —  all  coincident  with  a  worldwide  reduc-
tion of plant biomass (Glover et al., 2010; Guo et al., 2010; 
Tester and Langridge, 2010; Zhao and Running, 2010). Crop 
breeding aided by biotechnology will continue to play a major 
role in agricultural improvement. However, such efforts have 
traditionally focused on the visible, aboveground characters of 
plants,  while  root  systems  have  been  relatively  ignored.  We 
must extend our view into the soil if we are to confront such 
fundamental issues as water and nutrient limitations.

Root system architecture (RSA) refers to the spatial organi-
zation  of  the  root  system  in  its  growing  environment,  which 
reflects  its  capability  to  extract  resources  (Lynch,  1995). 
There  are  three  basic  components  to  root  architecture:  the 
initiation  of  root  axes  that  cause  branching,  the  growth  rate 
and path of each axis, and the expansion of the root surface 
area.  These  features  combined  can  produce  highly  complex 
topologies.  Although  root  development  occurs  through  reit-
erative processes such as branching and hair formation, envi-
ronmental  conditions  heavily  influence  the  extent  of  growth 
along a particular root axis. Thus RSA is difficult to accurately 
predict or even comprehensively describe.

With  these  concepts  in  mind,  we  review  root  architecture 
through  the  various  aspects  that  influence  its  growth.  We 
examine the endogenous genetic control of root development, 
how it is influenced by internal and external cues to shape the 
overall  growth  of  the  root  system,  and  how  evolutionary  fac-
tors may or may not constrain architecture. Finally, we consider 
technological  approaches  that  are  useful  to  study  the  genetic 
basis of root architecture from an agricultural standpoint.

Genetic and Developmental Aspects 
of Root Growth

The  shape  and  physiological  attributes  of  plants  depend  on 
the  coordinated  growth  of  their  tissues  and  organs.  Central 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00024-9

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

to the development of complex plants are meristems, regions 
of actively dividing stem cells that generate and organize new 
tissues.  There  are  two  general  types  of  meristems  that  form 
in  the  developing  embryo:  shoot  apical  meristems  (SAMs) 
responsible for generating aboveground growth; and root api-
cal meristems (RAMs) responsible for the root system. Based 
on  the  activity  of  their  apical  meristems,  plants  generate 
most  of  their  growth  as  extensions  from  their  tips.  Mature 
plants  can  have  numerous  apical  meristems,  the  vast  major-
ity  of  which  develop  post-embryonically  through  integration 
of genetic networks and environmental signals. Consequently, 
plants can tailor the growth of their root architecture to suit 
the prevailing environmental conditions.

Stereotypical organization of root tissues

Due  to  its  relatively  simple  form  and  ease  of  experimental 
manipulation, Arabidopsis thaliana has proven to be a power-
ful model species to study the mechanisms that govern mer-
istem function in plants. In the Arabidopsis embryo, a single 
meristem  generates  one  root  primordium,  which  becomes 
the primary root upon germination. Tissue development after 
this point is genetically controlled by formative series of cell 
divisions  in  the  RAM  (Dolan  et  al.,  1993;  Howell,  1998). 
The key transcription factors that orchestrate these cell divi-
sions have been identified through genetic and morphological 
analyses (Vandenberg et al., 1995; DiLaurenzio et al., 1996). 
These studies revealed the critical importance of asymmetric 
cell divisions, which generate a specialized progenitor cell for 
each type of tissue. The identity of this initial cell is passed on 
to daughters during subsequent symmetrical divisions, so that 
most cells in a given tissue layer are clonally related.

Divisions in the root are further classified based on their ori-
entation to the longitudinal axis. Periclinal divisions are parallel 
to the longitudinal axis, whereas anticlinal divisions are usually 
orthogonal  to  the  longitudinal  axis.  Thus,  periclinal  divisions 
can add to the number of concentric cell layers, whereas anti-
clinal  divisions  elongate  the  root  by  displacing  the  meristem 
downward.  Asymmetric  divisions  of  both  peri-  and  anticlinal 
type  contribute  to  new  layers  of  tissue.  For  example,  an  anti-
clinal division invariantly followed by a periclinal division gen-
erates the cortical and endodermal cell lineages of Arabidopsis 
(Petricka et al., 2009). The combined activities of divisions in 
the meristem result in layers of tissues arranged around the root 
longitudinal  axis.  This  radially  symmetric  organization  is  most 
easily understood by viewing a cross-section of the root. From 
the outside toward the center the basic tissues are the epider-
mis, the cortex, the endodermis, and the pericycle and vascu-
lar tissues that collectively comprise the stele. The numbers of 
cells in these layers are well defined in Arabidopsis, but can be 
highly variable in other species, particularly in the cereals that 
have numerous cortical cells and thicker roots (Esau, 1965).

The positions of neighboring plant cells are essentially fixed 
by  their  cell  walls.  Since  cells  are  continually  generated  in 
the RAM, the age of a given cell increases as a function of its 
distance from the root tip, creating a temporal gradient. Just 
behind the meristem in what is known as the elongation zone, 
cells  divide  less  often,  and  rapidly  increase  their  volumes. 

Cell  expansion  not  only  lengthens  the  root,  but  also  enables 
it to curve. Uneven expansion of cells on one side of the root 
causes  the  tip  to  bend  away  from  the  more  quickly  expand-
ing side. Consequently, molecular tropic responses to gravity, 
touch, and so forth, converge on cell wall expansion (Swarup 
et  al.,  2005).  Wall  expansion  is  controlled  in  part  by  corti-
cal  microtubules  that  when  arranged  helically,  can  cause  the 
root  to  twist  around  its  long  axis  (Thitamadee  et  al.,  2002; 
Buschmann et al.. 2009). Thus, the patterns and rates of cell 
expansion in the elongation zone heavily influence the topol-
ogy of the growing root.

After  the  period  of  rapid  expansion,  further  maturation 
occurs  in  the  differentiation  zone  where  cells  establish  their 
specialized  physiological  roles.  This  process  often  involves 
characteristic changes to cellular organization, some of which 
are initiated by evolutionarily well-conserved genetic program-
ming.  For  example,  the  tracheal  elements  of  xylem  strands 
develop  from  procambial  cells  in  a  process  of  programmed 
cell  death  and  cell  wall  restructuring  (Esau,  1965;  Groover 
and Jones, 1999). The development of xylem and other vascu-
lar elements is so tightly controlled that the patterns of these 
cells  are  nearly  invariant  within  a  species.  As  such,  vascular 
morphologies are the historical gold standard for phylogenetic 
classifications  (Esau,  1965).  Patterning  of  tissues  with  core 
functions  such  as  water  transport  must  be  consistent;  there-
fore the influence of lineage on cell identity is strong.

Other important maturation processes in the root are sig-
nificantly influenced by the environment. A defining physical 
feature  of  the  transition  from  the  elongation  to  the  matura-
tion zone is the extension of root hairs from epidermal cells. 
In this process, hair-forming cells are usually delineated from 
non-hair-forming  cells  by  either  positional  information  from 
neighbors or by asymmetric divisions (Gilroy and Jones, 2000; 
Muller  and  Schmidt,  2004).  However,  root  hair  outgrowth 
is  also  sensitive  to  nutrient  scarcity.  Under  conditions  of 
low  iron,  Arabidopsis  root  hairs  can  become  bifurcated,  and 
when  phosphate  is  not  available,  root  hairs  may  grow  longer 
and generate from cells that are normally in non-hair-forming 
positions (Muller and Schmidt, 2004). These and other data 
suggest  that  root  hair  responses  to  nutrient  availabilities  are 
distinct,  and  in  some  cases  are  influential  enough  to  over-
ride  endogenous  developmental  programming  (Schikora  and 
Schmidt,  2001;  Muller  and  Schmidt,  2004;  Dinneny  et  al., 
2008).  Since  root  hairs  can  comprise  a  majority  of  root  sur-
face area, which has a direct correlation with water and nutri-
tional  intake  ability,  control  of  their  differentiation  is  a  key 
aspect of root system function (Gilroy and Jones, 2000; Forde 
and Lorenzo, 2001; Lopez-Bucio et al., 2003a).

Architectural possibilities

Active  meristems  are  primarily  maintained  at  the  apices  of 
shoots and roots. However, incipient meristems also typically 
form along the sides of shoots and roots (Esau, 1965). When 
activated,  these  laterally  arranged  meristems  allow  plants  to 
shape  the  geometry  of  their  architecture  through  second-
ary,  tertiary,  and  higher  order  branching.  Lateral  SAMs  are 
formed  from  stem  cells  as  part  of  reiterative  developmental 

374

Growth Control of Root Architecture

C H A P T E R   2 4

units  called  phytomers,  and  their  activity  is  largely  control-
led  by  systemic  hormone  gradients  (Leyser,  2005).  Lateral 
RAM  control  is  more  complicated  because  these  meristems 
are not pre-formed. Instead they are generated when needed 
by  a  process  of  cell  dedifferentiation  and  subsequent  tissue 
reorganization  that  is  initiated  from  pericycle  cells  flanking 
the xylem poles (Malamy and Benfey, 1997; De Smet et al., 
2008; Moreno-Risueno et al., 2010). Thus, the possibilities of 
root branching are confined by the architecture of the vascular 
system. In Arabidopsis, the vasculature is arranged in a sym-
metrical  diarch  pattern,  resulting  in  a  bilaterally  symmetric 
pattern of lateral roots, whereas the polyarch symmetry found 
in  many  cereals  offers  multiple  angles  around  the  root  axis 
from  which  laterals  may  emerge  (Esau,  1965;  Malamy  and 
Benfey,  1997).  Furthermore,  only  specific  pericycle  cells  are 
competent for initialization, conceivably limiting the possible 
branch density. Recent evidence in Arabidopsis indicates that 
oscillating genetic signals are responsible for patterning poten-
tial  sites  of  lateral  root  formation  (Moreno-Risueno  et  al., 
2010). Whether this phenomenon applies to the more elabo-
rated roots of crops is unknown, but these oscillations may be 
key parameters of branching potential.

Signaling

Coordinated  cell  differentiation  is  essential  to  generate  the 
many specialized cell types that contribute to the physiology 
of  a  plant.  However,  plants  do  not  benefit  from  a  centrally 
organized nervous system that collects, interprets, and relays 
information  throughout  the  body.  Instead,  plants  coordinate 
a  variety  of  short-  and  long-distance  signals  to  amplify  local 
information  about  their  internal  and  environmental  status. 
Through manipulation of the phytohormones auxin and cyto-
kinin, classic in vitro experiments demonstrated the capacity 
of small pieces of differentiated tissue, such as leaves, stems, 
and roots, to regenerate whole plants (Steward et al., 1964). 
These results showed that plant cell fate is not absolutely con-
strained  by  developmental  lineage,  but  is  heavily  influenced 
by  extracellular  information  (Steward  et  al.,  1964;  Scheres, 
2001).  Production  and  distribution  of  hormones  are  used  by 
plants  to  regulate  growth  as  a  result  of  the  cross-talk  among 
signaling  pathways.  Redistribution  of  hormones  from  their 
sources  to  sink  tissues  creates  numerous  overlapping  local 
and systemic gradients that drive cell division and differentia-
tion.  For  example,  cytokinins  can  induce  cell  division  in  the 
presence  of  auxin  (Scheres,  2001),  and  gibberellins  induce 
cell  wall  expansion  under  certain  conditions.  Hormones  can 
thus be considered as general systemic regulators, in that they 
enforce growth processes, but are not strictly interpreted by 
all cells in the same way (Busch and Benfey, 2010). The ulti-
mate  outcome  of  hormonal  signaling  depends  on  its  integra-
tion  with  a  multitude  of  other  signals  as  well  as  endogenous 
genetic predisposition.

The  movements  of  signals  within  plants  are  constrained 
by  the  physical  connections  among  cells,  tissues,  and  organs. 
Direct  intercellular  connections  are  made  through  mem-
brane  lined  channels  called  plasmodesmata,  in  which  small 
molecules  such  as  mineral  ions,  sugars,  and  hormones  are 

thought  to  be  able  to  freely  pass  under  general  principles  of 
chemical diffusion (Zambryski and Crawford, 2000; Jackson, 
2001). Plasmodesmata can allow passage of larger molecules, 
although  the  precise  mechanism  by  which  this  occurs  is 
unknown.  Hence,  cells  connected  by  a  common  intercellu-
lar  space  (the  symplasm)  can  be  considered  to  share  a  simi-
lar  subset  of  regional  information,  which  can  be  nuanced  by 
the regulation of plasmodesmata. These connections between 
cells  have  a  profound  influence  on  plant  development.  For 
example,  several  transcription  factors  critical  to  root  tis-
sue  patterning  and  cell  differentiation  are  thought  to  move 
through plasmodesmata (Gallagher et al., 2004; Gallagher and 
Benfey, 2009; Busch and Benfey, 2010).

Cells are also connected by a common extracellular space, 
termed  the  apoplast,  in  which  vast  amounts  of  information 
and resources are trafficked. Some very small uncharged mole-
cules, such as the hormone ethylene, are thought to pass unin-
hibited from the apoplast through the plasma membrane and 
into  the  symplasm.  However,  most  molecules  require  recog-
nition  by  receptor  proteins  in  the  plasma  membrane  before 
cellular  uptake.  The  selectivity  of  uptake  is  apparent  from 
the  hundreds  of  putative  extracellular  receptors  encoded  in 
the  Arabidopsis  genome  (Shiu  and  Bleecker,  2001).  Well-
characterized  examples  tie  apoplastic  transport  to  core 
aspects  of  plant  development.  Chiefly,  cell-membrane-local-
ized PIN transporters control the intercellular polar transport 
of auxin via the apoplast, and the Clavata receptor-ligand sys-
tem  regulates  the  shoot  meristem  through  apoplast  signaling 
(Rojo et al., 2002; Grieneisen et al., 2007).

Although  signal  transduction  through  the  apoplast  can  be 
propagated  over  relatively  long  distances  (Grieneisen  et  al., 
2007),  the  capacity  of  the  vasculature  system  for  rapid,  sys-
tem-wide  dissemination  of  molecules  is  far  larger.  The  core 
functions  of  the  vasculature  are  the  transport  of  water  and 
dissolved  minerals  from  the  root  system  through  the  xylem, 
and  the  distribution  of  hormones,  amino  acids,  and  photo-
synthates  from  source  to  sink  tissues  through  the  phloem. 
However,  new  functions  of  the  vasculature  in  complex  sig-
naling  are  becoming  increasingly  apparent  (Jorgensen  et 
al.,  1998;  Lough  and  Lucas,  2006).  One  recent  study  dem-
onstrated  a  second,  physically  distinct,  phloem  system  in 
curcubit  species  seemingly  devoted  to  signaling  and  alterna-
tive  metabolite  distribution  (Zhang  et  al.,  2010).  Signaling 
through the vasculature is particularly important to maintain 
complementary  growth  of  roots  and  shoots.  For  instance, 
shoot  architecture  is  regulated  by  the  transport  of  caroten-
oid-related hormones and other metabolites generated in the 
root,  presumably  in  response  to  the  soil  environment  (Van 
Norman  et  al.,  2004;  Gomez-Roldan  et  al.,  2008;  Umehara  
et  al.,  2008;  Sieburth  and  Lee,  2010).  Furthermore,  micro-
RNAs,  sugars,  and  hormones  are  relayed  between  roots  and 
shoots to coordinate nutrient homeostasis with growth (Forde 
and Lorenzo, 2001; Jiao et al., 2009).

Accurate predictions of growth and metabolism in new envi-
ronmental and genetic scenarios are vital to a biotechnological 
approach  to  crop  improvement  (Nielsen  et  al.,  1994;  Lynch, 
et al., 1997; Hammer et al., 2004; Yin et al., 2004). It is there-
fore necessary to understand how particular signaling systems 
are  integrated  with  one  another  and  with  intrinsic  genetic 

375

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

developmental  processes.  These  endeavors  present  an  inter-
esting  challenge:  system-wide  information  from  a  number  of 
different types of molecules must be collected, but at the reso-
lution of the individual cell types that interpret these signals.

Systems biology concept of cell identity

Rapid  technological  improvements  have  paced  the  advance 
of system-wide approaches to cell biology. The most obvious 
impacts are evident in the rise of “omics” fields (e.g., genom-
ics, proteomics, metabolomics, ionomics), which seek to cap-
ture  webs  of  information  from  various  biological  scales.  The 
power of systems approaches have improved with the increas-
ing  resolution  at  which  plants  can  be  measured.  Molecular 
analyses of the root have traditionally been conducted on rela-
tively heterogeneous tissues such as whole roots or root sec-
tions,  which  muddle  information  from  individual  cell  types. 
There  are  currently  several  robust  approaches  to  dissect, 
purify,  and  analyze  molecules  from  functional  units  as  small 
as  specific  tissue  types,  cell  types,  and  even  individual  cells 
(EmmertBuck  et  al.,  1996;  Levsky  et  al.,  2002;  Birnbaum 
et al., 2003; Heiman et al., 2008; Deal et al., 2010).

Cell-type-specific  information  can  be  further  interrogated 
during tissue patterning and maturation processes, as well as 
in response to biotic and abiotic stresses (Brady et al., 2007; 
Dinneny et al., 2008; Sozzani et al., 2010). As a result, core 
elements  that  respond  to  multiple  levels  of  information  are 
being pinpointed. A cell-type-specific study in the Arabidopsis 
root established unique transcriptional responses to salt in the 
cortex,  whereas  iron  stress  induced  the  strongest  responses 
in  the  stele  (Dinneny  et  al.,  2008).  Metabolic  profiling  of 
Arabidopsis  epidermal  cells  provided  yet  another  type  of 
tissue-specific  physiological  information  (Ebert  et  al.,  2010). 
Similar  experiments  are  increasingly  feasible  in  crop  species. 
An  atlas  of  cell-type-specific  transcription  indexed  by  devel-
opmental  stage  was  recently  completed  in  rice  (Jiao  et  al., 
2009),  and  cell-specific  proteomic  analysis  of  maize  mutant 
tissue has begun to dissect the regulation of root formation at 
the cellular level (Muthreich et al., 2010). Computational and 
technological advances are paving the way for in vivo studies 
that measure the molecular dynamics of growth processes at 
fine scales (Lalonde et al., 2005; Mace et al., 2006). In these 
ways, the notion of cell identity is increasingly well defined by 
positional and temporal information, facilitating the identifica-
tion  of  nodes  of  regulatory  cross-talk.  With  this  information 
predictive mathematical models of plant growth under various 
environmental  conditions  will  become  more  accurate,  allow-
ing  agricultural  scientists  to  model  and  screen  the  presumed 
benefits  of  targets  for  genetic  improvement  in  silico  (Lynch 
et al., 1997; Hammer et al., 2004).

Plant–Environment Interactions

Plants  not  only  sense  and  respond  to  their  environment, 
but  also  actively  manipulate  their  surroundings  by  chemical 
secretions  and  alliances  with  mutually  beneficial  organisms. 
The  zone  of  influence  around  the  root  system  is  termed  the 
rhizosphere,  specifically  the  rhizosheath  when  referring  to 

the  physical  contacts  between  plant  cells,  soil  particles,  and 
microorganisms  (McCully,  1999).  In  the  rhizosheath,  root 
hairs are bound to soil particles, and microorganisms and soil 
solutes  inundate  the  apoplast  of  epidermal  and  cortical  cells 
(Darrah,  1993;  Hinsinger  et  al.,  2005;  Clode  et  al.,  2009). 
The  micro-ecosystem  around  the  root  can  have  dramatic 
effects on plant nutrition and root architecture, as well as soil 
and  aboveground  ecophysiology  (McCully,  1999;  Hinsinger 
et  al.,  2005;  Pineda  et  al.,  2010).  The  following  sections 
describe the dynamics of some of these interactions.

Environmental sensing and root exudation

Plant  litter,  animal  decomposition,  and  microbial  activity 
all contribute organic nutrients to the soil, but they create a 
highly heterogeneous distribution of resources for root forag-
ing.  Furthermore,  plants  are  unable  to  use  many  organically 
derived  nutrients  directly,  especially  nitrogen  and  phospho-
rus,  and  must  instead  rely  on  their  conversion  to  inorganic 
forms  (Robinson,  1994).  Even  potentially  available  inorganic 
resources, particularly phosphorus and iron, are often insolu-
ble and immobile in the soil, forcing roots to grow in the near 
vicinity of these nutrients. Acid soils, caused in part by the act 
of nutrient uptake, also constrain root foraging (Hinsinger et 
al., 2005). They can limit the growth of beneficial microbes, 
render  nutrient  ions  unavailable,  and  produce  toxic  levels  of 
metal  ions,  which  can  mitigate  otherwise  advantageous  root 
architecture  traits  (Sponchiado  et  al.,  1989;  Kochian  et  al., 
2004).  To  meet  these  challenges,  plants  have  developed  a 
number of strategies for exploiting organic resources through 
manipulation of the rhizosphere.

The  root  cap  is  a  unique  sensory  organ  at  the  very  tip  of 
the root that has key roles in plant–environment interactions. 
As the vanguard of root exploration, the root cap perceives an 
array of biotic and abiotic soil conditions to facilitate impend-
ing  growth  decisions.  Root  caps  are  organized  in  two  nested 
functional  compartments.  The  central  columella  houses  sta-
tocyte cells, whose functions include gravity sensing. Cells of 
the surrounding domain comprise the lateral root cap, which, 
besides physically protecting the RAM, also exudes a battery 
of biochemical compounds into the rhizosphere (Dakora and 
Phillips,  2002;  Arnaud  et  al.,  2010).  High  molecular  weight 
sugars secreted from the root caps of cereals comprise muci-
lage, a viscous hydrate that eases root passage and binds vari-
ous components of the rhizosphere into a matrix (Kiesselbach, 
1999; Arnaud et al., 2010). During typical root growth, bor-
der cells are released from the lateral root cap to the periph-
eral  mucilaginous  matrix.  Border  cells  can  remain  viable  for 
days,  apparently  with  the  purpose  of  secreting  growth  and 
defense  compounds  (Arnaud  et  al.,  2010).  Although  some 
biochemical profiling has been conducted (Jiang et al., 2006; 
Ma et al., 2010), the specific functions of the root cap and its 
border cells are underexplored (Brigham et al., 1995).

Other parts of the root besides the cap also exude chemi-
cals,  in  particular  root  hair  epidermal  cells.  The  general 
influence  of  plant  roots  on  microbes  in  their  vicinity  was 
recognized  as  the  “rhizosphere  effect”  over  a  century  ago 
(Hiltner, 1903), but the scale and range of processes implied 

376

Growth Control of Root Architecture

C H A P T E R   2 4

by  this  concept  could  hardly  have  been  guessed  at  the  time 
(Darrah, 1993; Forde and Lorenzo, 2001; Dakora and Phillips, 
2002;  Walker  et  al.,  2003;  Lugtenberg  and  Kamilova,  2009; 
Arnaud et al., 2010; Babalola, 2010). Root systems are com-
monly  estimated  to  secrete  20%  of  their  total  fixed  carbon 
into  the  soil,  and  under  certain  conditions  have  been  meas-
ured  to  secrete  as  much  as  50%  (Hinsinger  et  al.,  2005; 
Babalola,  2010).  These  amounts  are  considerable  metabolic 
expenditures  in  competitive  environments,  suggesting  that 
exudations are a core part of plant survival.

A  major  group  of  secreted  chemicals  are  the  organic  acid 
metabolites  citrate  and  malate  (Forde  and  Lorenzo,  2001; 
Dakora and Phillips, 2002). Organic acids can solubilize sev-
eral types of nutrient ions into forms usable by plants. A strik-
ing example of this process is the induction of proteoid roots 
as a systemic response to low phosphorus or low iron (Forde 
and  Lorenzo,  2001).  Proteoid  roots  form  as  dense  clusters 
of lateral roots that secrete massive amounts of organic acids 
into the soil. In the white lupin response, 25-fold more C14-
labeled carbon  was exuded  under phosphate-deficient  condi-
tions  than  under  standard  conditions  (Johnson  et  al.,  1996). 
Under similar phosphate deprivation, lupin roots were meas-
ured  to  produce  20-fold  more  acid  phosphatases,  a  group  of 
enzymes  that  aid  phosphorus  metabolism  both  within  the 
root  and  in  the  rhizosphere  (Gilbert  et  al.,  1999;  Dakora 
and Phillips, 2002). In cereal crops, a major response to iron 
deficiency  is  the  exudation  of  phytosiderophores,  a  class  of 
compounds  that  function  to  chelate  iron  and  other  micro-
nutrients  from  the  soil  (Marschner  et  al.,  1987;  Dakora  and 
Phillips,  2002).  Arabidopsis,  however,  is  not  known  to  pro-
duce siderophores when iron stressed; instead it responds by 
altering  root  hair  morphology  (Muller  and  Schmidt,  2004). 
These  examples  highlight  functional  and  evolutionary  inter-
play between root architecture and root exudation.

Microbial interactions

Many  functions  of  nutrient  acquisition  can  also  be  achieved 
through  biological  collaboration.  An  estimated  80%  of  plant 
species  form  symbioses  with  mycorrhizal  fungi  (Wang  and 
Qiu,  2006).  Within  these  arrangements  the  fungus  gains 
access  to  a  rich  carbon  supply  while  the  plant  gains  access 
to  otherwise  restricted  organic  nutrients,  particularly  phos-
phorus.  Arbuscular  associations  are  characterized  by  fungal 
penetration of plant cell walls to form functional arbuscules, 
whereas in ectomycorrhizal associations, the fungus insinuates 
the cortical apoplast to form a hartig net. In either case, there 
is  a  direct  exchange  of  metabolites  between  host  and  sym-
biont.  Legumes  have  evolved  similar  symbiotic  associations 
with  nitrogen-fixing  rhizobial  bacteria  that  allow  the  plant 
to  exploit  organic  nitrogen  sources.  As  detailed  next,  fun-
gal  and  bacterial  systems  share  several  parallel  mechanisms: 
plant-rhizosphere  signaling  to  begin  the  symbiosis;  followed 
by plant tissue reorganization instigated by calcium signaling, 
and finally, regulation of the symbiosis by the plant (Oldroyd 
et al., 2009; Ohkama-Ohtsu and Wasaki, 2010).

During rhizobium nodulation (RN), flavonoids are secreted 
from  the  host  root  system  as  chemoattractants.  As  a  result, 

soil  endemic  rhizobia  secrete  nodulation  (Nod)  factors  that 
allow  access  to  the  root  by  inducing  tissue  reorganization. 
As  rhizobia  penetrate  into  the  cortex,  they  begin  to  estab-
lish symbiosomes, which are the functional compartments of 
nodules.  However,  a  process  involving  auxin  and  cytokinin 
halts  nodule  maturation  if  the  plant  perceives  that  too  little 
nitrogen  is  received  in  the  exchange  (Oldroyd  et  al.,  2009). 
Nodule  number  is  also  autoregulated  by  a  systemic  signal-
ing  molecule  sent  from  the  shoot  and  recognized  by  the 
CLAVATA1-like  HAR1  receptor  in  the  root  (Krusell  et  al., 
2002; Nishimura et al., 2002). har1 knockout mutants there-
fore  hypernodulate  in  the  presence  of  rhizobia.  If  no  rhizo-
bia are present, primary root growth is abrogated in favor of 
excessive  lateral  branching,  which  is  also  a  typical  response 
to  localized  nitrogen  resources  (Drew  and  Saker,  1978).  It 
has  been  suggested  that  control  of  rhizobial  symbiosis  was 
co-opted  from  an  existing  framework  of  root  developmen-
tal  regulation  (Krusell  et  al.,  2002).  At  minimum,  systemic 
cross-talk  exists  between  external  nutrient  perception  and 
control  of  nodulation,  because  nodulation  is  inhibited  under 
nitrogen-rich  conditions  (Forde  and  Lorenzo,  2001;  Dakora 
and  Phillips,  2002).  Arbuscular  mycorrhizal  (AM)  symbioses 
are similarly controlled by the plant depending on phosphorus 
availability (Oldroyd et al., 2009). The production and excre-
tion of strigolactones, which prime AM hyphae for infection, 
are  increased  under  phosphorus  stress  in  some  crop  plants 
(Akiyama  et  al.,  2005;  Yoneyama  et  al.,  2007).  However, 
hyphal invasion of the root cortex is abrogated in the absence 
of appropriate phosphate transport through the plasma mem-
brane, suggesting that plants monitor the quality of AM sym-
biosis (Oldroyd et al., 2009), possibly through the regulation 
of  phosphate  transporters  that  are  triggered  during  infection 
(Paszkowski et al., 2002).

Overlap  between  root  growth  and  symbiosis  is  unsurpris-
ing  considering  that  fungal  symbioses  predate  the  evolution-
ary origins of roots by about 400 million years (Margulis and 
Schwartz, 1998; Landeweert et al., 2001). Fossilized evidence 
clearly shows that one of the earliest land plants, Rhynia, was 
rootless and engaged in widespread endomycorrhizal symbio-
sis. Modern day equivalents include Psilotum; rootless vascu-
lar plants that rely on fungal hyphae to supply root function 
(Margulis  and  Schwartz,  1998).  There  is  some  evidence  to 
support  the  view  that  plants  control  mycorrhizal  hyphae  as 
metabolically  low-cost,  rapidly  deployable  extensions  of  the 
root  system  (Darrah,  1993;  Tibbett,  2000).  For  one,  fungal 
hyphae can greatly expand the functional surface area of root 
systems  for  water  and  nutrient  absorption.  Symbiotic  fungal 
hyphae also appear to be extremely well suited to competitive 
root foraging processes that are important to the exploitation 
of  localized  nutrient  patches  (Tibbett,  2000).  Mycorrhizae 
could  also  enable  access  to  otherwise  unavailable  nutrient 
sources;  for  example,  associations  with  saprotrophic  fungi 
could extract resources directly from decaying organic matter.
Clearly, collaborative biological interactions play important 
roles in the growth and function of root systems. Besides the 
well-established  examples  of  mycorrhizae  and  nodulation, 
multiple  other  contributions  of  soil  or  root-endemic  bacte-
ria to root function have been identified, such as production 
of  plant  hormones,  mineral  solubilization,  protection  against 

377

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

toxic metals, biotic defense and so forth (Cook et al., 1995; 
Malik  et  al.,  1997;  Elbeltagy  et  al.,  2001;  Ryu  et  al.,  2003; 
Lugtenberg  and  Kamilova,  2009;  Babalola,  2010;  Pineda  
et al., 2010). These and likely undiscovered microbial capabil-
ities suggest additional strategies to improve root function, for 
instance,  through  applied  “biofertilizers”  (Babalola,  2010)  or 
bioengineering associative endophytes for specific agricultural 
conditions  (Taghavi  et  al.,  2009).  Yet  significant  gaps  exist 
in our understanding of how plants control and benefit from 
these  alliances.  Functional  ecological  approaches  combined 
with  molecular  biology  will  greatly  contribute  to  our  under-
standing of the extent to which microbes aid in responses to 
competitive root interactions, pathogens, and water and nutri-
ent scarcity (Guimil et al., 2005). Revised concepts of plant 
adaptive  growth  can  then  be  accurately  incorporated  into 
predictive models of root architecture (Darrah, 1993; Lynch 
et al., 1997; Lynch, 2007).

Architectural responses to nutrient 
availability

Plant growth plasticity in response to nutrient availability has 
been  termed  “trophomorphogenesis”  by  Forde  and  Lorenzo 
(2001),  and  these  responses  largely  determine  root  architec-
ture  in  various  environments.  Classic  experiments  analyzing 
trophomorphogenesis  revealed  several  general  phenomena 
(Stryker  et  al.,  1974;  Drew,  1975;  Drew  and  Saker,  1978; 
Jackson  et  al.,  1990;  Robinson,  1994;  Hodge,  2004).  First, 
root systems usually increase in size and lateral branch number 
when  encountering  a  localized  area  of  nutrients,  or  “patch.” 
Secondly,  the  rate  of  nutrient  uptake  per  unit  of  root  is 
increased in patches. Thirdly, increased growth in the nutrient-
rich  region  often  compensates  for  reduced  growth  elsewhere. 
The third phenomenon results in root:shoot mass ratios similar 
to  evenly  well-supplied  root  systems,  whereas  nutrient-defi-
cient plants commonly shift their mass ratio to favor the roots 
(Drew,  1975;  Robinson,  1994).  These  generalities  distinguish 
two systems that control trophomorphogenesis: one that func-
tions in a regional response to external nutrients, and another 
that monitors systemic levels of nutrients (Gersani and Sachs, 
1992; Forde and Lorenzo, 2001; Dakora and Phillips, 2002).

Molecular  genetic  analyses  of  nutrient  transport  and 
growth  response  have  borne  these  concepts  out.  Nutrients 
enter plant cells via both high- and low-affinity plasma mem-
brane  transporters.  Under  plentiful  nutrient  conditions, 
low-affinity  types  generally  predominate;  however,  under 
nutrient stress, high-affinity transporters (HATS) are induced 
(Malamy  and  Benfey,  1997;  Glass  et  al.,  2002;  Paszkowski 
et al., 2002; Osmont et al., 2007). Depending on its phospho-
rylation  status,  the  Arabidopsis  transporter  NRT1.1  (CHL1) 
changes its affinity for nitrate (NO3; Ho et al., 2009), indicat-
ing a potential for rapid response to changing external nutri-
ent  concentrations.  Nitrate  influx  through  NRT1.1  activates 
a  key  transcriptional  regulator,  ANR1,  which  is  required  for 
lateral  root  outgrowth  in  response  to  external  NO3  patches 
(Zhang and Forde, 1998). Accordingly, mutations in NRT1.1 
have  a  profound  effect  on  nitrogen  patch  response  (Remans 
et  al.,  2006).  However,  the  NRT1.1  patch  response  can  be 

separated from its nitrate transport function, demonstrating a 
dual  function  as  a  nutrient  sensor  (Remans  et  al.,  2006;  Ho 
et al., 2009). Remarkably, NRT1.1 is also capable of transport-
ing  auxin,  prompting  the  proposal  of  a  novel  mechanism  by 
which  nutrient  sensing  could  directly  alter  root  architecture 
via hormonal control (Krouk et al., 2010). When extracellular 
nitrate is low, epidermal cell-localized NRT1.1 in lateral root 
primordia could facilitate auxin transport away from the root 
apex,  inhibiting  meristem  activity.  When  extracellular  nitrate 
is  supplied  in  the  vicinity  of  lateral  root  primordia,  NRT1.1 
may  become  occupied  transporting  nitrate,  allowing  auxin  to 
flow to the root tip and stimulate growth (Krouk et al., 2010).
In  comparison  to  the  concentration  dependent  response 
of Arabidopsis lateral roots to nitrogen patches, the reorgani-
zation  of  root  architecture  under  low  phosphate  conditions 
appears to involve a switch response. In uniformly low phos-
phorus,  the  root  system  is  characterized  by  a  short  primary 
root and highly branched laterals (Lopez-Bucio et al., 2003b). 
Supplied  with  phosphate,  the  primary  root  maintains  inde-
terminate growth with moderate lateral branching. However, 
contact  with  low-phosphate  media  induces  a  rapid  and  pro-
found  reorganization  in  which  primary  root  growth  ceases 
and lateral roots proliferate. This response is mediated by the 
expression of two multi-copper oxidase genes in the root cap, 
which are proposed to trigger a switch to meristem determi-
nacy (Svistoonoff et al., 2007). The generality of this finding 
remains  to  be  determined,  however,  as  the  primary  axes  of 
barley roots under similar conditions were not similarly inhib-
ited (Drew and Saker, 1978).

If RSA was determined simply by responses to local nutri-
ent  conditions,  root  architecture  under  uniformly  well-sup-
plied  nutrients  would  resemble  patch  response  writ  large. 
Instead,  evidence  suggests  that  local  growth  is  conditioned 
by  internal  nutrient  status  (Drew,  1975;  Drew  and  Saker, 
1978;  Forde  and  Lorenzo,  2001;  Forde,  2002;  Jiao  et  al., 
2009). Internal nutrient homeostasis is maintained in part by 
feedback regulation of plasma membrane and vacuolar nutri-
ent transporters. Either the concentrations of ions or of their 
metabolites  (e.g.,  glutamate  in  nitrogen  homeostasis)  can 
be  used  as  regulatory  signals  (Glass  et  al.,  2002;  Jiao  et  al., 
2009).  Nutrient  status  can  be  shared  among  local  groups  of 
cells  through  apoplastic  and  symplastic  connections,  but 
this  information  must  ultimately  be  passed  on  to  the  vascu-
lature. Therefore, the regulation of cargo through xylem and 
phloem  cells  should  be  the  key  link  between  local  and  sys-
temic  nutrient  signaling  (Lough  and  Lucas,  2006).  Analysis 
of  the  POPEYE  gene  in  Arabidopsis  provides  evidence  for 
this  view  (Long  et  al.,  2010). POPEYE  modulates  the  influx 
of iron into the shoot, in part by regulating genes that control 
vacuolar  iron  transport  in  root  cells  that  supply  the  vascula-
ture.  Under  iron  starvation,  POPEYE  also  limits  the  amount 
of  systemically  transported  iron,  resulting  in  weak  shoots.  A 
co-regulated putative iron-binding domain protein, BRUTUS, 
acts  to  dampen  this  effect  (Long  et  al.,  2010).  It  is  tempt-
ing to speculate that BRUTUS plays a reciprocal role by con-
veying systemic iron needs of the shoot to local regions of the 
root system, which would be an especially important function 
in a patchy environment where some roots are well supplied 
with iron and others were iron-limited.

378

Shoot  and  root  system  cross-talk  also  ensures  that  carbon 
metabolism in the shoot is synchronized with nutrient cycles 
in the root. Shoots use both light and sugar signals to regulate 
many types of nutrient transporters and thus coordinate root 
metabolism with photosynthesis (Lejay et al., 2003). Analysis 
of the pho3 mutation provides functional evidence for photo-
synthate  and  mineral  nutrient  cross-talk.  pho3  was  originally 
identified in a screen for reduced acid-phosphatase secretion 
in response to phosphate starvation, but was later identified as 
a mutation in the SUC2 transporter that unloads sugar from 
the phloem to the root system (Hammond and White, 2008). 
Sugar in this regard could act as a quantitative signal, since the 
production  and  excretion  of  phosphatases  and  organic  acids 
place  a  high  demand  on  photosynthate  precursors  (Johnson 
et al., 1996). Sugars applied exogenously to roots elicit substan-
tially increased lateral branching in low phosphorus conditions 
(Karthikeyan et al., 2007). These data suggest that root archi-
tectural  response  to  phosphate  stress  relies  to  a  large  degree 
on  local  sugar  levels,  rather  than  on  systemic  sugar  transport 
per  se.  Coincidently,  shoots  regulate  phosphate  homeostasis 
in  roots  through  direct  transcriptional  control.  Under  stress, 
shoots upregulate miR399, which travels to the roots through 
the phloem to suppress PHO2 gene expression and facilitate 
phosphate  accumulation  in  the  shoot  (Bari  et  al.,  2006;  Lin 
et  al.,  2008;  Pant  et  al.,  2008).  Transpecific  grafting  experi-
ments and phylogenetic analyses provide evidence that this form 
of  phosphorus  regulation  is  well  conserved  among  plants  (Bari 
et  al.,  2006;  Lin  et  al.,  2008;  Pant  et  al.,  2008).  The  phloem 
content of miR398 and miR395 is upregulated in Brassica rapa 
phloem  under  copper  and  sulfur  stress,  respectively,  suggest-
ing that the systemic transport of small RNAs may be generally 
applicable to nutrient regulation (Jiao et al., 2009).

Vascular  plant  species  face  a  similar  set  of  challenges  in 
extracting  resources  from  competitive  and  unpredictable 
soil  environments,  while  successfully  completing  reproduc-
tion  in  an  aboveground  environment  fraught  with  the  same 
difficulties. Most plants seem to have evolved strategies that 
focus  their  metabolism  on  exploiting  promising  areas  of  the 
soil  (Drew,  1975;  Robinson,  1994;  Hodge,  2004).  A  variety 
of tactics are employed, such as root proliferation, increased 
nutrient  uptake,  symbioses,  and  chemical  secretions.  The 
mechanisms  involved  in  these  processes  are  clear  targets  for 
biotechnological  improvements  to  agriculture.  However,  the 
effective  integration  of  scientific  advances  with  agriculture 
will also require a view of the larger ecological and evolution-
ary pictures.

Crop Root Systems

Types of root systems

There are two main types of root systems in vascular plants, 
taproot  and  fibrous.  The  taproot  system,  common  to  gym-
nosperms and dicots such as Arabidopsis, is characterized by 
continuous growth and maturation of the embryonic primary 
root, which is facilitated by an indeterminate apical meristem. 
The stereotypical taproot extends deep into the soil and relies 

Growth Control of Root Architecture

C H A P T E R   2 4

on lateral roots emanating from the central root axis for hori-
zontal exploration. A relatively long and narrow geometry can 
be efficient at finding deep-water reserves in arid or drought 
prone environments (Gallardo et al., 1996), but it potentially 
limits  the  acquisition  of  nutrients  that  are  most  abundant  in 
the  topsoil  (Lynch,  1995).  Indeed,  some  taproot-forming 
crops, such as legumes (beans and pulses), use nodulation as 
an  additional  strategy  for  nutrient  acquisition.  It  is  intrigu-
ing to consider the evolutionary interplay between symbiotic 
associations and root architecture.

Fibrous root systems are characteristic of monocots, which 
include  the  cereal  crops  corn,  rice,  wheat,  barley,  sorghum, 
millet, oats, rye, teff, and so forth. They differ from taproot 
systems  in  two  major  ways:  embryonic  primary  root  growth 
is  determinate  due  to  cessation  of  apical  meristem  activity 
and in lieu of a prominent primary root, fibrous root systems 
can develop numerous shoot-borne/nodal/crown roots during 
post-embryonic growth. Each of these roots can form a main 
growth  axis  capable  of  several  orders  of  lateral  branching, 
resulting in superior coverage of the topsoil and wide variation 
in root system topology. For example, current maize cultivars 
typically have several dozen shoot-borne roots that can spread 
over  several  horizontal  meters  (Freeling  and  Walbot,  1994; 
Kiesselbach,  1999).  In  one  classic  example,  a  rye  plant  was 
estimated at 13 million root branches, covering 500 km of soil 
(Forbes and Watson, 1992). This example underscores the sig-
nificant challenges of studying the architectural and functional 
characteristics of cereal crop root systems.

Embryonic and post-embryonic root 
systems

The  branching  capacity  of  fibrous  root  systems  is  evident 
early  in  the  development  of  cereals.  Whereas  a  single  RAM 
is  formed  in  the  Arabidopsis  embryo,  cereal  embryos  can 
have  several  root  primordia.  These  additional  meristems  are 
activated  soon  after  germination,  producing  roots  that  play 
a  significant  role  in  soil  exploration  and  physical  support  for 
the  young  plant.  Excluding  the  primary  root,  embryonically 
derived roots collectively form the seminal root system. The 
numbers, relative positions, and growth rates of seminal roots 
are broadly characteristic of particular cereals (Weaver, 1926). 
However,  considerable  variation  exists  within  species,  even 
among  inbred  lines  (Kiesselbach,  1999;  Hochholdinger  and 
Zimmermann,  2008).  Growth  plasticity  of  the  seminal  root 
system  among  genetically  identical  individuals  suggests  a  sig-
nificant  environmental  component  to  the  development  of 
embryonically patterned root architecture.

Examinations  of  maize  and  rice  mutants  at  the  seedling 
stage  have  led  to  several  insights  regarding  the  genetic  pro-
gramming of seminal and nodal root systems. For example, a 
mutation  in  Rootless  Concerning  Crown  And  Seminal  Roots 
(RTCS)  prevents  the  formation  of  both  seminal  and  nodal 
root  primordia  in  maize  plants  (Hetz  et  al.,  1996;  Taramino 
et al., 2007). RTCS is a lateral organ boundaries domain (LBD) 
gene,  and  part  of  a  conserved  group  of  plant-specific  tran-
scription factors that are emerging as major regulators of  root 
architecture  (Husbands  et  al.,  2007).  Additional  evidence 

379

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

comes  from  rice  mutants  deficient  in  the  RTCS  ortholog, 
Adventitious  Rootless1/Crown  Rootless1 
(ARL1/CRL1; 
Inukai et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2005). Rice typically forms sev-
eral  embryonic  crown  roots  from  the  base  of  the  coleoptile 
prior  to  the  emergence  of  post-embryonic  crown  roots,  but 
arl1/crl1 mutants are absent of all crown roots or primordia. 
Thus,  the  LBD  genes  in  cereals  provide  a  major  regulatory 
link  between  embryonic  and  post-embryonic  root  systems. 
However,  mutations  in  related  Arabidopsis  LOB-Domain 
genes, LBD16 and LBD29, affect only post-embryonic lateral 
root  formation,  apparently  through  auxin  response  factors 
(ARFs;  Coudert  et  al.,  2010).  Although  ARF-binding  ele-
ments are present in the promoters of maize RTCS and rice 
ARL1/CRL1, lateral root formation in the respective mutants 
is unaffected (Hetz et al., 1996; Inukai et al., 2005; Liu et al., 
2005).  Auxin  does  induce  lateral  root  outgrowth  from  the 
seminal and early crown roots in maize, but through the LRT1 
gene  (Hochholdinger  and  Feix,  1998).  Remarkably,  auxin-
insensitive  lrt1  mutant  seedlings  can  still  form  lateral  roots 
when supplied with high phosphate or a mycorrhizal symbiont 
(Paszkowski  and  Boller,  2002;  Hochholdinger  et  al.,  2004), 
suggesting that breakdowns in conserved growth mechanisms 
can be compensated for by environmental response pathways.
Developmental  compensation  is  further  exemplified  by 
maize  rtcs  mutant  plants,  whose  root  system  consists  of 
only  the  embryonic  primary  root  and  its  lateral  extensions, 
similar  to  a  taproot.  Remarkably,  rtcs  plants  are  fully  fer-
tile  under  field  conditions  (Hetz  et  al.,  1996).  Considering 
that the maize embryonic root system typically supports the 
plant  for  only  a  matter  of  days  (Freeling  and  Walbot,  1994; 
Kiesselbach, 1999), it is evident that a massive remobilization 
of resources occurs in rtcs plants, perhaps as a result of pro-
longed indeterminacy of their root apical meristems. Systems 
genetic  approaches  currently  being  employed  in  crops  and 
Arabidopsis (Dinneny et al., 2008; Hoecker et al., 2008; Jiao 
et al., 2009) will be instrumental in identifying the molecular 
factors involved in repartitioning growth under developmental 
and environmental constraints.

Evolutionary strategies and trade-offs

The  partitioning  of  carbon,  nitrogen,  and  other  resources 
into  vegetative  and  reproductive  growth  determines  the  ulti-
mate  success  of  the  plant.  New  structures  such  as  root  axes 
and flowers require an investment in resources whose returns 
depend on how appropriate the structure is for the prevailing 
environmental  conditions.  Due  to  a  finite  metabolic  budget 
and  environmental  unpredictability,  resource  allocation  deci-
sions can establish trade-offs that limit certain types of growth 
in favor of others (Lynch, 1995, 2007; Hodge, 2004). Life his-
tory  strategies  of  annual  and  perennial  growth  are  often  jux-
taposed  in  terms  of  their  trade-offs.  Annual  plant  growth  is 
seasonally determinate, culminating in senescence of root and 
shoot  tissues  to  allocate  maximum  resources  to  developing 
seeds. In contrast, perennials maintain persistent belowground 
growth,  liquidating  resources  from  aging  tissues  as  needed. 
Perennials  are  generally  viewed  as  placing  less  emphasis  on 
seed  set,  instead  focusing  their  resources  on  environmental 

380

stability (Thomas et al., 2000; DeHaan et al., 2005). Because 
the seed is the primary focus of human oil and food produc-
tion, our current grain crops are predominately annuals.

However, the long-standing assumption that a rigid evolu-
tionary  trade-off  exists  between  yield  and  longevity  is  under 
increased  scrutiny,  mainly  in  response  to  worldwide  agricul-
tural  challenges  (Thomas  et  al.,  2000;  DeHaan  et  al.,  2005; 
Glover  et  al.,  2010).  Proponents  argue  that  perennial  crops 
offer  many  advantages  over  annual  systems,  especially  when 
viewed  over  the  long  term  and  from  an  ecological  perspec-
tive. One major advantage of a perennial growth habit is the 
establishment  of  a  permanent  root  system.  Whereas  many 
modern  annual  crops  rely  on  high-input  agricultural  practice 
to  re-establish  root  systems  every  season,  perennials  experi-
ence a precipitous drop in resource demands of the root sys-
tem after the first year. A pre-existing root system at the start 
of the growth cycle allows perennials to capture more carbon 
by establishing their shoot systems earlier and senescing them 
later  (DeHaan  et  al.,  2005).  To  support  this  growth,  peren-
nial root systems may be more adept at collecting water and 
nutrient resources, especially in marginal soils and under low- 
or  no-input  agricultural  conditions.  Furthermore,  the  selec-
tive  pressures  facing  perennials  (k-selection,  max  density) 
are likely to have fostered evolutionary adaptations to intense 
intraspecific  competition,  disease,  long-term  drought,  and 
heat (DeHaan et al., 2005; Glover et al., 2010).

Thus, the exploitation of perennial crops has strong poten-
tial  to  address  many  of  the  concerns  of  modern  agriculture. 
Yet  annuality  and  perenniality  are  not  necessarily  opposing 
evolutionary  strategies.  Instead,  a  confluence  of  environmen-
tal  conditions  and  genetic  traits  may  determine  the  growth 
habits  of  the  root  and  shoot  systems  (Thomas  et  al.,  2000). 
Local resources can significantly influence the choice between 
annual  or  biennial  strategies,  reinforcing  the  notion  that  life 
history  trade-offs  can  be  environment  specific  (DeHaan 
et  al.,  2005;  Johnson,  2007).  Many  annual  crops  includ-
ing  maize,  rice,  wheat,  sorghum,  and  soybean  have  wild  and 
semi-domesticated  perennial  relatives  that  provide  sources 
of  novel  genetic  variation  for  plant  breeders  (Thomas  et  al., 
2000). The quantitative basis of annuality and perenniality in 
crop  species  can  be  examined  in  hybrid  populations  through 
quantitative trait loci (QTL)s and association mapping, as dis-
cussed in the following section. These strategies could be used 
to dissect the genetic and environmental control of root mer-
istem  determinacy  by  comparing  annual  and  perennial  root 
architectures in recombinant inbred or introgression lines.

Approaches to Study Root 
Architecture

Quantitative analysis

Root  system  architecture  has  been  manipulated  since  the 
beginning  of  agriculture,  for 
instance,  during  selection 
for  drought  or  density-tolerant  crops.  Nonetheless,  little 
attention  has  been  paid  to  the  underlying  genetic  factors. 
Agronomic  traits  often  have  complex  inheritances  because 

Growth Control of Root Architecture

C H A P T E R   2 4

they are controlled by many genes and are heavily influenced 
by  epistatic  genetic  effects,  by  environmental  interactions 
(GxE), and by ontogeny. Such traits are quantitative, in that 
their phenotypes are expressed in a continuous range through-
out the population (Lynch and Walsh, 1998). Most RSA traits 
of  agricultural  interest,  such  as  root  length,  angle,  surface 
area, thoroughness of soil exploration, and so forth are quan-
titative traits, and thus are difficult to specifically manipulate. 
While  traditional  breeding  has  consistently  improved  yields 
over the years, it is highly labor-intensive and responds slowly 
to  the  type  of  rapidly  changing  environmental  conditions  we 
face today (Glover et al., 2010). Advanced breeding methods 
rely  on  the  identification  of  QTLs,  which  are  regions  of  the 
genome  that  contribute  to  phenotypic  variance  for  the  trait 
of  interest.  Numerous  QTLs  for  specific  root  traits  under  a 
variety of biotic and abiotic stresses have been identified and 
bred  for  in  recent  years  (de  Dorlodot  et  al.,  2007;  Collins 
et  al.,  2008).  Molecular  markers  associated  with  QTL 
are  often  used  in  marker-assisted  selection  (MAS)  to  rap-
idly  screen  for  promising  plant  lines  (Collins  et  al.,  2008). 
However,  the  translation  from  RSA  QTL  to  improved  yield 
is  not  straightforward,  and  can  hinge  on  the  accurate  identi-
fication and genetic background of the QTL. While polymor-
phisms in specific genes, regulatory elements, and non-coding 
DNA  are  the  molecular  bases  of  QTLs,  quantitative  loci  are 
often  broadly  defined  and  encompass  hundreds  of  candidate 
sequences, making the causative agents difficult to identify.

QTL  studies  that  incorporate  multiple  traits,  or  one  trait 
in multiple environments, are promising ways to home in on 
functional  bases  for  root  architecture  traits  (MacMillan  et 
al., 2006a,b). In a combined greenhouse and field study of an 
interspecific cross between wild and cultivated lettuce, large-
effect  QTLs  for  rooting  depth  and  efficient  deep-soil  water 
extraction were co-localized (Johnson et al., 2000). However, 
the precise molecular basis for this correlation is not known. 
Deep  roots  and  deep-water  uptake  capacity  may  be  pleio-
tropic  effects,  or  may  be  correlated  by  tight  genetic  linkage 
of  polymorphisms  in  separate  genes  (Chen  and  Lubberstedt, 
2010). Discerning between these two scenarios is of particu-
lar  importance  when  co-localized  QTLs  for  key  agronomic 
traits exhibit negative correlations, as do late senescence and 
early maturity under drought stress in sorghum (Crasta et al., 
1999; Chen and Lubberstedt, 2010). In this sense pleiotropy 
would  suggest  a  mechanistic  trade-off,  whereas  simple  link-
age could be broken by recombination. Negative correlations 
have  similarly  been  identified  or  suggested  for  other  RSA 
traits (Sponchiado et al., 1989; Beebe et al., 2006). These and 
other studies identify the dichotomy of deep-water extraction 
and topsoil nutrient foraging as an especially important area to 
examine trade-off relationships for RSA traits.

Improvements in QTL resolution and underlying gene iden-
tification  will  be  crucial  to  a  comprehensive  understanding 
of the functional mechanisms of root architecture. However, 
lack  of  accurate  phenotyping  methods,  lack  of  mathemati-
cal descriptions, and strong G3E interactions have made the 
quantitative  genetic  bases  of  RSA  traits  notoriously  difficult 
to  pinpoint  (Lynch,  1995;  de  Dorlodot  et  al.,  2007;  Collins 
et al., 2008). In the remaining sections, we survey how mod-
ern technological approaches aim to meet these challenges.

High-throughput sequencing

Traditional  breeding  methods  are  greatly  bolstered  by  wide-
spread  genome  sequencing  and  bioinformatic  technologies 
in  several  ways.  The  candidate  gene  approach  uses  a  priori 
molecular,  developmental,  and  evolutionary  information  to 
identify  genes  potentially  involved  in  agricultural  traits.  A 
brute-force  candidate  method  was  used  with  the  plant-spe-
cific NAC transcription factor family that had been previously 
linked to stress response (Jeong et al., 2010). This study dem-
onstrated that root-specific expression of OsNAC10 dramati-
cally  improved  the  yield  of  field-grown  rice  under  drought 
stress,  which  was  correlated  with  a  25%  increase  in  root 
diameter.  Functional  and  phylogenetic  information  can  also 
be  used  to  identify  gene  candidates  within  an  existing  QTL, 
greatly  reducing  the  labor  involved  in  fine-mapping.  A  major 
aluminum  tolerance  gene  in  elite  Sorghum  lines  was  identi-
fied in this way (Sasaki et al., 2004; Magalhaes et al., 2007), 
and homologs in several other cereals have subsequently been 
identified as targets for breeding. Similar methods were used 
to  clone  sodium  and  freezing  tolerance  genes  (Collins  et  al., 
2008).  QTLs  may  also  be  mapped  using  high-throughput 
sequencing (Severin et al., 2010). For example, transcriptional 
profiling  in  combination  with  metaQTL  analysis  identified 
polymorphisms  underlying  several  root  architecture  QTLs  in 
rice (Norton et al., 2008).

Dense markers generated through genome sequencing have 
also facilitated increasingly powerful genome-wide association 
(GWA)  studies.  Association  mapping  uses  evidence  of  his-
torical recombination events to accurately identify QTL poly-
morphisms.  This  technique  is  especially  powerful  to  study 
populations of high genetic diversity, including natural popu-
lations  (Clark  et  al.,  2007;  Nordborg  and  Weigel,  2008;  Yu 
et al., 2008). Analyses of genetically diverse native landraces 
and  wild  germplasms  are  revealing  vast  amounts  of  natural 
variation  that  were  lost  during  domestication  and  breeding 
bottlenecks,  but  could  potentially  be  reintroduced  into  elite 
crops (Johnson et al., 2000; de Dorlodot et al., 2007; Weber 
et al., 2008, 2009). The Nested Association Mapping (NAM) 
population was designed to combine both association and tra-
ditional linkage mapping to take advantage of the substantial 
genetic diversity present in current maize cultivars (Yu et al., 
2008). The power of the NAM population was recently lev-
eraged  in  field  experiments  to  phenotype  over  one  million 
plants across a range of environments, thus revealing the fun-
damental  genetic  bases  of  flowering  time  in  maize  (Buckler 
et al., 2009).

Phenomics

Despite  profound  advances  in  sequencing  technologies,  our 
ability  to  discover  the  underlying  genetic  mechanisms  of 
complex  traits  is  limited  by  available  phenotyping  methods. 
The field of phenomics strives toward high-throughput, high-
resolution,  dynamic,  accurate,  and  affordable  plant  meas-
urements.  In  field  studies,  groups  of  measurements  such  as 
water transpiration, soil moisture, temperature flux, and light 
capture  can  be  taken  from  individual  plants  using  automatic 

381

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

imaging  platforms  (Berger  et  al.,  2010).  However,  similar 
high-throughput methods have yet to be established for root 
systems grown in the field at the resolution necessary to accu-
rately measure functional RSA traits.

Alternatively, new methods to analyze root systems in labo-
ratory and greenhouse settings have made feasible high-reso-
lution  phenotyping  in  controlled  environments.  Non-invasive 
technologies allow the observation of dynamic aspects of root 
growth in situ (de Dorlodot et al., 2007). Automated growth 
and imaging systems using soil-filled pots or hydroponic cham-
bers  can  measure  shoot  and  root  traits  of  hundreds  of  indi-
viduals  per  day,  facilitating  complex  trait  dissection  and  the 
identification  of  the  underlying  genes  (Berger  et  al.,  2010; 
Tester and Langridge, 2010). Recently, the simultaneous mon-
itoring of gene expression and lateral branching of Arabidopsis 
roots grown on agar plates demonstrated that oscillating tran-
scriptional  networks  pattern  the  formation  of  lateral  root 
branch sites (Moreno-Risueno et al., 2010). High-throughput, 
automated  image  analysis  of  similarly  grown  Arabidopsis 
described the growth response plasticity of roots to gravity as 
conditioned  by  a  matrix  of  nutrient  and  developmental  fac-
tors (Brooks et al., 2010). To fully capture the three-dimen-
sional topology of monocot roots, rice plants were grown in a 
clear gel-substrate and imaged in 360 degrees at high resolu-
tion with a standard digital camera. The resulting images were 
combined in an analysis pipeline that automatically extracted 
sixteen RSA traits and accurately separated the root systems 
of diverse cultivars by genotype (Iyer-Pascuzzi et al., 2010).

Several  methods  exist  for  capturing  images  of  root  sys-
tems grown in solid substrates. With various precision, these 
data can be tomographically reconstructed into three-dimen-
sional  models  that  display  root  system  topologies  (Gregory 
et al., 2003; Zhu et al., 2006a; Fang et al., 2009; Jahnke et al.,  
2009;  Dhondt  et  al.,  2010;  Tracy  et  al.,  2010).  Laser  line-
scanning  was  used  to  image  gel-grown  roots  and  generate 
three-dimensional  reconstructions  of  rice  and  soybean  root 
architectural  responses  to  phosphorus  availability  over  sev-
eral  days  (Fang  et  al.,  2009).  These  experiments  followed 
an  earlier  study  using  a  standard  camera  to  image  excavated 
roots  (Zhu  et  al.,  2006b).  X-ray  tomography  has  also  been 
used  to  image  root  systems  in  natural  soils,  but  at  relatively 
low  resolution  (Gregory  et  al.,  2003).  Recent  improvements 
to the X-ray system now allow high-resolution imaging of root 
systems  (Dhondt  et  al.,  2010;  Tracy  et  al.,  2010),  including 
structural  soil  features  such  as  mineral  grains  (Tracy  et  al., 

2010).  However,  imaging  times  are  prohibitive  for  high-
throughput  analysis  of  large  samples,  and  repeated  imag-
ing  was  reported  to  inhibit  normal  growth  (Dhondt  et  al., 
2010),  suggesting  that  the  method  is  ill-suited  for  dynamic 
growth  studies.  In  contrast,  positron  emission  tomography 
(PET) offers extremely dynamic systems information, includ-
ing  carbon  metabolism,  root  exudation,  and  hormone  signal-
ing  (Thorpe  et  al.,  2007;  Kiser  et  al.,  2008).  Although  PET 
is  limited  by  throughput,  resolution,  and  the  involvement  of 
radioisotopes, it can be combined with other technologies for 
a comprehensive view of RSA (Jahnke et al., 2009).

Thus,  a  continued  focus  on  improving  phenomics  tech-
nologies  promises  to  connect  spatial  and  temporal  aspects 
of  RSA  with  underlying  genetic  and  metabolic  aspects  (de 
Dorlodot et al., 2007; Tester and Langridge, 2010). Advances 
in machine vision and computing are beginning to yield auto-
matic evaluation of traits and digital root system reconstruc-
tions  at  high-throughput  (Iyer-Pascuzzi  et  al.,  2010).  These 
types  of  data  should  aid  in  the  development  of  geometric 
and other mathematical descriptions of complex root system 
topologies,  particularly  in  response  to  environmental  cues 
(Nielsen et al., 1994; Lynch et al., 1997).

Concluding Remarks

Here,  we  illuminated  root  system  research  at  many  levels 
to  understand  the  fundamentals  of  how  plants  interact  with 
their environment and how this knowledge can improve crops 
to  meet  global  agricultural  challenges.  New  strategies  are 
paramount as world food demand increases, agricultural con-
ditions worsen, and advanced breeding lines reach maximum 
potential  (Graybosch  and  Peterson,  2010).  A  blending  of 
many disciplines from mathematics, to molecular and cellular 
biology,  to  agronomy,  will  be  required  to  realize  the  concept 
of  “breeding  by  design,”  envisioned  to  bring  about  the  next 
generation of crops (Peleman and van der Voort, 2003). These 
efforts  will  be  bolstered  by  accurate  functional  descriptions 
of  RSA  and  an  increased  focus  on  introgressing  useful  traits 
gleaned  from  wild  and  semi-domesticated  germplasms.  Cell-
type-specific  genetic  and  metabolic  information  will  inform 
biotechnological  efforts  to  engineer  crops  that  will  thrive 
despite  current  and  impending  environmental  adversities.  As 
the foundation of plants, roots must also be the foundation of 
our agricultural prospects.

References

Akiyama, K., Matsuzaki, K., & Hayashi, H. 

(2005). Plant sesquiterpenes induce hyphal 
branching in arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. 
Nature, 435, 824–827.

Bari, R., Datt Pant, B., Stitt, M., & Scheible, 
W. R. (2006). PHO2, microRNA399, and 
PHR1 define a phosphate-signaling pathway 
in plants. Plant Physiology, 141, 988–999.

Arnaud, C., Bonnot, C., Desnos, T., & Nussaume, 

L. (2010). The root cap at the forefront. 
Comptes Rendus Biologies, 333, 335–343.
Babalola O. O. (2010). Beneficial bacteria of 

agricultural importance. Biotechnology Letters 
32(11), 170–175.

Beebe, S. E., Rojas-Pierce, M., Yan, X. L., 
Blair, M. W., Pedraza, F., & Munoz, F., 
et al. (2006). Quantitative trait loci for 
root architecture traits correlated with 
phosphorus acquisition in common bean. 
Crop Science, 46, 413–423.

Berger, B., Parent, B., & Tester, M. (2010). 
High-throughput shoot imaging to study 
drought responses. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 61, 3519–3528.

Birnbaum, K., Shasha, D. E., Wang, J. Y., Jung, 
J. W., Lambert, G. M., & Galbraith, D. W., 
et al. (2003). A gene expression map of the 
Arabidopsis root. Science, 302, 1956–1960.

Brady, S. M., Orlando, D. A., Lee, J. Y., Wang, J. Y.,  

Koch, J., & Dinneny, J. R., et al. (2007).  

382

Growth Control of Root Architecture

C H A P T E R   2 4

A high-resolution root spatiotemporal map 
reveals dominant expression patterns. Science, 
318, 801–806.

Brigham, L. A., Woo, H. H., Nicoll, S. M., 

& Hawes, M. C. (1995). Differential 
expression of proteins and messenger-Rnas 
from border cells and root-tips of pea. Plant 
Physiology, 109, 457–463.

Brooks, T. L., Miller, N. D., & Spalding, E. 
P. (2010). Plasticity of Arabidopsis root 
gravitropism throughout a multidimensional 
condition space quantified by automated 
image analysis. Plant Physiology, 152, 
206–216.

Buckler, E. S., et al. (2009). The genetic 
architecture of maize flowering time. 
Science, 325, 714–718.

Busch, W., & Benfey, P. N. (2010). Information 

processing without brains — the power 
of intercellular regulators in plants. 
Development, 137, 1215–1226.

Buschmann, H., Hauptmann, M., Niessing, D., 

Lloyd, C. W., & Schaffner, A. R. (2009). 
Helical growth of the Arabidopsis mutant 
tortifolia2 does not depend on cell division 
patterns but involves handed twisting of 
isolated cells. Plant Cell, 21, 2090–2106.

Chen, Y. S., & Lubberstedt, T. (2010). 

Molecular basis of trait correlations. Trends 
in Plant Science, 15, 454–461.

Clark, R. M., et al. (2007). Common sequence 

polymorphisms shaping genetic diversity 
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Science, 317, 
338–342.

Clode, P. L., Kilburn, M. R., Jones, D. 

L., Stockdale, E. A., Cliff, J. B., 3rd, 
& Herrmann, A. M., et al. (2009). In 
situ mapping of nutrient uptake in the 
rhizosphere using nanoscale secondary ion 
mass spectrometry. Plant Physiology, 151, 
1751–1757.

Collins, N. C., Tardieu, F., & Tuberosa, R. 
(2008). Quantitative trait loci and crop 
performance under abiotic stress: Where do 
we stand? Plant Physiology, 147, 469–486.
Cook, R. J., Thomashow, L. S., Weller, D. M., 
Fujimoto, D., Mazzola, M., & Bangera, G., 
et al. (1995). Molecular mechanisms of 
defense by rhizobacteria against root disease. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 92, 
4197–4201.

Coudert, Y., Perin, C., Courtois, B., Khong, N. 
G., & Gantet, P. (2010). Genetic control of 
root development in rice, the model cereal. 
Trends in Plant Science, 15, 219–226.
Crasta, O. R., Xu, W. W., Rosenow, D. T., 

Mullet, J., & Nguyen, H. T. (1999). Mapping 
of post-flowering drought resistance traits 
in grain sorghum: Association between 
QTLs influencing premature senescence and 
maturity. Molecular and General Genetics, 
262, 579–588.

Dakora, F. D., & Phillips, D. A. (2002). Root 

exudates as mediators of mineral acquisition 
in low-nutrient environments. Plant and 
Soil, 245, 35–47.

Darrah, P. R. (1993). The rhizosphere and plant 

nutrition — a quantitative approach. Plant 
and Soil, 156, 1–20.

de Dorlodot, S., Forster, B., Pages, L., Price, 

A., Tuberosa, R., & Draye, X. (2007). Root 

system architecture: Opportunities and 
constraints for genetic improvement of 
crops. Trends in Plant Science, 12, 474–481.
De Smet, I., et al. (2008). Receptor-like kinase 
ACR4 restricts formative cell divisions in the 
Arabidopsis root. Science, 322, 594–597.

Deal, R. B., Henikoff, J. G., & Henikoff, S. 

(2010). Genome-wide kinetics of nucleosome 
turnover determined by metabolic labeling of 
histones. Science, 328, 1161–1164.

DeHaan, L. R., Van Tassel, D. L., & Cox, T. S. 
(2005). Perennial grain crops: A synthesis 
of ecology and plant breeding. Renewable 
Agriculture and Food Systems, 20, 5–14.

Dhondt, S., Vanhaeren, H., Van Loo, D., 
Cnudde, V., & Inze, D. (2010). Plant 
structure visualization by high-resolution 
X-ray computed tomography. Trends in Plant 
Science, 15, 419–422.

DiLaurenzio, L., WysockaDiller, J., Malamy, 
J. E., Pysh, L., Helariutta, Y., & Freshour, 
G., et al. (1996). The SCARECROW 
gene regulates an asymmetric cell division 
that is essential for generating the radial 
organization of the Arabidopsis root. Cell, 
86, 423–433.

Dinneny, J. R., Long, T. A., Wang, J. Y., Jung, 

J. W., Mace, D., & Pointer, S., et al. (2008). 
Cell identity mediates the response of 
Arabidopsis roots to abiotic stress. Science, 
320, 942–945.

Dolan, L., Janmaat, K., Willemsen, V., Linstead, 

P., Poethig, S., & Roberts, K., et al. (1993). 
Cellular-organization of the Arabidopsis 
thaliana root. Development, 119, 71–84.
Drew, M. C. (1975). Comparison of effects 

of a localized supply of phosphate, nitrate, 
ammonium and potassium on growth of 
seminal root system, and shoot, in Barley. 
New Phytologist, 75, 479–490.

Drew, M. C., & Saker, L. R. (1978). Nutrient 

supply and growth of seminal root-system in 
barley. 3. Compensatory increases in growth 
of lateral roots, and in rates of phosphate 
uptake, in response to a localized supply of 
phosphate. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
29, 435–451.

Ebert, B., Zoller, D., Erban, A., Fehrle, I., 

Hartmann, J., & Niehl, A., et al. (2010). 
Metabolic profiling of Arabidopsis thaliana 
epidermal cells. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 61, 1321–1335.

Elbeltagy, A., Nishioka, K., Sato, T., Suzuki, 
H., Ye, B., & Hamada, T., et al. (2001). 
Endophytic colonization and in planta 
nitrogen fixation by a Herbaspirillum sp 
isolated from wild rice species. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 67, 
5285–5293.

EmmertBuck, M. R., Bonner, R. F., Smith, 
P. D., Chuaqui, R. F., Zhuang, Z. P., & 
Goldstein, S. R., et al. (1996). Laser capture 
microdissection. Science, 274, 998–1001.

Esau, K. (1965). Plant anatomy. New York: Wiley.
Fang, S., Yan, X., & Liao, H. (2009). 3D 

reconstruction and dynamic modeling of 
root architecture in situ and its application 
to crop phosphorus research. Plant Journal, 
60, 1096–1108.

Forbes, J. C., & Watson, R. D. (1992). Plants in 
agriculture. Cambridge England; New York, 
NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.

Forde, B., & Lorenzo, H. (2001). The 

nutritional control of root development. 
Plant and Soil, 232, 51–68.

Forde, B. G. (2002). The role of long-distance 
signalling in plant responses to nitrate and 
other nutrients. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 53, 39–43.

Freeling, M., & Walbot, V. (1994). The Maize 

handbook. New York: Springer-Verlag.

Gallagher, K. L., & Benfey, P. N. (2009). Both 
the conserved GRAS domain and nuclear 
localization are required for SHORT-ROOT 
movement. Plant Journal, 57, 785–797.
Gallagher, K. L., Paquette, A. J., Nakajima, 
K., & Benfey, P. N. (2004). Mechanisms 
regulating SHORT-ROOT intercellular 
movement. Current Biology, 14, 1847–1851.

Gallardo, M., Jackson, L. E., & Thompson, 

R. B. (1996). Shoot and root physiological 
responses to localized zones of soil moisture 
in cultivated and wild lettuce (Lactuca spp). 
Plant Cell and Environment, 19, 1169–1178.
Gersani, M., & Sachs, T. (1992). Development 
correlations between roots in heterogeneous 
environments. Plant Cell and Environment, 
15, 463–469.

Gilbert, G. A., Knight, J. D., Vance, C. P., 

& Allan, D. L. (1999). Acid phosphatase 
activity in phosphorus-deficient white lupin 
roots. Plant Cell and Environment, 22, 
801–810.

Gilroy, S., & Jones, D. L. (2000). Through form 

to function: Root hair development and 
nutrient uptake. Trends in Plant Science, 5, 
56–60.

Glass, A. D. M., et al. (2002). The regulation of 
nitrate and ammonium transport systems in 
plants. Journal of Experimental Botany, 53, 
855–864.

Glover, J. D., et al. (2010). Increased food 

and ecosystem security via perennial grains. 
Science, 328, 1638–1639.

Gomez-Roldan, V., et al. (2008). Strigolactone 
inhibition of shoot branching. Nature, 455 
189-U122

Graybosch, R. A., & Peterson, C. J. (2010). 
Genetic improvement in winter wheat  
yields in the great plains of North America, 
1959–2008. Crop Science, 50, 1882–1890.
Gregory, P. J., Hutchison, D. J., Read, D. B., 
Jenneson, P. M., Gilboy, W. B., & Morton, 
E. J. (2003). Non-invasive imaging of 
roots with high resolution X-ray micro-
tomography. Plant and Soil, 255, 351–359.

Grieneisen, V. A., Xu, J., Maree, A. F. M., 

Hogeweg, P., & Scheres, B. (2007). 
Auxin transport is sufficient to generate a 
maximum and gradient guiding root growth. 
Nature, 449, 1008–1013.

Groover, A., & Jones, A. M. (1999). Tracheary 

element differentiation uses a novel 
mechanism coordinating programmed cell 
death and secondary cell wall synthesis. 
Plant Physiology, 119, 375–384.

Guimil, S., et al. (2005). Comparative 

transcriptomics of rice reveals an 
ancient pattern of response to microbial 
colonization. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 102, 8066–8070.

Guo, J. H., Liu, X. J., Zhang, Y., Shen, J. L., 
Han, W. X., & Zhang, W. F., et al. (2010). 

383

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Significant acidification in major Chinese 
croplands. Science, 327, 1008–1010.

Hammer, G. L., Sinclair, T. R., Chapman, S. 

C., & van Oosterom, E. (2004). On systems 
thinking, systems biology, and the in silico 
plant. Plant Physiology, 134, 909–911.

Hammond, J. P., & White, P. J. (2008). Sucrose 

transport in the phloem: Integrating root 
responses to phosphorus starvation. Journal 
of Experimental Botany, 59, 93–109.

Heiman, M., et al. (2008). A translational 

profiling approach for the molecular 
characterization of CNS cell types. Cell, 
135, 738–748.

Hetz, W., Hochholdinger, F., Schwall, 

M., & Feix, G. (1996). Isolation and 
characterization of rtcs, a maize mutant 
deficient in the formation of nodal roots. 
Plant Journal, 10, 845–857.

Hiltner, L. (1903). Neue untersuchungen über 
die wurzel knöllchen der leguminosen und 
deren erreger. n.p.

Hinsinger, P., Gobran, G. R., Gregory, P. J., 

& Wenzel, W. W. (2005). Rhizosphere 
geometry and heterogeneity arising from 
root-mediated physical and chemical 
processes. New Phytologist, 168, 293–303.
Ho, C. H., Lin, S. H., Hu, H. C., & Tsay, Y. F. 
(2009). CHL1 functions as a nitrate sensor 
in plants. Cell, 138, 1184–1194.

Hochholdinger, F., & Feix, G. (1998). Early 

post-embryonic root formation is specifically 
affected in the maize mutant Irt1. Plant 
Journal, 16, 247–255.

Hochholdinger, F., Woll, K., Sauer, M., & 

Dembinsky, D. (2004). Genetic dissection 
of root formation in maize (Zea mays) 
reveals root-type specific developmental 
programmes. Annals of Botany, 93, 359–368.
Hochholdinger, F., & Zimmermann, R. (2008). 
Conserved and diverse mechanisms in root 
development. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 11, 70–74.

Hodge, A. (2004). The plastic plant: Root 
responses to heterogeneous supplies of 
nutrients. New Phytologist, 162, 9–24.

Hoecker, N., Keller, B., Muthreich, N., Chollet, 

D., Descombes, P., & Piepho, H. P., et al. 
(2008). Comparison of maize (Zea mays L.) 
F-1-hybrid and parental inbred line primary 
root transcriptomes suggests organ-specific 
patterns of nonadditive gene expression and 
conserved expression trends. Genetics, 179, 
1275–1283.

Howell, S. H. (1998). Molecular genetics of 
plant development. Cambridge, UK; New 
York: Cambridge University Press.

Husbands, A., Bell, E. M., Shuai, B., Smith, H. 

M. S., & Springer, P. S. (2007). LATERAL 
ORGAN BOUNDARIES defines a new 
family of DNA-binding transcription 
factors and can interact with specific bHLH 
proteins. Nucleic Acids Research, 35, 
6663–6671.

Inukai, Y., Sakamoto, T., Ueguchi-Tanaka, M., 

Shibata, Y., Gomi, K., & Umemura, I., et al. 
(2005). Crown rootless1, which is essential 
for crown root formation in rice, is a target 
of an AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR in 
auxin signaling. Plant Cell, 17, 1387–1396.
Iyer-Pascuzzi, A. S., Symonova, O., Mileyko, 

Y., Hao, Y. L., Belcher, H., & Harer, J., et al. 

384

(2010). Imaging and analysis platform for 
automatic phenotyping and trait ranking of 
plant root systems. Plant Physiology, 152, 
1148–1157.

Jackson, D. (2001). The long and the short 

of it: Signaling development through 
plasmodesmata. Plant Cell, 13, 2569–2572.
Jackson, R. B., Manwaring, J. H., & Caldwell, 

M. M. (1990). Rapid physiological 
adjustment of roots to localized soil 
enrichment. Nature, 344, 58–60.

Jahnke, S., et al. (2009). Combined MRI-PET 
dissects dynamic changes in plant structures 
and functions. Plant Journal, 59, 634–644.
Jeong, J. S., Kim, Y. S., Baek, K. H., Jung, H., 

Ha, S. H., & Do Choi, Y., et al. (2010). 
Root-specific expression of OsNAC10 
improves drought tolerance and grain yield 
in rice under field drought conditions. Plant 
Physiology, 153, 185–197.

Jiang, K., Zhang, S. B., Lee, S., Tsai, G., Kim, K., 

& Huang, H. Y., et al. (2006). Transcription 
profile analyses identify genes and pathways 
central to root cap functions in maize. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 60, 343–363.

Jiao, Y. L., et al. (2009). A transcriptome 

atlas of rice cell types uncovers cellular, 
functional and developmental hierarchies. 
Nature Genetics, 41, 258–263.

Johnson, J. F., Allan, D. L., Vance, C. P., 

& Weiblen, G. (1996). Root carbon 
dioxide fixation by phosphorus-deficient 
Lupinus albus — Contribution to organic 
acid exudation by proteoid roots. Plant 
Physiology, 112, 19–30.

Johnson, M. T. J. (2007). Genotype-by-

environment interactions leads to variable 
selection on life-history strategy in common 
evening primrose (Oenothera biennis). 
Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 20, 190–200.
Johnson, W. C., Jackson, L. E., Ochoa, O., van 

Wijk, R., Peleman, J., & St Clair, D. A., et al. 
(2000). Lettuce, a shallow-rooted crop, and 
Lactuca serriola, its wild progenitor, differ 
at QTL determining root architecture and 
deep soil water exploitation. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 101, 1066–1073.

Jorgensen, R. A., Atkinson, R. G., Forster, R. 
L., & Lucas, W. J. (1998). An RNA-based 
information superhighway in plants. Science, 
279, 1486–1487.

Karthikeyan, A. S., Varadarajan, D. K., Jain, A., 
Held, M. A., Carpita, N. C., & Raghothama, 
K. G. (2007). Phosphate starvation 
responses are mediated by sugar signaling in 
Arabidopsis. Planta, 225, 907–918.

Kiesselbach, T. A. (1999). The structure and 
reproduction of corn. Cold Spring Harbor, 
N.Y.: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

Kiser, M. R., Reid, C. D., Crowell, A. S., 
Phillips, R. P., & Howell, C. R. (2008). 
Exploring the transport of plant metabolites 
using positron emitting radiotracers. Hfsp 
Journal, 2, 189–204.

Kochian, L. V., Hoekenga, O. A., & Pineros, M. 
A. (2004). How do crop plants tolerate acid 
soils? Mechanisms of aluminum tolerance 
and phosphorous efficiency. Annual Review 
of Plant Biology, 55, 459–493.

Krouk, G., et al. (2010). Nitrate-regulated 

auxin transport by NRT1.1 defines a 
mechanism for nutrient sensing in plants. 
Developmental Cell, 18, 927–937.

Krusell, L., et al. (2002). Shoot control of root 

development and nodulation is mediated 
by a receptor-like kinase. Nature, 420, 
422–426.

Lalonde, S., Ehrhardt, D. W., & Frommer, W. 

B. (2005). Shining light on signaling and 
metabolic networks by genetically encoded 
biosensors. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 8, 574–581.

Landeweert, R., Hoffland, E., Finlay, R. D., 

Kuyper, T. W., & van Breemen, N. (2001). 
Linking plants to rocks: Ectomycorrhizal 
fungi mobilize nutrients from minerals. 
Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 16, 248–254.

Lejay, L., Gansel, X., Cerezo, M., Tillard, P., 

Muller, C., & Krapp, A., et al. (2003). 
Regulation of root ion transporters by 
photosynthesis: Functional importance and 
relation with hexokinase. Plant Cell, 15, 
2218–2232.

Levsky, J. M., Shenoy, S. M., Pezo, R. C., 

& Singer, R. H. (2002). Single-cell gene 
expression profiling. Science, 297, 836–840.

Leyser, O. (2005). The fall and rise of apical 

dominance — Commentary. Current Opinion 
in Genetics & Development, 15, 468–471.
Lin, S. I., Chiang, S. F., Lin, W. Y., Chen, J. 

W., Tseng, C. Y., & Wu, P. C., et al. (2008). 
Regulatory network of microRNA399 
and PHO2 by systemic signaling. Plant 
Physiology, 147, 732–746.

Liu, H. J., Wang, S. F., Yu, X. B., Yu, J., 

He, X. W., & Zhang, S. L., et al. (2005). 
ARL1, a LOB-domain protein required for 
adventitious root formation in rice. Plant 
Journal, 43, 47–56.

Long, T. A., Tsukagoshi, H., Busch, W., Lahner, 
B., Salt, D. E., & Benfey, P. N. (2010). The 
bHLH transcription factor POPEYE regulates 
response to iron deficiency in Arabidopsis 
roots. Plant Cell, 22, 2219–2236.

Lopez-Bucio, J., Cruz-Ramirez, A., & Herrera-

Estrella, L. (2003a). The role of nutrient 
availability in regulating root architecture. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 6, 
280–287.

Lopez-Bucio, J., Ramirez, V., Nieto, F., 

O’Connor, A., Herrera-Estrella, L. (2003b). 
Engineering enhanced nutrient uptake in 
transgenic plants. Plant Biotechnology 2002 
and Beyond, 179–182.

Lough, T. J., & Lucas, W. J. (2006). Integrative 
plant biology: Role of phloem long-distance 
macromolecular trafficking. Annual Review 
of Plant Biology, 57, 203–232, 619.

Lugtenberg, B., & Kamilova, F. (2009). Plant-
growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Annual 
Review of Microbiology, 63, 541–556.

Lynch, J. (1995). Root architecture and plant 
productivity. Plant Physiology, 109, 7–13.

Lynch, J. P. (2007). Rhizoeconomics: The roots 
of shoot growth limitations. Horttechnology, 
42, 1107–1109.

Lynch, J. P., Nielsen, K. L., Davis, R. D., & 

Jablokow, A. G. (1997). SimRoot: Modelling 
and visualization of root systems. Plant and 
Soil, 188, 139–151.

Lynch, M., & Walsh, B. (1998). Genetics and 
analysis of quantitative traits. Sunderland, 
Mass: Sinauer.

Ma, W., Muthreich, N., Liao, C. S., Franz-Wachtel, 

M., Schutz, W., & Zhang, F. S., et al. (2010). 

The mucilage proteome of maize  
(Zea mays L.) primary roots. Journal of 
Proteome Research, 9, 2968–2976.

Mace, D. L., Lee, J. Y., Twigg, R. W., Colinas, J.,  

Benfey, P. N., & Ohler, U. (2006). 
Quantification of transcription factor 
expression from Arabidopsis images. 
Bioinformatics, 22, E323–E331.

MacMillan, K., Emrich, K., Piepho, H. P., 
Mullins, C. E., & Price, A. H. (2006). 
Assessing the importance of genotype 3 
environment interaction for root traits 
in rice using a mapping population II: 
Conventional QTL analysis. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 113, 953–964.

MacMillan, K., Emrich, K., Piepho, H. P., 
Mullins, C. E., & Price, A. H. (2006). 
Assessing the importance of genotype 3 
environment interaction for root traits in 
rice using a mapping population. I: A soil-
filled box screen. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 113, 977–986.

Magalhaes, J. V., et al. (2007). A gene in the 
multidrug and toxic compound extrusion 
(MATE) family confers aluminum tolerance 
in sorghum. Nature Genetics, 39, 1156–1161.

Malamy, J. E., & Benfey, P. N. (1997). 

Organization and cell differentiation in 
lateral roots of Arabidopsis thaliana. 
Development, 124, 33–44.

Malik, K. A., Bilal, R., Mehnaz, S., Rasul, G., 
Mirza, M. S., & Ali, S. (1997). Association 
of nitrogen-fixing, plant-growth-promoting 
rhizobacteria (PGPR) with kallar grass and 
rice. Plant and Soil, 194, 37–44.

Margulis, L., & Schwartz, K. V. (1998). Five 

kingdoms: An illustrated guide to the phyla of 
life on earth. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Marschner, H., Romheld, V., & Kissel, M. 

(1987). Localization of phytosiderophore 
release and of iron uptake along intact barley 
roots. Physiologia Plantarum, 71, 157–162.

McCully, M. E. (1999). Roots in soil: 

Unearthing the complexities of roots and 
their rhizospheres. Annual Review of Plant 
Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology, 50 
695.

Moreno-Risueno, M. A., Van Norman, J. M., 

Moreno, A., Zhang, J., Ahnert, S. E., & 
Benfey, P. N. (2010). Oscillating gene 
expression determines competence for 
periodic Arabidopsis root branching. Science, 
329, 1306–1311.

Muller, M., & Schmidt, W. (2004). 

Environmentally induced plasticity of root 
hair development in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiology, 134, 409–419.

Muthreich, N., Schutzenmeister, A., Schutz, 

W., Madlung, J., Krug, K., & Nordheim, A., 
et al. (2010). Regulation of the maize (Zea 
mays L.) embryo proteome by RTCS which 
controls seminal root initiation. European 
Journal of Cell Biology, 89, 242–249.

Nielsen, K. L., Lynch, J. P., Jablokow, A. G., 

& Curtis, P. S. (1994). Carbon cost of root 
systems — an architectural approach. Plant 
and Soil, 165, 161–169.

Nishimura, R., et al. (2002). HAR1 mediates 

systemic regulation of symbiotic organ 
development. Nature, 420, 426–429.

Nordborg, M., & Weigel, D. (2008). Next-

generation genetics in plants. Nature, 456, 
720–723.

Growth Control of Root Architecture

C H A P T E R   2 4

Norton, G. J., Aitkenhead, M. J., Khowaja, F. S.,  

Whalley, W. R., & Price, A. H. (2008). A 
bioinformatic and transcriptomic approach 
to identifying positional candidate genes 
without fine mapping: An example using rice 
root-growth QTLs. Genomics, 92, 344–352.

Ohkama-Ohtsu, N., & Wasaki, J. (2010). 

Recent progress in plant nutrition research: 
Cross-talk between nutrients, plant 
physiology and soil microorganisms. Plant 
and Cell Physiology, 51, 1255–1264.

Oldroyd, G. E., Harrison, M. J., & Paszkowski, 

U. (2009). Reprogramming plant cells for 
endosymbiosis. Science, 324, 753–754.

Osmont, K. S., Sibout, R., & Hardtke, C. S. 

(2007). Hidden branches: Developments in 
root system architecture. Annual Review of 
Plant Biology, 58, 93–113.

Pant, B. D., Buhtz, A., Kehr, J., & Scheible, W. 
R. (2008). MicroRNA399 is a long-distance 
signal for the regulation of plant phosphate 
homeostasis. Plant Journal, 53, 731–738.

Paszkowski, U., & Boller, T. (2002). The growth 
defect of Irt1, a maize mutant lacking lateral 
roots, can be complemented by symbiotic 
fungi or high phosphate nutrition. Planta, 
214, 584–590.

Paszkowski, U., Kroken, S., Roux, C., & Briggs, 

S. P. (2002). Rice phosphate transporters 
include an evolutionarily divergent 
gene specifically activated in arbuscular 
mycorrhizal symbiosis. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 99, 13324–13329.

Peleman, J. D., & van der Voort, J. R. (2003). 
Breeding by design. Trends in Plant Science, 
8, 330–334.

Petricka, J. J., Van Norman, J. M., Benfey, 

P. N. (2009). Symmetry breaking in 
plants: Molecular mechanisms regulating 
asymmetric cell divisions in Arabidopsis. 
Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology, 
1(5), a000497.

Pineda, A., Zheng, S. J., van Loon, J. J., 

Pieterse, C. M., Dicke, M. (2010). Helping 
plants to deal with insects: The role of 
beneficial soil-borne microbes. Trends in 
Plant Science, 15(9), 507–514. 

Remans, T., Nacry, P., Pervent, M., Filleur, S., 
Diatloff, E., & Mounier, E., et al. (2006). 
The Arabidopsis NRT1.1 transporter 
participates in the signaling pathway 
triggering root colonization of nitrate-
rich patches. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 103, 19206–19211.

Robinson, D. (1994). The responses of plants 
to nonuniform supplies of nutrients. New 
Phytologist, 127, 635–674.

Rojo, E., Sharma, V. K., Kovaleva, V., Raikhel, 

N. V., & Fletcher, J. C. (2002). CLV3 is 
localized to the extracellular space, where 
it activates the Arabidopsis CLAVATA 
stem cell signaling pathway. Plant Cell, 14, 
969–977.

Ryu, C. M., Farag, M. A., Hu, C. H., Reddy, 

M. S., Wei, H. X., & Pare, P. W., et al. 
(2003). Bacterial volatiles promote growth 
in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 100, 4927–4932.

Sasaki, T., Yamamoto, Y., Ezaki, B., Katsuhara, 

M., Ahn, S. J., & Ryan, P. R., et al. (2004). A 

wheat gene encoding an aluminum-activated 
malate transporter. Plant Journal, 37, 
645–653.

Scheres, B. (2001). Plant cell identity. The role 

of position and lineage. Plant Physiology, 
125, 112–114.

Schikora, A., & Schmidt, W. (2001). Iron 

stress-induced changes in root epidermal 
cell fate are regulated independently 
from physiological responses to low iron 
availability. Plant Physiology, 125, 1679–
1687.

Severin, A. J., et al. (2010). An integrative 

approach to genomic introgression mapping. 
Plant Physiology, 154, 3–12.

Shiu, S. H., & Bleecker, A. B. (2001).  

Receptor-like kinases from Arabidopsis 
form a monophyletic gene family related  
to animal receptor kinases. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of  
the United States of America, 98, 
10763–10768.

Sieburth, L. E., & Lee, D. K. (2010). BYPASS1: 

How a tiny mutant tells a big story about 
root-to-shoot signaling. Journal of Integrative 
Plant Biology, 52, 77–85.

Sozzani, R., Cui, H., Moreno-Risueno, M. A., 
Busch, W., Van Norman, J. M., & Vernoux, 
T., et al. (2010). Spatiotemporal regulation 
of cell-cycle genes by SHORTROOT 
links patterning and growth. Nature, 466, 
128–149.

Sponchiado, B. N., White, J. W., Castillo, J. A.,  

& Jones, P. G. (1989). Root-growth of 
4 common bean cultivars in relation to 
drought tolerance in environments with 
contrasting soil types. Experimental 
Agriculture, 25, 249–257.

Steward, F. C., Mapes, M. O., Kent, A. E., 
& Holsten, R. D. (1964). Growth and 
development of cultured plant cells. Science, 
143, 20–27.

Stryker, R. B., Gilliam, J. W., & Jackson, 

W. A. (1974). Nonuniform phosphorus 
distribution in root zone of corn — growth 
and phosphorus uptake. Soil Science Society 
of America Journal, 38, 334–340.

Svistoonoff, S., Creff, A., Reymond, M., 

Sigoillot-Claude, C., Ricaud, L., & Blanchet, 
A., et al. (2007). Root tip contact with  
low-phosphate media reprograms plant  
root architecture. Nature Genetics, 39, 
792–796.

Swarup, R., Kramer, E. M., Perry, P., Knox, 

K., Leyser, H. M. O., & Haseloff, J., et al. 
(2005). Root gravitropism requires lateral 
root cap and epidermal cells for transport 
and response to a mobile auxin signal. 
Nature Cell Biology, 7, 1057–1065.

Taghavi, S., Garafola, C., Monchy, S., Newman, 

L., Hoffman, A., & Weyens, N., et al. 
(2009). Genome survey and characterization 
of endophytic bacteria exhibiting a beneficial 
effect on growth and development of 
poplar trees. Applied and environmental 
microbiology, 75, 748–757.

Taramino, G., Sauer, M., Stauffer, J. L., 

Multani, D., Niu, X. M., & Sakai, H., et al. 
(2007). The maize (Zea mays L.) RTCS 
gene encodes a LOB domain protein that is 
a key regulator of embryonic seminal and 
post-embryonic shoot-borne root initiation. 
Plant Journal, 50, 649–659.

385

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

fate in the Arabidopsis root-meristem 
determined by directional signaling. Nature, 
378, 62–65.

Walker, T. S., Bais, H. P., Grotewold, E., & 

Vivanco, J. M. (2003). Root exudation and 
rhizosphere biology. Plant Physiology, 132, 
44–51.

Wang, B., & Qiu, Y. L. (2006). Phylogenetic 

distribution and evolution of mycorrhizas in 
land plants. Mycorrhiza, 16, 299–363.
Weaver, J. E. (1926). Root development of 

field crops. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Co.

Weber, A. L., Briggs, W. H., Rucker, J.,  

Baltazar, B. M., Sanchez-Gonzalez, J. D., &  
Feng, P., et al. (2008). The genetic 
architecture of complex traits in teosinte 
(Zea mays ssp parviglumis): New evidence 
from association mapping. Genetics, 180, 
1221–1232.

Weber, A. L., Zhao, Q., McMullen, M. D., & 

Doebley, J. F. (2009). Using association 
mapping in teosinte to investigate the 
function of maize selection-candidate genes. 
Plos One, 4, e8227.

Yin, X., Struik, P. C., & Kropff, M. J. (2004). 
Role of crop physiology in predicting gene-
to-phenotype relationships. Trends in Plant 
Science, 9, 426–432.

Yoneyama, K., Xie, X., Kusumoto, D., 

Sekimoto, H., Sugimoto, Y., & Takeuchi, Y.  
(2007). Nitrogen deficiency as well 
as phosphorus deficiency in sorghum 
promotes the production and exudation of 
5-deoxystrigol, the host recognition signal 
for arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and root 
parasites. Planta, 227, 125–132.

Yu, J. M., Holland, J. B., McMullen, M. D., 
& Buckler, E. S. (2008). Genetic design 
and statistical power of nested association 
mapping in maize. Genetics, 178, 539–551.

Zambryski, P., & Crawford, K. (2000). 

Plasmodesmata: Gatekeepers for cell-to-cell 
transport of developmental signals in plants. 
Annual review of cell and developmental 
biology, 16, 393–421.

Zhang, B., Tolstikov, V., Turnbull, C., Hicks, 

L. M., & Fiehn, O. (2010). Divergent 
metabolome and proteome suggest 
functional independence of dual phloem 
transport systems in cucurbits. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 107, 13532–
13537.

Zhang, H. M., & Forde, B. G. (1998). 

An Arabidopsis MADS box gene that 
controls nutrient-induced changes in root 
architecture. Science, 279, 407–409.

Zhao, M., & Running, S. W. (2010). Drought-
induced reduction in global terrestrial net 
primary production from 2000 through 
2009. Science, 329, 940–943.

Zhu, J. M., Mickelson, S. M., Kaeppler, S. 
M., & Lynch, J. P. (2006). Detection of 
quantitative trait loci for seminal root 
traits in maize (Zea mays L.) seedlings 
grown under differential phosphorus levels. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 113, 1–10.

Zhu, T., Fang, S., Li, Z., Liu, Y., Liao, H., & 
Yan, X. (2006). Quantitative analysis of 
3-dimensional root architecture based on 
image reconstruction and its application to 
research on phosphorus uptake in soybean. 
Chinese Science Bulletin, 51, 11p.

Tester, M., & Langridge, P. (2010). Breeding 

technologies to increase crop production in a 
changing world. Science, 327, 818–822.

Thitamadee, S., Tuchihara, K., & Hashimoto, T. 

(2002). Microtubule basis for left-handed 
helical growth in Arabidopsis. Nature, 417, 
193–196.

Thomas, H., Thomas, H. M., & Ougham, H. 

(2000). Annuality, perenniality and cell 
death. Journal of Experimental Botany, 51, 
1781–1788.

Thorpe, M. R., Ferrieri, A. P., Herth, M. M., & 
Ferrieri, R. A. (2007). 11C-imaging: Methyl 
jasmonate moves in both phloem and xylem, 
promotes transport of jasmonate, and of 
photoassimilate even after proton transport 
is decoupled. Planta, 226, 541–551.

Tibbett, M. (2000). Roots, foraging and the 
exploitation of soil nutrient patches: The 
role of mycorrhizal symbiosis. Functional 
Ecology, 14, 397–399.

Tracy, S. R., Roberts, J. A., Black, C. R., 

McNeill, A., Davidson, R., & Mooney, 
S. J. (2010). The X-factor: Visualizing 
undisturbed root architecture in soils using 
X-ray computed tomography. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 61, 311–313.

Umehara, M., et al. (2008). Inhibition of shoot 
branching by new terpenoid plant hormones. 
Nature, 455 195-U129.

Van Norman, J. M., Frederick, R. L., & 

Sieburth, L. E. (2004). BYPASS1 negatively 
regulates a root-derived signal that controls 
plant architecture. Current Biology, 14, 
1739–1746.

Vandenberg, C., Willemsen, V., Hage, W., 

Weisbeek, P., & Scheres, B. (1995). Cell 

386

Biotechnological strategies for engineering 
plants with durable resistance to fungal 
and bacterial pathogens

21

Dor Salomon  Guido Sessa
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 329
Choosing the Target Gene for Transgenic Expression  .  .  . 330

Plant immune receptors mediating  
pathogen recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .330
Elicitors of plant immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .331
Plant genes involved in signaling  
networks of plant immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .332
Antimicrobial genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .334
Genes targeting pathogen virulence determinants  . . .335

How Many Transgenes Should be Expressed  
in a Single Plant for Efficient Disease Control?   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 335
When and Where Should the Transgene(s)  
be Expressed?  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 336

Pathogen-responsive and  
tissue-specific promoters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .337
Pathogen-responsive elements and  
synthetic promoters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .338
Conclusions and Prospects  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 339
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 339

Introduction

Fungal and bacterial pathogens are a major threat to the yield of 
crop plants worldwide. Therefore, an important goal in plant sci-
ence is the production of plants with broad-spectrum and dura-
ble resistance to microbial diseases. Potential strategies to reach 
this goal include classical or marker-assisted breeding, and genetic 
engineering (Michelmore, 2003). While breeding techniques are 
time-consuming and have the disadvantage of introducing unde-
sired  traits  by  linkage,  genetic  engineering  is  relatively  fast  and 
allows transference of individual traits into crops in a calculated 
manner. In addition, genetic engineering may allow for the rapid 
introduction of desirable traits from other plant species or organ-
isms into crops, and the precise manipulation of temporal or tis-
sue-specific expression of the trait of interest.

Despite the large variety of bacterial and fungal pathogens 
present  in  nature,  disease  is  rare  and  resistance  is  prevalent 
as  an  outcome  of  plant–pathogen  interactions.  The  efficient 
plant  immune  system  relies  both  on  pre-formed  structural 
and  chemical  barriers,  and  on  inducible  defense  responses 
that are activated by complex mechanisms of molecular rec-
ognition  and  cellular  signal  transduction.  However,  mod-
ern  agricultural  practices  based  on  cultivation  of  large  areas 
of  genetically  identical  crops  enable  pathogens  to  quickly 
adapt  and  defeat  plant  immunity,  causing  devastating  losses 
in  yield.  Attempts  to  limit  pathogen  outbreaks  by  classical 
breeding  procedures  have  provided  only  temporary  control, 
due  to  the  ability  of  pathogens  to  overcome  the  resistance 
genes  generally  employed  in  breeding  programs  (McDowell 
and  Woffenden,  2003).  Alternative  approaches  for  achiev-
ing  durable  disease  resistance  are  based  on  genetic  engineer-
ing of desired traits in transgenic plants. In many cases, such 
approaches have been undermined by side effects of transgene 
expression on plant development, yield, and seed production, 
necessitating refinement in the design of such strategies (Gurr 
and Rushton, 2005a,b; Gust et al., 2010).

In  recent  years,  genetic  and  genomics  analyses  of  plants 
and  interacting  pathogens  significantly  advanced  our  under-
standing  of  the  molecular  basis  of  microbial  infection  and 
plant immunity, providing the opportunity to select new tar-
gets  for  durable  resistance.  In  addition,  discovery  of  patho-
gen-responsive  and  tissue-specific  promoters  may  now  allow 
a  tight  control  of  transgene  expression.  These  new  molecu-
lar  tools  combined  with  lessons  from  previous  unsuccessful 
biotechnological  attempts  have  the  potential  to  lead  to  suc-
cessful  approaches  for  the  achievement  of  durable  disease 
resistance.

In this chapter we will review critical issues that should be 
considered  in  the  design  of  transgenic  technologies  for  dura-
ble and broad-spectrum resistance. We will focus our discus-
sion  on  the  choice  of  target  genes  to  be  expressed,  on  the 
number of genes to be employed, and on the control of their 
expression.

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00021-3

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Choosing the Target Gene for 
Transgenic Expression

Our knowledge of the molecular basis of plant immunity and 
microbial pathogenicity has greatly increased over the last two 
decades,  providing  a  better  understanding  of  plant–pathogen 
interactions, and hence of the available targets for disease con-
trol in economically important crop plants. The repertoire of 
genes that may potentially be manipulated to confer durable 
disease  resistance  to  a  broad  spectrum  of  bacterial  and  fun-
gal pathogens can be divided into two main groups. The first 
group  is  represented  by  plant  or  pathogen  genes  that  may 
induce or potentiate plant immunity. This includes genes that 
encode  plant  immune  receptors,  their  corresponding  patho-
gen ligands, and components of signal transduction networks 
activated  by  immune  receptors.  The  second  group  includes 
plant  or  exogenous  genes  that  possess  antimicrobial  activity 
or  counteract  pathogen  virulence  factors.  The  advantage  of 
employing  this  second  group  of  genes  for  transgenic  expres-
sion  is  that  they  act  directly  against  the  pathogen  without 
activating  plant  immune  responses  and  thus  avoid  energetic 
burden on the plant.

Plant immune receptors mediating 
pathogen recognition

Plant  immune  receptors  detect  the  presence  of  disease-
causing  bacteria  and  fungi  by  recognizing  pathogen  mol-
ecules  that  are  either  constitutively  expressed  or  exclusively 
synthesized  during  the  infection  process  (Jones  and  Dangl, 
2006).  Transmembrane  pattern-recognition  receptors  (PRRs) 
are  a  class  of  plant  immune  receptors  that  recognize  consti-
tutively expressed and highly conserved molecular structures 
of  microbes,  generally  referred  to  as  pathogen-  or  microbe-
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs or MAMPs; Boller and 
Felix, 2009). Immune responses activated by PRRs are collec-
tively referred to as PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI) and rep-
resent the basis of broad-spectrum resistance against non-host 
microbial  pathogens  (Boller  and  Felix,  2009;  Zipfel,  2009; 
Figure 21.1).

An important advantage of using PRRs for disease control 
resides  in  the  conservation  of  their  corresponding  PAMPs 
in  different  pathogens.  Engineering  susceptible  plants  with 
PRR-mediated  recognition  of  PAMPs,  which  are  present  in 
the majority of the isolates of a certain microbe or in differ-
ent microbes, has the potential of conferring resistance against 
a broad range of pathogens. For example, the rice PRR Xa21 
recognizes  a  secreted  sulfated  peptide  that  is  conserved  in 
diverse  strains  of  the  bacterium  Xanthomonas  oryzae  pv. 
oryzae (Lee et al., 2009). As predicted, transgenic expression 
of Xa21 in rice plants missing endogenous Xa21 was shown to 
confer a broad-range resistance against multiple strains of the 
pathogen (Wang et al., 1996).

A  recently  developed  strategy  to  confer  disease  resistance 
in plants is the transfer of PAMP recognition capacities across 
plant  families.  While  some  PAMPs  are  recognized  by  many 
plant  species,  others  are  recognized  only  by  certain  plant 

330

Figure 21.1 l A model illustrating the two main branches of 
plant immunity. l Plant cells detect invasion by a fungal or bacterial 
microbe through pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs). Most of 
the PRRs are embedded in the plasma membrane and recognize 
conserved pathogen determinants, designated as pathogen- or 
microbe-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs or MAMPs). This 
recognition event activates a network of signaling cascades resulting 
in the onset of a first line of immune response, collectively referred to 
as PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI). PTI includes fortification of the cell 
wall, production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and accumulation 
of antimicrobial proteins and compounds. A second line of immunity 
is represented by plant resistance (R) proteins, mostly cytoplasmic, 
that specifically recognize a pathogen effector protein and mount 
very efficient immune responses, referred to as effector-triggered 
immunity (ETI). ETI boosts PTI-associated immune response, often 
culminating in a localized hypersensitive response (HR) cell death, 
and inhibits the spread of the pathogen to neighboring healthy 
tissues. 

families (Boller and Felix, 2009). The bacterial PAMP EF-Tu 
is known to be recognized naturally only by members of the 
Brassicaceae  family  through  the  EFR  receptor  (Kunze  et  al., 
2004; Zipfel et al., 2006). It was recently shown that trans-
genic  expression  of  EFR  in  the  Solanaceous  species  tomato 
and Nicotiana benthamiana confers EF-Tu responsiveness and 
resistance  to  various  foliar  and  vascular  bacterial  pathogens 
of different genera (Lacombe et al., 2010). The BAK1 gene, 
which  encodes  a  protein  structurally  similar  to  several  PRRs 
and  is  required  for  the  function  of  multiple  transmembrane 
receptors  (Chinchilla  et  al.,  2009),  has  also  been  shown  to 
represent  a  possible  target  for  disease  control.  In  fact,  over-
expression  of  BAK1  in  transgenic  rice  enhanced  host  resist-
ance to blast fungus infection (Hu et al., 2005).

Resistance (R) proteins represent a second class of immune 
receptors that specifically recognize pathogen virulence effec-
tors (acting under these circumstances as avirulence factors), 
and  trigger  a  line  of  efficient  immune  responses  known  as 
effector-triggered  immunity  (ETI;  Jones  and  Dangl,  2006; 

Resistance to fungal and bacterial pathogens

C H A P T E R   2 1

Figure 21.1). Importantly, ETI includes a rapid and localized 
cell death at the site of infection, known as the hypersensitive 
response  (HR),  which  is  thought  to  prevent  further  spread 
of  the  pathogen  to  uninfected  tissues  (Greenberg  and  Yao, 
2004).  Most  R  genes  isolated  to  date  encode  proteins  with 
an  amino-terminal  nucleotide  binding  site  (NBS)  and  a  car-
boxy-terminal leucine rich repeat (LRR; Caplan et al., 2008). 
R  genes  have  been  extensively  used  as  a  tool  to  achieve  dis-
ease control by classical breeding practices as well as by trans-
genic  approaches  (Rommens  and  Kishore,  2000;  McDowell 
and  Woffenden,  2003).  However,  important  limitations  have 
compromised  most  of  the  attempts  to  confer  durable  resist-
ance by the introduction of R genes into crop plants. In most 
cases, R genes turn out to lack durability in the field because 
pathogens are usually able to avoid recognition by R proteins, 
either  by  shedding  the  corresponding  effector  protein  or  by 
introducing  mutations  in  the  effector  gene.  An  additional 
important drawback in the employment of R genes for disease 
control is that their over-expression may result in the consti-
tutive activation of immune responses even in the absence of 
pathogen, as was described for over-expression of the R genes 
Pto and RPS2 in tomato and Arabidopsis plants, respectively 
(Tang et al., 1999; Tao et al., 2000). Such a constitutive acti-
vation  of  immune  responses  may  have  a  negative  impact  on 
plant  growth  and  yield.  Finally,  R  genes  may  not  be  able  to 
mount a resistance response when expressed in distant plant 
species,  probably  due  to  the  lack  of  suitable  signal  transduc-
tion mechanisms. This phenomenon is termed “restricted tax-
onomic functionality” and may hinder the transfer of R genes 
between  distantly  related  crops  and  from  model  species  to 
crops (Tai et al., 1999).

Despite these limitations, several reports indicate that cer-
tain  R  genes  still  have  great  potential  for  successful  employ-
ment  in  disease  control.  A  first  example  is  the  pepper  Bs2 
gene, whose protein product recognizes the AvrBs2 effector of 
the  gram  negative  phytopathogenic  bacterium  Xanthomonas 
campestris  (Kearney  and  Staskawicz,  1990).  Because  avrBs2 
is widespread among X. campestris pathovars and its absence 
results in bacteria that are much less virulent than wild-type 
strains (Kearney and Staskawicz, 1990; Swords et al., 1996), 
the  Bs2  R  gene  was  selected  as  a  candidate  for  conferring 
durable disease resistance against a wide range of X. campes-
tris pathovars (Tai et al., 1999). Indeed, transgenic expression 
of  Bs2  in  tomato  plants  conferred  disease  resistance  against 
pathovars of X. campestris carrying avrBs2. In addition, trans-
genic  N.  benthamiana  plants  expressing  Bs2  developed  an 
HR when challenged with bacterial strains expressing avrBs2. 
However,  the  prospected  durability  of  Bs2  remains  to  be 
demonstrated in field trials.

Examples  of  R  genes  with  a  proven  potential  against  fun-
gal  pathogens  include  the  barley  Rpg1  gene  (Brueggeman  et 
al., 2002), the tomato Ve1 gene (Kawchuk et al., 2001; Fradin 
et al., 2009), and the Arabidopsis RPW8.1 and RPW8.2 genes 
(Xiao et al., 1997). The barley Rpg1 gene confers resistance to 
most pathotypes of the stem rust fungus Puccinia graminis f. 
sp. tritici (Brueggeman et al., 2002). Remarkably, this R gene 
was  proven  to  be  of  extraordinary  durability  (Brueggeman 
et  al.,  2002).  North  American  barley  cultivars  with  Rpg1 
were  first  released  in  1942,  and  since  then  there  have  been 

no  major  losses  as  a  result  of  stem  rust  (Brueggeman  et  al., 
2002).  Resistance  provided  by  the  tomato  Ve1  gene  against 
Verticillium  species,  which  cause  wilt  disease  in  many  dif-
ferent  crops,  has  been  incorporated  into  most  commercial 
tomato  varieties  and  has  proven  to  be  durable  (Kawchuk  et 
al.,  2001).  Importantly,  Ve1  was  also  shown  to  be  functional 
in  potato  when  expressed  as  a  transgene  (Kawchuk  et  al., 
2001).  The  Arabidopsis  RPW8.1  and  RPW8.2  genes  repre-
sent  an  example  of  the  potential  use  of  R  genes  for  achiev-
ing  broad-spectrum  resistance.  These  two  homologous 
Arabidopsis genes confer resistance to multiple powdery mil-
dew isolates that belong to distinct Erysiphe spp. (Xiao et al., 
1997). Interestingly, over-expression of RPW8.1 and RPW8.2 
in  transgenic  Arabidopsis  plants  conferred  resistance  to  the 
biotrophic  oomycete  Hyaloperonospora  parasitica  and  to  the 
cauliflower mosaic virus, but renders plants more susceptible 
to  the  necrotrophic  fungal  pathogens  Alternaria  and  Botrytis 
spp.  (Wang  et  al.,  2007).  The  differential  effect  of  RPW8.1 
and  RPW8.2  over-expression  toward  biotrophic  and  necro-
trophic  pathogens  is  reminiscent  of  the  activity  of  the  plant 
hormone salicylic acid (SA) that activates immune responses 
against  biotrophs  while  repressing  immune  responses  against 
necrotrophs  (Glazebrook,  2005).  These  observations  raise 
the  possibility  that  broad-spectrum  resistance  mediated  by 
RPW8.1  and  RPW8.2  is  the  result  of  constitutive  activation 
of SA-dependent immunity rather than specific recognition of 
pathogen effectors. Therefore, when manipulating R genes for 
engineering  disease  resistance  it  should  be  taken  into  account 
that their over-expression may activate defense pathways that 
are beneficial against certain pathogens, but detrimental against 
others.  An  additional  R-like  gene  that  when  over-expressed 
induces SA-dependent immune responses is the NBS-LRR Prf 
gene, which is required for tomato resistance against the bac-
terium Pseudomonas syringae (Salmeron et al., 1996). Tomato 
plants over-expressing Prf displayed broad-spectrum resistance 
against different bacterial pathogens, while they did not differ 
from wild-type plants with respect to growth and fruit produc-
tion (Oldroyd and Staskawicz, 1998).

The search for new R genes that confer resistance against 
pathogens for which natural plant defenses are currently una-
vailable  is  an  important  task.  An  ideal  situation  would  be  to 
identify R genes that recognize avirulence determinants indis-
pensable  for  pathogen  virulence.  Such  R  genes  could  poten-
tially  provide  durable  resistance,  since  the  pathogen  cannot 
afford to lose its avirulence determinant to evade plant resist-
ance without hampering its own virulence.

Elicitors of plant immunity

An  important  strategy  to  enhance  plant  disease  resistance  is 
to  express  in  plants  microbial-derived  genes  encoding  pro-
teins that are recognized by the plant surveillance system and 
elicit effective immune responses against pathogens (generally 
referred to as elicitors). Examples of well-characterized elici-
tors include PAMPs, avirulence effectors, Hrp proteins deliv-
ered by the type III secretion system, and fungal or oomycetal 
proteins,  such  as  cryptogein  and  cerato-platanins  (Gurr  and 
Rushton,  2005b;  Table  21.1).  Here  we  will  discuss  a  few 

331

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Table 21.1  Main classes of elicitors of plant immunity

Elicitor type

Source

Examples

PAMPsa

DAMPse

Harpins

Effector 
proteins

Elicitins

Bacteria and 
fungi

Flagellin (Gomez-Gomez and Boller, 
2002), EF-Tub, chitinc, β-glucansd

Plants

AtPEP1 (Huffaker et al., 2006)

Bacteria

Hrf-1 (Shao et al., 2008)

Bacteria and 
fungi

AvrPtof, AvrBs2 (Kearney and Staskawicz, 
1990), Avr9g

Fungi

Cryptogein (Ricci et al., 1989)

aPathogen-associated molecular patterns.
bKunze et al. (2004).
cBaureithel et al. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269:17931–17938.
dKlarzynski et al. (2000) Plant Physiol. 124:1027–1038.
eDamage-associated molecular patterns.
fRonald et al. (1992) J. Bacteriol. 174:1604–1611.
gvan Kan et al. (1991) Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 4:52–59.

examples  of  elicitors  whose  potential  for  disease  control  has 
been demonstrated.

As  detailed  previously,  PAMPs  play  a  key  role  in  activat-
ing  PTI,  an  important  branch  of  plant  immunity  (Boller  and 
Felix, 2009). Flagellin is a well-characterized PAMP constitut-
ing the basic unit of the bacterial flagellum, which is respon-
sible  for  motility  and  allows  bacteria  to  respond  to  stimuli 
in  their  environment  (Gomez-Gomez  and  Boller,  2002).  In 
Arabidopsis  plants,  flagellin  is  recognized  by  the  PRR  FLS2 
that  upon  flagellin  perception  activates  signaling  networks 
leading  to  the  induction  of  immune  responses  (Gomez-
Gomez  and  Boller,  2002).  Interestingly,  expression  of  a  flag-
ellin  gene  from  the  bacterial  pathogen  Acidovorax  avenae  in 
transgenic rice enhanced disease resistance against the fungus 
Magnaporthe grisea, which is the causal agent of blast disease 
(Takakura  et  al.,  2008).  However,  the  transgenic  plants  also 
showed  small  chlorotic  spots  on  leaves,  indicating  that  the 
constitutive  activation  of  flagellin-mediated  immunity  causes 
detrimental effects on the plant.

Cryptogein,  a  potent  activator  of  plant  defense  responses 
from  the  oomycete  Phytophthora  cryptogea  (Ricci  et  al., 
1989),  represents  an  additional  example  of  the  success-
ful  implementation  of  an  elicitor  to  generate  enhanced 
disease  resistance  in  a  model  plant  (Keller  et  al.,  1999). 
Transgenic  expression  of  cryptogein  under  a  pathogen-induc-
ible promoter caused the appearance of necrotic lesions upon 
Phytophthora parasitica var. nicotianae infection and provided 
enhanced  disease  resistance  against  several  unrelated  patho-
genic  fungi  in  tobacco  plants  (Keller  et  al.,  1999).  Harpins 
constitute  another  class  of  pathogen-derived  elicitors  that 
can  be  used  to  generate  disease-resistant  transgenic  plants 
(Cornelis  and  Van  Gijsegem,  2000).  These  are  heat-stable 
and glycine-rich proteins that are produced by gram negative 
phytopathogenic  bacteria  and  are  secreted  by  their  type  III 
secretion system, presumably to the plant apoplast (Cornelis 
and Van Gijsegem, 2000). When infiltrated at relatively high 

332

concentration  into  the  plant  intercellular  spaces,  harpins 
elicit an HR-like reaction (Cornelis and Van Gijsegem, 2000). 
Interestingly,  over-expression  of  harpin-encoding  genes  from 
different phytopathogenic bacteria in rice and tobacco plants 
enhanced  disease  resistance  against  a  number  of  fungal  and 
bacterial pathogens (Peng et al., 2004; Jang et al., 2006; Sohn 
et  al.,  2007).  Notably,  expression  of  Hrf1,  a  harpin  from  X. 
oryzae  pv.  oryzae,  conferred  non-specific  resistance  to  the 
blast fungus M. grisea in field conditions (Shao et al., 2008). 
Hrf1-expressing  plants  also  showed  constitutively  enhanced 
expression of genes involved in plant defense pathways (Shao 
et al., 2008).

Families  of  small-secreted  fungal  proteins,  for  example, 
hydrophobins  and  metallothioneins  (Gijzen  and  Nurnberger, 
2006;  Cox  and  Hooley,  2009),  are  widespread  among  fungi 
and are likely to be secreted in the host or to have structural 
roles in the fungal cell wall. Because several of these proteins 
were  shown  to  act  as  elicitors  of  plant  immune  responses, 
their  ability  to  confer  broad-spectrum  resistance  has  been 
explored. For example, the MgSM1 gene from the fungus M. 
grisea encodes a small protein belonging to the cerato-platinin 
family  (Yang  et  al.,  2009).  Interestingly,  MgSM1  expression 
induced  immune  responses  in  various  plants,  and  conferred 
resistance  to  bacterial  and  fungal  pathogens  when  expressed 
in  transgenic  Arabidopsis  plants  (Yang  et  al.,  2009).  Finally, 
the  discovery  that  immune  responses  can  also  be  activated 
by  plant-derived  elicitors,  which  are  released  from  damaged 
plant  tissues  during  infection  and  termed  damage-associated 
molecular  patterns  (DAMPs),  provides  new  candidate  trans-
genes  for  crop  improvement  (Boller  and  Felix,  2009).  For 
example,  the  Arabidopsis  AtPep1  peptide  is  encoded  by  a 
stress-induced precursor gene and its over-expression induced 
constitutive  transcription  of  pathogenesis-related  (PR)  genes 
and enhanced resistance to a fungal pathogen (Huffaker et al., 
2006).

Plant genes involved in signaling networks 
of plant immunity

The  accumulating  knowledge  on 
immunity-related  signal 
transduction pathways provides new opportunities to manipu-
late  plant  disease  resistance  (Figure  21.2).  The  expression  of 
transgenes  encoding  signaling  components  that  are  common 
intersects  of  diverse  resistance  pathways  can  be  used  to  acti-
vate  a  complete  battery  of  defense  responses.  This  approach 
could  provide  a  broad-spectrum  resistance  because  activa-
tion  of  immune  responses  will  not  be  dependent  on  specific 
pathogen recognition. In addition, it is expected to be durable 
because  it  cannot  be  defeated  by  simple  mutations  or  dele-
tions of pathogen genes. However, it should be noted that con-
stitutive  activation  of  immune  responses  by  over-expression  
of central immunity regulators may result in detrimental effects 
on  growth  and  development  that  can  eventually  reduce  crop 
yields.

Potential  candidate  genes  for  this  approach  are  those 
encoding  immunity-related  signaling  molecules  such  as  pro-
tein  kinases.  In  recent  years  it  has  become  clear  that  MAP 
kinase  cascades  participate  in  the  activation  of  plant  immune 

Resistance to fungal and bacterial pathogens

C H A P T E R   2 1

widely  explored  (Gutterson  and  Reuber,  2004;  Pandey  and 
Somssich, 2009). In a large number of studies, over-expression 
of  ERF  and  WRKY  transcription  factors  in  transgenic  model 
and  crop  plants  resulted  in  enhanced  disease  resistance  (Shin 
et  al.,  2002).  Interestingly,  over-expression  of  defense-related 
transcription  factors  may  provide  disease  resistance  to  multi-
ple  unrelated  pathogens.  For  example,  over-expression  of  the 
ERF  Tsi1  protein  in  transgenic  hot  pepper  enhanced  resist-
ance  to  viral,  bacterial,  and  oomycete  pathogens  (Shin  et  al., 
2002). Similarly, over-expression of the Arabidopsis transcrip-
tion factor MYB30 in transgenic Arabidopsis and tobacco plants 
enhanced resistance to the bacterium P. syringae and the fun-
gus Cercospora nicotianae (Vailleau et al., 2002).

Another class of genes that can be used to activate immune 
responses  independent  of  pathogen  recognition  are  those 
involved  in  signaling  pathways  activated  by  defense-related 
plant  hormones,  such  as  SA,  jasmonic  acid  (JA),  and  ethyl-
ene (ET; Pieterse et al., 2009; Shah, 2009). A typical example 
for the potential use of these genes is NPR1, which encodes 
a  key  regulator  of  systemic  acquired  resistance  (SAR;  Dong, 
2004). SAR is a mechanism of induced defense that confers 
long-lasting  protection  against  a  broad  spectrum  of  microor-
ganisms  (Durrant  and  Dong,  2004).  NPR1  represents  a  par-
ticularly  relevant  candidate  for  disease  control  because  it 
is  required  both  for  R-gene-mediated  resistance  and  SAR 
(Dong,  2004).  The  NPR1  gene  product  activates  expression 
of  defense  genes  by  interacting  with  members  of  the  TGA 
family of bZIP transcription factors in the plant cell nucleus 
(Zhang  et  al.,  1999).  Interestingly,  Arabidopsis  plants  over-
expressing  NPR1  displayed  enhanced  resistance  toward  bac-
terial,  fungal,  and  oomycete  pathogens  (Cao  et  al.,  1998; 
Friedrich et al., 2001). Notably, enhanced resistance observed 
in  these  plants  did  not  result  from  constitutive  activation  of 
immune responses, but from a more efficient response to the 
SAR-inducing  hormone  salicylic  acid.  Although  in  transgenic 
Arabidopsis plants overexpression of NPR1 did not cause any 
detrimental effect, in transgenic rice it caused the appearance 
of necrotic lesions that can negatively affect yield (Fitzgerald 
et al., 2004). In a more recent report, the introduction of the 
Arabidopsis NPR1 gene into carrot plants enhanced resistance 
against  a  broad  range  of  pathogens  including  biotrophic  and 
necrotrophic  fungi  and  a  foliar  bacterial  pathogen,  without 
evidence of any undesirable growth or developmental pheno-
types (Wally et al., 2009).

Activation  of  SAR  and  concomitant  increase  of  disease 
resistance  was  also  obtained  by  manipulating  the  polyamine 
metabolism (Moschou et al., 2009). Transgenic tobacco plants 
over-expressing  the  polyamine  oxidase  gene,  which  catalyzes 
the  oxidative  catabolism  of  spermidine  and  spermine  thus 
generating hydrogen peroxidase, displayed increased levels of 
SAR  marker  genes  and  of  cell  wall  defense  (Moschou  et  al., 
2009).  Moreover,  the  transgenic  plants  showed  pre-induced 
disease tolerance against the biotrophic bacterium P. syringae 
and  the  hemibiotrophic  oomycete  Ph.  parasitica  (Moschou 
et al., 2009).

An  additional  avenue  for  boosting  plant  immunity  is  to 
manipulate biosynthesis of defense-related plant hormones. An 
example  for  this  approach  is  represented  by  over-expression 
of  the  pathogen-inducible  rice  gene  OsAOS2,  which  encodes 

333

Figure 21.2 l Schematic representation of plant defense 
signaling networks. l Perception of a pathogen by infected plant 
tissues triggers activation of multiple signaling cascades that differ 
according to the lifestyle of the invading microbe (Glazebrook, 
2005). Signaling pathways that trigger immune responses against 
biotrophic organisms are mostly dependent on the plant hormone 
salicylic acid (SA), include mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase 
modules, and lead to the activation of various classes of defense-
related transcription factors. Signaling cascades that induce immune 
responses against necrotrophic pathogens are dependent on the 
plant hormones jasmonic acid (JA) and ethylene (ET). These include 
MAP kinase cascades and lead to the activation of classes of 
transcription factors that only partially overlap with those induced by 
biotrophic organisms. Mutual inhibition occurs between SA- and JA/
ET-signaling networks (Glazebrook, 2005). Arabidopsis NPR1 and 
MPK6 are examples of signaling molecules playing central roles in 
SA-dependent networks (Dong, 2004; Pedley and Martin, 2005), 
while MPK3 represents signaling components that participate both 
in SA- and JA/ET-dependent pathways (Pedley and Martin, 2005). 
Arabidopsis MPK4 is a negative regulator of SA-dependent immune 
responses (Petersen et al., 2000).

responses mediated by R and PRR proteins (Pedley and Martin, 
2005).  An  example  of  the  potential  use  of  these  proteins  for 
disease  control  is  the  enhanced  resistance  against  the  bac-
terium  P.  syringae  and  the  fungus  Botrytis  cinerea  that  was 
gained  by  over-expressing  several  components  of  a  PAMP-
induced  MAPK  cascade  in  Arabidopsis  (Asai  et  al.,  2002). 
Identification  of  additional  potential  candidate  genes  stems 
from  the  observation  that  a  vast  transcriptional  reprogram-
ming occurs during the activation of immune responses (Wise 
et al., 2007). Representatives of the ERF, WRKY, Myb, TGA-
bZIP, Whirly, and GRAS families of transcription factors have 
been  shown  to  play  central  roles  in  plant  immunity,  and  thus 
represent  strong  candidates  for  engineering  enhanced  dis-
ease resistance (Century et al., 2008). ERF and WRKY family 
members  are  excellent  examples  of  well-characterized  tran-
scription  factors  whose  potential  for  disease  control  has  been 

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

allene  oxide  synthase,  a  key  enzyme  of  the  JA  biosynthetic 
pathway (Gfeller et al., 2010). Transgenic rice plants expressing 
OsAOS2 under the control of a strong pathogen-inducible pro-
moter accumulated high levels of JA, exhibited accumulation of 
PR genes, and displayed increased resistance to the fungal path-
ogen M. grisea (Mei et al., 2006). However, it should be noted 
that  because  of  the  involvement  of  defense-related  plant  hor-
mones in diverse physiological functions other than plant immu-
nity,  this  type  of  manipulation  is  likely  to  affect  plant  growth 
and development, and to cause undesired phenotypes.

Finally, the suppression of plant genes that negatively regu-
late plant immune responses represents another possible strat-
egy to engineer disease resistance. For example, activation of 
plant  immunity  was  achieved  in  Arabidopsis  by  suppressing 
the expression of the MAP kinase MPK4, which is a negative 
regulator  of  SAR  (Petersen  et  al.,  2000).  Arabidopsis  plants 
mutated  in  mpk4  exhibited  constitutive  activation  of  SAR 
and increased resistance to the bacterium P. syringae, and to 
the  oomycete  Peronospora  parasitica  (Petersen  et  al.,  2000). 
However, similar to other mutants that constitutively express 
immune  responses,  mpk4  mutants  displayed  developmental 
phenotypes  such  as  dwarfism,  curled  leaves,  reduced  pollen 
production, and reduced fertility (Petersen et al., 2000).

Antimicrobial genes

The  plant  immune  response  culminates  in  the  production 
of  a  myriad  of  antimicrobial  agents  including  reactive  oxy-
gen  species,  secondary  metabolites,  hydrolytic  enzymes,  and 
antimicrobial peptides and proteins. Increasing the accumula-
tion of antimicrobial compounds of different biological origin 
(plant or microbial) in transgenic plants represents a promis-
ing  strategy  for  engineering  plant  disease  resistance  against 
fungal  and  bacterial  pathogens.  Antimicrobial  agents  can  be 
used  to  counteract  the  action  of  specific  pathogens  without 
the  need  to  induce  complex  signaling  pathways  that  lead  to 
a complete array of immune responses. One advantage of this 
approach  is  that  it  allows  bypassing  the  induction  of  energy-
consuming  processes  in  the  plant,  and  reduces  the  incidence 
of growth and developmental phenotypes that may negatively 
affect yields. In early implementations of this strategy, hydro-
lytic enzymes (e.g., glucanases and chitinases) that target the 
microbial cell wall were used to enhance disease resistance in 
important crops, such as rice and wheat (Gomez-Ariza et al., 
2007; Shin et al., 2008). In addition, defense-related proteins 
with protease inhibitor activity were shown to confer disease 
resistance  to  bacterial  and  fungal  pathogens  when  expressed 
in  transgenic  tobacco  plants  (Senthilkumar  et  al.,  2010). 
Similarly, expression of the grapevine phytoalexin resveratrol 
in  transgenic  tobacco  plants  enhanced  resistance  to  fungal 
infection (Hain et al., 1993).

More  recently,  plant-derived  genes  that  encode  peptides 
with  antimicrobial  activities  have  emerged  as  important  can-
didates for generating disease-resistant plants (van der Biezen, 
2001; Manners, 2007; Montesinos, 2007; Rossi et al., 2008). 
Plant  antimicrobial  peptides  are  cysteine-rich  short  amino 
acid  sequences  that  share  general  features,  such  as  an  over-
all  positive  charge  and  the  presence  of  disulfide  bonds,  and 

typically  target  outer  membrane  structures  (e.g.,  ion  chan-
nels). Main families of antimicrobial peptides are represented 
by  α-defensins,  thionins,  lipid  transfer  proteins,  cyclotides, 
snakins,  and  hevein-like  (Manners  et  al.,  2007).  A  database 
containing structural and functional information on more than 
270  antimicrobial  plant  peptides  and  their  target  organisms 
was recently developed (PhytAMP; http://phytamp.pfba-lab-
tun.org; Hammami et al., 2009). This information may assist 
in  isolating  and  characterizing  novel  plant  antimicrobial  pep-
tides,  in  designing  synthetic  peptides  with  higher  potency 
against pathogens or with broad antimicrobial spectra, and in 
identifying candidate genes for engineering disease resistance 
against desired pathogens.

Several  plant  genes  that  encode  peptides  with  antimicro-
bial  activity  were  successfully  used  to  generate  transgenic 
plants  with  enhanced  disease  resistance.  For  instance,  over-
expression  of  the  snakin-1  gene  enhanced  disease  resistance 
against the soil-borne fungal pathogen Rhizoctonia solani and 
the bacterial pathogen Erwinia carotovora in transgenic potato 
plants  (Segura  et  al.,  1999;  Almasia  et  al.,  2008).  Likewise, 
the  pepper  antimicrobial  gene  CaAMP1  conferred  broad-
spectrum  resistance  to  bacterial,  oomycete,  and  fungal  path-
ogens when over-expressed in Arabidopsis plants (Lee et al., 
2008).  An  additional  example  is  the  PnAMP-h2  gene  from 
Pharbitis  nil  (morning  glory)  plants  encoding  a  hevein-like 
antimicrobial  peptide  with  potent  antifungal  activity  (Koo 
et  al.,  2002).  PnAMP-h2  over-expression  in  tobacco  plants 
resulted in enhanced resistance against the oomycete Ph. par-
asitica  (Koo  et  al.,  2002).  Finally,  a  barley  chitinase  (chi-2) 
gene and a wheat lipid-transfer-protein (ltp), when simultane-
ously  expressed  in  carrot  plants,  conferred  enhanced  resist-
ance  against  the  fungal  pathogens  Alternaria  radicicola  and 
B. cinerea (Jayaraj and Punja, 2007).

Antimicrobial  genes  that  are  efficient  against  bacterial 
and  fungal  pathogens  can  also  be  derived  from  heterologous 
non-plant  systems.  Non-phytopathogenic  microbes  represent 
a  rich  source  of  genes  that  can  be  used  to  engineer  disease-
resistant  plants  (Lorito  et  al.,  1998;  Punja  and  Utkhede, 
2003).  The  mycoparasitic  fungus  Trichoderma  virens  is  the 
source of an endochitinase gene that was introduced into cot-
ton  and  tobacco  plants  to  enhance  disease  resistance  (Emani 
et  al.,  2003).  Endochitinases  are  enzymes  that  specifically 
degrade  chitin,  a  major  constituent  of  the  cell  wall  of  many 
fungi  (Adams,  2004).  Interestingly,  transgenic  plants  over-
expressing  the T.  virens  endochitinase  gene  were  resistant  to 
both  the  soil-borne  pathogen  R.  solani  and  the  foliar  patho-
gen A. alternata (Emani et al., 2003). In another study, fun-
gal-borne viruses were shown to be a source of antimicrobial 
genes that can be used for crop improvement (Schlaich et al., 
2006).  KP4  is  a  virally  encoded  antifungal  toxin  secreted  by 
strains of the fungus Ustilago maydis (Park et al., 1994; Gage 
et al., 2001). Interestingly, transgenic wheat plants expressing 
the  KP4  gene  showed  a  30%  decrease  in  disease  symptoms 
after infection with the smut fungus Tilletia caries in a glass-
house,  and  a  10%  increase  in  resistance  in  field  experiments 
(Schlaich et al., 2006).

An  original  study  combined  the  use  of  antimicrobial  pep-
tides  with  that  of  specific  antibodies  to  achieve  disease  con-
trol against the fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum (Peschen 

334

Resistance to fungal and bacterial pathogens

C H A P T E R   2 1

et  al.,  2004).  Three  antifungal  peptides  were  each  fused  to 
a  Fusarium-specific  antibody  and  expressed  in  transgenic 
Arabidopsis  plants.  By  this  strategy,  the  antifungal  peptides 
were specifically targeted to the site of infection where they 
efficiently  interfered  with  fungal  growth  and  development. 
Remarkably,  transgenic  plants  expressing  the  fusion  proteins 
showed  significantly  enhanced  resistance  to  the  pathogen 
(Peschen  et  al.,  2004).  In  comparison,  transgenic  plants  that 
expressed  only  the  antifungal  peptides  or  the  antibody  dis-
played  lower  levels  of  resistance.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the 
morphology of the transgenic plants was similar to that of the 
non-transformed control plants (Peschen et al., 2004).

Genes targeting pathogen virulence 
determinants

Virulence  determinants  on  which  microbes  rely  for  their 
pathogenicity can be directly targeted to achieve plant disease 
resistance.  In  this  section  we  review  a  few  examples  of  how 
virulence  mechanisms  can  be  manipulated  for  disease  con-
trol. Oxalic acid was found to be associated with pathogenesis 
of  several  phytopathogenic  fungi  and  thus  represents  a  target 
for  genetic  manipulations  (Godoy  et  al.,  1990;  Cessna  et  al., 
2000). Based on the hypothesis that introduction of a gene that 
can  specifically  degrade  oxalic  acid  in  crop  plants  would  con-
fer  disease  resistance  to  fungal  pathogens,  the  oxalate  decar-
boxylase  gene,  whose  translation  product  catabolizes  oxalic 
acid  to  CO2  and  formic  acid,  was  over-expressed  in  tobacco 
and  tomato  plants  (Kesarwani  et  al.,  2000).  Interestingly,  the 
obtained  transgenic  plants  showed  resistance  to  the  fungal 
pathogen  Sclerotinia  sclerotiorum,  which  requires  oxalic  acid 
for a successful plant infection (Kesarwani et al., 2000). By a 
similar  strategy,  expression  in  oilseed  rape  plants  of  a  wheat 
oxalate oxidase, which oxidizes oxalic acid to CO2 and H2O2, 
enhanced resistance to S. sclerotiorum (Dong et al., 2008).

Programmed  cell  death  is  often  associated  with  both  sus-
ceptible  and  resistant  host  responses  in  plants  (Glazebrook, 
2005). Because necrotrophic pathogens benefit from host cell 
death, it was suggested that inhibiting plant programmed cell 
death  by  expression  of  anti-apoptotic  genes  would  result  in 
plants  with  increased  resistance  to  necrotrophic  pathogens. 
Based  on  this  premise,  animal  genes  that  negatively  regu-
late  apoptosis  were  expressed  in  transgenic  tobacco  plants 
(Dickman et al., 2001). Interestingly, expression of the anti-
apoptotic  human  Bcl-2  and  Bcl-xl,  nematode  CED-9,  and 
baculovirus  Op-IAP  transgenes  conferred  heritable  resistance 
to  several  necrotrophic  fungal  pathogens  including  S.  sclero-
tiorum, B. cinerea, and C. nicotianae (Dickman et al., 2001). 
Similarly,  the  expression  of  the  baculovirus  anti-apoptotic 
gene p35 in lupin resulted in a reduction of disease symptoms 
caused  by  necrotrophic  fungal  pathogens  (Wijayanto  et  al., 
2009).  Together,  these  studies  indicate  the  potential  of  anti-
apoptotic  genes  to  generate  effective  disease  resistance  to 
necrotrophic fungi in economically important crops.

Recent  studies  have  indicated  that  pathogens  should  sup-
press  plant  immunity  to  infect  a  plant  species  (Cui  et  al., 
2009; De Wit et al., 2009). To this purpose, some pathogens 
utilize effector molecules to activate host targets that function 

as negative regulators of plant immunity. In principle, knock-
ing  out  such  effector  targets  or  susceptibility  factors  would 
release  the  suppression  of  immune  responses  and  lead  to 
resistance (Pavan et al., 2010). A well-characterized example 
of  such  susceptibility  factors  is  the  barley  plasma  membrane 
protein  MLO  that  is  required  for  susceptibility  to  powdery 
mildew  infections  (Buschges  et  al.,  1997;  Piffanelli  et  al., 
2004). Naturally occurring loss-of-function mlo alleles in bar-
ley and tomato plants provide durable resistance to a variety 
of powdery mildews without affecting yield (Piffanelli et al., 
2004; Bai et al., 2008). As MLO protein families are present 
in several plant species (including crops), their targeted inac-
tivation bears the potential to confer disease resistance against 
numerous powdery mildews. Indeed, targeted inactivation of 
MLO  in  Arabidopsis  plants  conferred  resistance  to  powdery 
mildew pathogenesis (Consonni et al., 2006). As discussed for 
MLO, manipulation of other plant susceptibility factors repre-
sents a promising strategy to achieve disease resistance against 
pathogens (Pavan et al., 2010).

How Many Transgenes Should be 
Expressed in a Single Plant for 
Efficient Disease Control?

The  introduction  of  a  single  gene  into  susceptible  plants, 
either  by  breeding  or  genetic  engineering,  rarely  results  in 
durable  disease  resistance  due  to  the  ability  of  pathogens  to 
evade its effect and break resistance. A useful strategy to over-
come this limitation in the attempt to engineer resistant plants 
is to “pyramid” or “stack” several transgenes in a single plant 
(Figure  21.3).  This  approach  is  predicted  to  provide  a  more 
durable  resistance,  since  it  is  unlikely  that  a  pathogen  would 
be  able  to  simultaneously  lose  or  mutate  multiple  traits.  In 
addition,  pyramiding  several  genes  that  target  multiple  races 
of  a  pathogen,  or  even  different  pathogens,  would  provide  a 
broader  spectrum  of  resistance  compared  to  a  single-gene 
strategy.  In  principle,  this  approach  may  assist  in  generating 
plants that are resistant to both bacteria and fungi, despite the 
very different virulence mechanisms of these pathogens.

Figure 21.3 l Schematic representation of the pyramiding 
concept. l Increase in the number of defense transgenes (stacking) 
in a plant widens the spectrum of pathogens against which the plant 
is resistant. In addition, stacking of transgenes enhances durability of 
resistance because pathogens need to develop multiple strategies to 
evade the effect of different transgenes.

335

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Several  reports  demonstrate  that  stacking  R  genes  in 
crop  plants  represents  a  successful  strategy  to  confer  broad- 
spectrum and durable disease resistance. For example, multi-
ple  R  genes  were  introduced  by  breeding  into  rice  plants  to 
enhance  disease  resistance  to  bacterial  blight  caused  by  the 
pathogen  X.  oryzae  pv.  oryzae  (Singh  et  al.,  2001).  Higher 
levels  of  resistance  to  various  X.  oryzae  pv.  oryzae  isolates 
were  obtained  by  pyramiding  into  rice  different  combina-
tions  of  the  R  genes  Xa-4,  xa-5,  xa-13,  and  Xa-21,  as  com-
pared  to  plants  expressing  only  a  single  R  gene.  Moreover, 
the  combinations  of  R  genes  tested  in  this  study  provided  a 
wider  spectrum  of  resistance  to  the  X.  oryzae  pv.  oryzae 
population prevalent in the region in which field experiments 
were  conducted  (Singh  et  al.,  2001).  Similarly,  a  strategy  of 
pyramiding  R  genes  was  successfully  applied  to  confer  dis-
ease resistance against the blast fungus M. grisea (Hittalmani 
et  al.,  2000).  In  this  study,  rice  lines  expressing  the  R  genes 
Pi1,  Piz-5,  and  Pita  displayed  enhanced  and  broad-spectrum 
resistance against various M. grisea isolates compared to lines 
with  a  single  R  gene  (Hittalmani  et  al.,  2000).  Although  in 
these  studies  the  stacking  of  R  genes  was  achieved  by  clas-
sical  breeding  techniques  and  not  by  genetic  engineering, 
the results obtained are supportive of the use of the R genes 
pyramiding strategy. In the future, the faster pace of genetic 
engineering compared to classical breeding techniques should 
allow for more efficient pyramiding of R genes in crops.

Other  transgenes,  besides  R  genes,  showed  promising 
results when stacked in a single plant. One successful example 
is the pyramiding of protease-inhibitors in transgenic tobacco 
plants  (Senthilkumar  et  al.,  2010).  The  protease-inhibitor 
genes  Sporamin  from  sweet  potato  and  CeCPI  from  taro 
driven  by  a  wound-  and  pathogen-responsive  promoter  were 
expressed in tobacco plants. Transgenic plants over-expressing 
the stacked genes displayed enhanced resistance against bacte-
rial and oomycete pathogens and insects (Senthilkumar et al., 
2010).  The  pyramiding  of  PR  genes  was  also  demonstrated 
to  be  efficient  in  enhancing  plant  disease  resistance  (Jayaraj 
and Punja, 2007). Stacking of the barley chitinase chi-2 gene 
and the wheat lipid transfer protein ltp gene in carrot plants 
resulted  in  transgenic  plants  with  significantly  higher  resist-
ance against necrotrophic foliar fungal pathogens compared to 
plants with a single transgene (Jayaraj and Punja, 2007).

An  additional  form  of  pyramiding  is  manifested  in  nature 
as quantitative disease resistance (QDR; Poland et al., 2009). 
QDR  is  an  incomplete  resistance  conditioned  by  multiple 
genes  of  partial  effect  commonly  referred  to  as  quantitative 
resistance loci (QRLs). For certain diseases, particularly those 
caused  by  necrotrophic  pathogens,  QDR  is  the  most  impor-
tant or only form of resistance available. Observations on the 
performance  of  crop  cultivars  with  different  types  of  resist-
ance have led to the conclusion that QDR tends to be more 
durable  than  typical  R-gene-mediated  resistance  (Parlevliet, 
2002; Kliebenstein and Rowe, 2009). R genes can be rapidly 
overcome as a result of a strong selection for compatible path-
ogen  variants,  whereas  breakdown  of  QDR  is  less  frequent 
because the partial contribution of QRLs to resistance results 
in  a  lower  selection  pressure  on  the  pathogen.  Therefore,  a 
thorough  understanding  of  QDR  should  contribute  to  the 
design and deployment of durable resistance crops. However, 

the  molecular  mechanisms  that  control  QDR  remain  poorly 
understood,  largely  due  to  the  incomplete  and  inconsistent 
nature  of  the  resistance  phenotype,  which  is  usually  con-
ditioned  by  many  loci  of  small  effect  (Poland  et  al.,  2009). 
Despite  these  limitations,  several  QRLs  have  been  identi-
fied  in  different  plant  pathosystems  in  recent  years  (Poland 
et  al.,  2009).  An  example  of  the  applicability  of  QDR  for 
conferring  durable  resistance  is  the  stacking  of  five  QRLs  in 
a  rice  line  susceptible  to  rice  blast  (Manosalva  et  al.,  2009). 
Interestingly,  the  obtained  line  exhibited  superior  resistance 
to  rice  blast  for  over  14  cropping  seasons,  compared  to  the 
susceptible  parental  line  (Manosalva  et  al.,  2009).  As  more 
QRLs  are  isolated  and  characterized,  it  will  be  possible  to 
integrate  them  in  breeding  or  genetic  engineering  programs 
for disease control.

When and Where Should the 
Transgene(s) be Expressed?

Most  of  the  attempts  to  enhance  disease  resistance  by  con-
stitutive  and  ectopic  expression  of  immunity-related  genes 
resulted  in  plants  affected  in  growth  and  development,  and 
with reduced yield. This is to be ascribed to the vast transcrip-
tional reprogramming occurring in plants during the onset of 
resistance  that  re-allocates  energetic  resources  from  growth 
to defense responses (Eulgem et al., 1999). Therefore, when 
engineering disease resistance in transgenic plants, it is funda-
mentally important to tightly control the timing and localiza-
tion of transgene expression to reduce detrimental side effects 
on plant growth and productivity (Gurr and Rushton, 2005a).
The  use  of  pathogen-responsive  promoters  to  drive  trans-
gene  expression  represents  a  promising  strategy  to  bypass 
the  undesired  effects  of  constitutive  expression.  Only  a  few 
pathogen-inducible  promoters  have  been  employed  for  the 
control  of  bacterial  and  fungal  disease  to  date  (Gurr  and 
Rushton,  2005a),  although  their  implementation  for  enhanc-
ing disease resistance was already proposed in the early 1990s 
(De Wit, 1992). This is probably related to the many impor-
tant  features  that  a  pathogen-responsive  promoter  should 
display to be suitable as a biotechnological tool (Table 21.2): 
(1)  rapid  induction  upon  sensing  of  the  pathogen  to  allow 
plants  to  mount  a  defense  response  before  the  pathogen 
spreads  to  neighboring  tissues  and  disease  symptoms  appear; 
(2)  a  minimal  degree  of  constitutive  transcriptional  activity 
in  the  absence  of  pathogens  to  ensure  that  the  transgene  is 
expressed only during pathogen attack; (3) ability to respond 
to various potential pathogens for achieving a wide resistance 
spectrum; (4) unresponsiveness to processes activated by the 
transgene to avoid uncontrolled spread of plant responses; and 
(5)  unresponsiveness  to  stresses  other  than  pathogen  attack 
to  ensure  specificity  to  biotic  cues.  Despite  the  fact  that 
very  few  promoters  that  meet  these  requirements  are  avail-
able, gene expression profiles and other genomic technologies 
applied to plant–pathogen interactions are expected to lead to 
the  identification  of  pathogen-responsive  promoters  suitable 
for disease control (Wise et al., 2007).

A  complementary  approach  to  limit  the  energetic  cost  of 
transgene  constitutive  expression  is  to  employ  promoters 

336

Resistance to fungal and bacterial pathogens

C H A P T E R   2 1

that  drive  expression  to  defined  tissues  or  specific  stages 
of  the  plant  life  cycle  that  are  most  vulnerable  to  pathogens 
(Kovalchuk  et  al.,  2010).  Spatial  regulation  of  expression 
could even be combined with pathogen inducibility. Based on 
the  extensive  knowledge  on  virulence  mechanisms  used  by 
pathogens of many major crops, ideally it should be possible to 
target transgene expression only to tissues that come in direct 
contact with the pathogen in the initial infection stages. Such 
a strategy should allow the plant to arrest the pathogen from 
spreading  from  the  infection  site,  while  other  plant  tissues 
that are not under direct attack continue to function normally 
without the burden of over-expressing the transgene. Another 
emerging  possibility  is  to  express  the  transgene  at  a  specific 
stage of the plant life cycle in which the plant is most vulner-
able to pathogen attack. This would allow the plant to resist 
the infection until endogenous barriers build up, without hav-
ing to bear the energetic cost of activating defense responses 
throughout the entire plant life (Gurr and Rushton, 2005a).

An important alternative to native promoters are synthetic 
promoters that contain single or multiple cis-acting elements 
(Rushton et al., 2002). A combination of different regulatory 
elements  can  potentially  provide  a  more  tightly  controlled 
temporal  expression  of  the  transgene,  tissue  specificity,  and 
resistance to a wider spectrum of pathogens (bacterial or fun-
gal)  with  various  lifestyles  (biotrophs  or  necrotrophs).  Here 
we describe examples of promising native and synthetic pro-
moters that were characterized to date and were employed to 
develop disease-resistant transgenic plants.

Pathogen-responsive and tissue-specific 
promoters

Pathogen-responsive  promoters  represent  a  tool  for  the 
expression  of  transgenes  in  a  spatially  and  temporally  con-
trolled  manner.  In  recent  years  several  such  promoters  have 
been  characterized  and  their  possible  employment  for  engi-
neering  disease-resistant  plants  assessed.  Among  them  is  the 

promoter  of  the  rice  PBZ1  gene,  which  encodes  an  intracel-
lular PR protein (Midoh and Iwata, 1996). The PBZ1 protein 
participates in systemic defense responses activated in rice by 
the chemical probenazole, which is widely used in agriculture 
to  protect  plants  against  the  rice  blast  fungus  M.  grisea  and 
the bacterial blight pathogen X. oryzae pv. oryzae (Midoh and 
Iwata,  1996;  Lin  et  al.,  2008).  By  monitoring  PBZ1  mRNA 
accumulation,  the  PBZ1  promoter  was  shown  to  be  induced 
by  inoculation  with  the  rice  blast  fungus,  and  by  treatment 
with various compounds that induce systemic resistance, but 
not  by  wounding  (Midoh  and  Iwata,  1996).  Because  of  its 
induction  characteristics,  the  PBZ1  promoter  was  employed 
in  transgenic  rice  plants  to  drive  strong  pathogen-inducible 
expression of the OsAOS2 gene, which encodes a key enzyme 
in  the  biosynthetic  pathway  of  the  defense-related  hormone 
JA (Mei et al., 2006). Interestingly, upon M. grisea infection, 
the transgenic plants displayed higher levels of JA, enhanced 
activation of PR genes, and increased resistance to the patho-
gen (Mei et al., 2006).

Also  well  characterized  is  the  pathogen-inducible  Pgst1 
(formerly prp1-1) promoter that drives expression of a potato 
PR  gene  (Martini  et  al.,  1993).  The  Pgst1  promoter  is  acti-
vated at early stages of potato infection by the late blight fun-
gus Ph. infestans, but not in response to abiotic environmental 
cues (Martini et al., 1993). This promoter was also character-
ized in apple and shown to maintain its pathogen responsive-
ness, albeit with relatively low expression levels, when plants 
were treated with the fungus Venturia inaequalis and the bac-
terium E. amylovora (Malnoy et al., 2006).

In  an  additional  significant  study,  a  constitutively  active 
form  of  a  MAP  kinase  kinase  was  expressed  under  the  con-
trol  of  a  pathogen-inducible  promoter  to  activate  immune 
response  upon  pathogen  attack  (Yamamizo  et  al.,  2006).  To 
this  end,  the  promoter  of  the  PVS3  gene,  which  encodes  a 
key  enzyme  of  phytoalexin  biosynthesis,  was  first  isolated 
from  potato  plants  and  shown  to  be  significantly  induced  in 
tubers and leaves by both virulent and avirulent isolates of the 
late blight fungal pathogen Ph. infestans, but not by wounding 

Table 21.2  Desired characteristics for a promoter designed to drive defense-related transgenes

Promoter characteristic

Desired

Timing of transcription

Only in the presence of a pathogen — minimal degree of 
transcription in absence of pathogen

Undesired

Constitutive

Tissue specificity

Induction kinetics

Restricted to tissues that come in direct contact with the 
pathogen

Non-specific

Rapid — upon sensing the pathogen and before it can 
spread and cause disease

Slow — after pathogen spread and appearance of disease 
symptoms

Responsiveness to pathogen 
spectrum

Wide — transcription is activated upon sensing a wide 
spectrum of pathogens

Narrow — transcription is activated upon sensing only one 
or few different pathogens

Responsiveness to transgene

Non-responsive to processes activated by the driven 
transgene

Responsive to processes activated by the driven transgene

Responsiveness to abiotic stress

Non-responsive

Responsive

Activity spectrum in different plants Wide — active in various plant species

Narrow — active only in a limited number of plant species

337

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

(Yamamizo  et  al.,  2006).  Transgenic  potato  plants  carrying  a 
constitutively  active  form  of  a  MAPK  kinase  driven  by  the 
PVS3  promoter  were  generated.  Interestingly,  these  trans-
genic plants showed high resistance to Ph. infestans as well as 
to the early blight pathogen A. solani (Yamamizo et al., 2006).
Recently,  the  promoter  of  the  barley  GER4c  gene,  which 
belongs to a gene cluster encoding the germin-like protein, has 
been proposed as a possible biotechnological tool for engineer-
ing strictly localized and pathogen-regulated disease resistance 
in  transgenic  cereal  crops  (Himmelbach  et  al.,  2010).  This 
promoter  mediates  expression  specific  to  epidermal  tissues, 
and it is activated by several host and non-host pathogens in 
barley (Himmelbach et al., 2010). Additional examples of tis-
sue-specific  and  stress-inducible  promoters  are  defensin  pro-
moters  from  wheat  and  rice  (Kovalchuk  et  al.,  2010).  Their 
specific  spatial  and  temporal  expression  patterns  in  develop-
ing grains and germinating seeds make these promoters valu-
able  tools  for  the  targeted  expression  of  transgenes  in  cereal 
crops. Several other pathogen-responsive promoters, including 
ZmPR4 from maize, win3.12T from poplar, and PmPR10-1.13 
from  western  white  pine,  were  described  and  even  used  to  
engineer  disease-resistant  plants  (Liu  et  al.,  2005;  Moreno 
et al., 2005; Yevtushenko et al., 2005). However, these pro-
moters are induced under both biotic and abiotic stress, and 
may  therefore  be  less  effective  as  tools  to  engineer  specific 
disease  resistance  in  plants  (Liu  et  al.,  2005;  Moreno  et  al., 
2005; Yevtushenko et al., 2005).

Pathogen-responsive elements and 
synthetic promoters

Transcription  factors  of  multiple  families  orchestrate  the 
transcriptional reprogramming that takes place in plants chal-
lenged  by  pathogens  (Gutterson  and  Reuber,  2004;  Eulgem, 
2005;  Pandey  and  Somssich,  2009).  Representatives  of  sev-
eral families of transcription factors have been shown to bind 
to  promoters  of  immunity-related  genes  and  regulate  their 
expression (Rushton and Somssich, 1998; Eulgem, 2005). An 
interesting and promising strategy to control the expression of 
transgenes for disease control is to isolate pathogen-responsive 
promoter elements and to use them as building blocks of syn-
thetic  promoters  (Gurr  and  Rushton,  2005a).  Such  promot-
ers  could  be  designed  to  respond  specifically  to  biotic  stress 
and to recognize a broader spectrum of pathogens than that of 
native promoters.

Only  a  few  pathogen-responsive  promoter  elements  have 
been  identified  and  characterized.  An  example  of  such  ele-
ments is the W-box that is found in promoters of many genes 
activated  by  WRKY  transcription  factors  (Rushton  et  al., 
1996; Eulgem et al., 1999). Two W-box elements were iden-
tified in the promoters of the immediate-early response gene 
CMPG1 from parsley and Arabidopsis, and represent promis-
ing building blocks for synthetic pathogen-responsive promot-
ers (Kirsch et al., 2001; Heise et al., 2002). These elements 
are  rapidly  and  strongly  induced  by  pathogen  elicitors,  but 
not by wounding, in contrast to the CMPG1 promoter from 
which they are derived. In addition, they show a strongly syn-
ergistic activity in artificial combinations with other cis-acting 

elements  (Heise  et  al.,  2002).  These  characteristics  make 
W-box  elements  particularly  suited  for  engineering  synthetic 
promoters  for  disease  control.  The  possibility  of  employ-
ing  W-box  elements  for  the  enhancement  of  disease  resist-
ance  was  demonstrated  by  fusing  promoter  regions  of  the 
DRR206 gene from pea, which contain a W-box and a wound/
pathogen-inducible  box  (W/P-box;  Palm  et  al.,  1990),  with 
a  DNase  elicitor  gene  from  F.  solani  f.  sp.  phaseoli  (Choi 
et  al,  2004).  Interestingly,  this  construct  conferred  resist-
ance against the bacterial pathogen P. syringae and the fungus 
A. alternata in tobacco (Choi et al., 2004).

An  additional  pathogen-responsive  element  was  identi-
fied  in  the  tobacco  hsr203J  gene,  whose  expression  is  spe-
cifically  induced  during  the  onset  of  the  HR,  several  hours 
before the appearance of necrotic lesions (Pontier et al., 1994, 
2001).  Remarkably,  the  hsr203J  promoter  was  successfully 
used  to  drive  pathogen-inducible  expression  of  the  crypto-
gein elicitor in transgenic tobacco plants (Keller et al., 1999). 
Expression of the transgene in these plants was not detected 
in the absence of pathogen, whereas it was induced by infec-
tion with the virulent oomycete Ph. parasitica var. nicotianae 
causing  the  appearance  of  localized  necrosis  (Keller  et  al., 
1999).  However,  less  successful  was  the  attempt  to  use  this 
promoter  to  drive  expression  of  the  popA  elicitor  gene  from 
the bacterium Ralstonia solanacearum (Belbahri et al., 2001). 
Although  tobacco  plants  carrying  the  hsr203J:popA  trans-
gene  showed  enhanced  resistance  to  Ph.  parasitica  var. nico-
tianae, they occasionally developed an uncontrolled spreading 
of  necrosis  that  initiated  at  the  site  of  pathogen  infection 
(Belbahri  et  al.,  2001).  Deletion  and  mutagenesis  analysis 
of  the  hsr203J  promoter  led  to  the  identification  of  a  12 bp 
motif  termed  HSRE  (HSR203J  responsive  element),  which 
is necessary and sufficient for transcriptional activation of the 
hsr203J  gene  in  response  to  pathogen  attack  (Pontier  et  al., 
2001).

Pathogen-responsive  elements  can  serve  as  modules  for 
engineering  synthetic  pathogen-inducible  promoters.  The 
potential  of  this  approach  has  been  demonstrated  in  an  ele-
gant  study,  in  which  several  cis-acting  elements  were  tested 
for  their  ability  to  drive  pathogen-inducible  expression  in 
planta  when  removed  from  their  respective  native  promoter 
context (Rushton et al., 2002). Synthetic promoters contain-
ing tetramers of a single type cis-acting element were shown 
to  mediate  local  gene  expression  in  transgenic  Arabidopsis 
plants  infected  by  pathogens,  although  various  levels  of 
background  expression  were  also  observed  in  the  uninfected 
plants  (Rushton  et  al.,  2002).  This  study  also  demonstrated 
the  possibility  of  constructing  improved  synthetic  promoters 
that  contain  elements  of  different  types.  Several  combina-
tions  of  pathogen-responsive  cis-acting  elements  of  different 
types  resulted  in  promoters  with  high  inducibility  by  a  wide 
range of pathogens and low background transcriptional activ-
ity (Rushton et al., 2002).

An  additional  promising  strategy  for  engineering  synthetic 
pathogen-responsive  promoters  stems  from  the  observation 
that  certain  plant  promoters  are  directly  activated  by  patho-
gen  virulence  factors  that  act  as  transcriptional  activators. 
Transcription-activator like (TAL) effectors are virulence pro-
teins  found  in  many  phytopathogenic  bacteria  of  the  genus 

338

Resistance to fungal and bacterial pathogens

C H A P T E R   2 1

Xanthomonas that are delivered into the plant cell via a type 
III secretion system (White et al., 2009). TAL effectors have 
a characteristic central domain comprising a variable number 
of  tandemly  arranged  copies  of  a  34/35-amino  acid  motif 
that  specifically  binds  to  a  corresponding  UPA  (upregulated 
by AvrBs3) box found in promoters of their target host genes 
(Boch  et  al.,  2009;  Moscou  and  Bogdanove,  2009).  In  addi-
tion,  they  contain  nuclear  localization  signals  and  an  acidic 
transcriptional  activation  domain.  Based  on  these  observa-
tions, a strategy has been devised to use UPA boxes to engi-
neer synthetic promoters by stacking up several different UPA 
boxes in the same promoter (Romer et al., 2009). These syn-
thetic  promoters,  driving  the  expression  of  an  R  gene,  were 
shown  to  respond  and  confer  disease  resistance  to  various 
pathogens that possess different TAL effectors (Romer et al., 
2009).  The  recent  deciphering  of  the  code  of  DNA-binding 
specificity of TAL type III effectors should allow the design of 
more sophisticated synthetic TAL-responsive promoters in the 
near future (Boch et al., 2009; Moscou and Bogdanove, 2009).

pathogens  has  significantly  improved.  Thus  far  engineering 
of  disease  resistance  in  crops  remains  largely  elusive,  but  a 
wide array of new genetic tools is now becoming available and 
may  be  employed  to  achieve  this  goal.  Custom-made  com-
binations  of  promoters  and  transgenes  may  be  designed  and 
tested  for  disease  control.  Type  and  number  of  transgene(s), 
and  the  native  or  synthetic  promoter(s)  to  be  employed 
should be carefully selected according to criteria that include 
the desired spectrum of disease resistance (narrow or broad), 
the  nature  (bacteria,  fungi,  or  both),  lifestyle  (biotrophic  or 
necrotrophic)  and  virulence  strategies  of  the  pathogens(s), 
and  the  genetic  and  physiological  characteristics  of  the  engi-
neered  crop.  Toward  the  successful  engineering  of  durable 
resistance  in  crop  plants,  several  promising  novel  strategies 
have proven successful in controlled environments and await 
confirmation in field trials.

Acknowledgments

Conclusions and Prospects

In  recent  years,  the  understanding  of  molecular  mecha-
nisms that govern plant immunity and virulence of important 

Our research on plant disease resistance and susceptibility is 
supported by grants from the United States-Israel Binational 
Agricultural  Research  and  Development  Fund  (BARD;  grant 
no.  IS-4159-08C)  and  from  the  Israel  Science  Foundation 
(ISF; grant no. 326/10).

References

Adams, D. J. (2004). Fungal cell wall chitinases 

and glucanases. Microbiology, 150, 2029–
2035.

Almasia, N. I., Bazzini, A. A., Hopp, H. E., & 

Vazquez-Rovere, C. (2008). Overexpression 
of snakin-1 gene enhances resistance to 
Rhizoctonia solani and in transgenic potato 
plants. Molecular Plant Pathology, 9, 329–338.

Asai, T., Tena, G., Plotnikova, J., Willmann,  
M. R., Chiu, W. L., & Gomez-Gomez, L.,  
et al. (2002). MAP kinase signalling cascade 
in Arabidopsis innate immunity. Nature, 
415, 977–983.

Bai, Y., Pavan, S., Zheng, Z., Zappel, N. F., 

Reinstadler, A., & Lotti, C., et al. (2008). 
Naturally occurring broad-spectrum 
powdery mildew resistance in a Central 
American tomato accession is caused by loss 
of mlo function. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 21, 30–39.

Belbahri, L., Boucher, C., Candresse, T., Nicole, 

M., Ricci, P., & Keller, H. (2001). A local 
accumulation of the Ralstonia solanacearum 
PopA protein in transgenic tobacco renders 
a compatible plant–pathogen interaction 
incompatible. Plant Journal, 28, 419–430.

Boch, J., Scholze, H., Schornack, S., Landgraf, 

A., Hahn, S., & Kay, S., et al. (2009). 
Breaking the code of DNA binding 
specificity of TAL-type III effectors. Science, 
326, 1509–1512.

Boller, T., & Felix, G. (2009). A renaissance of 
elicitors: Perception of microbe-associated 
molecular patterns and danger signals by 
pattern-recognition receptors. Annual 
Review of Plant Biology, 60, 379–406.

Brueggeman, R., Rostoks, N., Kudrna, D., 

Kilian, A., Han, F., & Chen, J., et al. (2002). 
The barley stem rust-resistance gene Rpg1 
is a novel disease-resistance gene with 
homology to receptor kinases. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 99, 9328–9333.

Buschges, R., Hollricher, K., Panstruga, R., 
Simons, G., Wolter, M., & Frijters, A., 
et al. (1997). The barley Mlo gene: A 
novel control element of plant pathogen 
resistance. Cell, 88, 695–705.

Cao, H., Li, X., & Dong, X. (1998). Generation 

of broad-spectrum disease resistance by 
overexpression of an essential regulatory gene 
in systemic acquired resistance. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 95, 6531–6536.

Caplan, J., Padmanabhan, M., & Dinesh-
Kumar, S. P. (2008). Plant NB-LRR 
immune receptors: From recognition to 
transcriptional reprogramming. Cell Host & 
Microbe, 3, 126–135.

Century, K., Reuber, T. L., & Ratcliffe, O. J. 

(2008). Regulating the regulators: The 
future prospects for transcription-factor-
based agricultural biotechnology products. 
Plant Physiology, 147, 20–29.

Cessna, S. G., Sears, V. E., Dickman, M. 
B., & Low, P. S. (2000). Oxalic acid, 
a pathogenicity factor for Sclerotinia 
sclerotiorum, suppresses the oxidative 
burst of the host plant. Plant Cell, 12, 
2191–2200.

Chinchilla, D., Shan, L., He, P., de Vries, S., 

& Kemmerling, B. (2009). One for all: The 

receptor-associated kinase BAK1. Trends in 
Plant Science, 14, 535–541.

Choi, J. J., Klosterman, S. J., & Hadwiger, 

L. A. (2004). A promoter from pea gene 
DRR206 is suitable to regulate an elicitor-
coding gene and develop disease resistance. 
Phytopathology, 94, 651–660.

Consonni, C., Humphry, M. E., Hartmann, H. 
A., Livaja, M., Durner, J., & Westphal, L., 
et al. (2006). Conserved requirement for a 
plant host cell protein in powdery mildew 
pathogenesis. Nature Genetics, 38, 716–720.

Cornelis, G. R., & Van Gijsegem, F. (2000). 

Assembly and function of type III secretory 
systems. Annual Review of Microbiology, 54, 
735–774.

Cox, P. W., & Hooley, P. (2009). Hydrophobins: 

New prospects for biotechnology. Fungal 
Biology Reviews, 23, 40–47.

Cui, H., Xiang, T., & Zhou, J. M. (2009). 

Plant immunity: A lesson from pathogenic 
bacterial effector proteins. Cellular 
Microbiology, 11, 1453–1461.

De Wit, P. J. (1992). Molecular characterization 

of gene-for-gene systems in plant–fungus 
interactions and the application of avirulence 
genes in control of plant pathogens. Annual 
Review of Phytopathology, 30, 391–418.

De Wit, P. J., Mehrabi, R., Van den Burg, H. A., 

& Stergiopoulos, I. (2009). Fungal effector 
proteins: Past, present and future. Molecular 
Plant Pathology, 10, 735–747.

Dickman, M. B., Park, Y. K., Oltersdorf, T., 

Li, W., Clemente, T., & French, R. (2001). 
Abrogation of disease development in plants 
expressing animal antiapoptotic genes. 

339

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 
6957–6962.

Dong, X. (2004). NPR1, all things considered. 

Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 7, 
547–552.

Dong, X., Ji, R., Guo, X., Foster, S. J., 

Chen, H., & Dong, C., et al. (2008). 
Expressing a gene encoding wheat oxalate 
oxidase enhances resistance to Sclerotinia 
sclerotiorum in oilseed rape (Brassica 
napus). Planta, 228, 331–340.

Durrant, W. E., & Dong, X. (2004). Systemic 

acquired resistance. Annual Review of 
Phytopathology, 42, 185–209.

Emani, C., Garcia, J. M., Lopata-Finch, E., 

Pozo, M. J., Uribe, P., & Kim, D. J., et 
al. (2003). Enhanced fungal resistance 
in transgenic cotton expressing an 
endochitinase gene from Trichoderma virens. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 1, 321–336.

Eulgem, T. (2005). Regulation of the 

Arabidopsis defense transcriptome. Trends 
in Plant Science, 10, 71–78.

Eulgem, T., Rushton, P. J., Schmelzer, E., 

Hahlbrock, K., & Somssich, I. E. (1999). 
Early nuclear events in plant defence 
signalling: Rapid gene activation by WRKY 
transcription factors. EMBO Journal, 18, 
4689–4699.

Fitzgerald, H. A., Chern, M. S., Navarre, R., 

& Ronald, P. C. (2004). Overexpression 
of (At)NPR1 in rice leads to a BTH- and 
environment-induced lesion-mimic/cell 
death phenotype. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 17, 140–151.

Fradin, E. F., Zhang, Z., Juarez Ayala, J. C., 

Castroverde, C. D., Nazar, R. N., & Robb, 
J., et al. (2009). Genetic dissection of 
Verticillium wilt resistance mediated by 
tomato Ve1. Plant Physiology, 150, 320–
332.

Friedrich, L., Lawton, K., Dietrich, R., Willits, 

M., Cade, R., & Ryals, J. (2001). NIM1 
overexpression in Arabidopsis potentiates 
plant disease resistance and results in 
enhanced effectiveness of fungicides. 
Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions, 14, 
1114–1124.

Gage, M. J., Bruenn, J., Fischer, M., Sanders, 

D., & Smith, T. J. (2001). KP4 fungal 
toxin inhibits growth in Ustilago maydis 
by blocking calcium uptake. Molecular 
Microbiology, 41, 775–785.

Gfeller, A., Dubugnon, L., Liechti, R., & 

Farmer, E. E. (2010). Jasmonate biochemical 
pathway. Science Signaling, 3, cm3.

Gijzen, M., & Nurnberger, T. (2006). Nep1-like 
proteins from plant pathogens: Recruitment 
and diversification of the NPP1 domain 
across taxa. Phytochemistry, 67, 1800–1807.
Glazebrook, J. (2005). Contrasting mechanisms 

of defense against biotrophic and 
necrotrophic pathogens. Annual Review of 
Phytopathology, 43, 205–227.

Godoy, G., Steadman, J. R., Dickman, M. 
B., & Dam, R. (1990). Use of mutants 
to demonstrate the role of oxalic acid in 
pathogenicity of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 
on Phaseolus vulgaris. Physiological and 
Molecular Plant Pathology, 37, 179–191.

Gomez-Ariza, J., Campo, S., Rufat, M.,  

Estopa, M., Messeguer, J., & San Segundo, B.,  

340

et al. (2007). Sucrose-mediated priming of 
plant defense responses and broad-spectrum 
disease resistance by overexpression of the 
maize pathogenesis-related PRms protein 
in rice plants. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 20, 832–842.

Gomez-Gomez, L., & Boller, T. (2002). 

Flagellin perception: A paradigm for innate 
immunity. Trends in Plant Science, 7, 
251–256.

Greenberg, J. T., & Yao, N. (2004). The role 
and regulation of programmed cell death 
in plant-pathogen interactions. Cellular 
Microbiology, 6, 201–211.

Gurr, S. J., & Rushton, P. J. (2005). Engineering 

plants with increased disease resistance: 
How are we going to express it? Trends in 
Biotechnology, 23, 283–290.

Gurr, S. J., & Rushton, P. J. (2005). Engineering 

plants with increased disease resistance: 
What are we going to express? Trends in 
Biotechnology, 23, 275–282.

Gust, A. A., Brunner, F. and Nurnberger, 

T. (2010) Biotechnological concepts for 
improving plant innate immunity. Current 
Opinion in Biotechnology, 21, 204–210.

Gutterson, N., & Reuber, T. L. (2004). 

Regulation of disease resistance pathways 
by AP2/ERF transcription factors. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 7, 465–471.

Hain, R., Reif, H. J., Krause, E., Langebartels, 
R., Kindl, H., & Vornam, B., et al. (1993). 
Disease resistance results from foreign 
phytoalexin expression in a novel plant. 
Nature, 361, 153–156.

Hammami, R., Ben Hamida, J., Vergoten, G., 

& Fliss, I. (2009). PhytAMP: A database 
dedicated to antimicrobial plant peptides. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 37, D963–D968.

Heise, A., Lippok, B., Kirsch, C., & Hahlbrock, 

K. (2002). Two immediate-early pathogen-
responsive members of the AtCMPG gene 
family in Arabidopsis thaliana and the 
W-box-containing elicitor-response element 
of AtCMPG1. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 99, 9049–9054.

Himmelbach, A., Liu, L., Zierold, U., 

Altschmied, L., Maucher, H., & Beier, 
F., et al. (2010). Promoters of the barley 
germin-like GER4 gene cluster enable strong 
transgene expression in response to pathogen 
attack. Plant Cell, 22, 937–952.

Hittalmani, S., Parco, A., Mew, T. V., Zeigler, 
R. S., & Huang, N. (2000). Fine mapping 
and DNA marker-assisted pyramiding of 
the three major genes for blast resistance in 
rice. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 100, 
1121–1128.

Hu, H., Xiong, L., & Yang, Y. (2005). Rice 

SERK1 gene positively regulates somatic 
embryogenesis of cultured cell and host 
defense response against fungal infection. 
Planta, 222, 107–117.

Huffaker, A., Pearce, G., & Ryan, C. A. (2006). 
An endogenous peptide signal in Arabidopsis 
activates components of the innate immune 
response. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 103, 10098–10103.

Jang, Y. S., Sohn, S. I., & Wang, M. H. (2006). 

The hrpN gene of Erwinia amylovora 
stimulates tobacco growth and enhances 

resistance to Botrytis cinerea. Planta, 223, 
449–456.

Jayaraj, J., & Punja, Z. K. (2007). Combined 
expression of chitinase and lipid transfer 
protein genes in transgenic carrot plants 
enhances resistance to foliar fungal 
pathogens. Plant Cell Reports, 26, 1539–
1546.

Jones, J. D., & Dangl, J. L. (2006). The plant 

immune system. Nature, 444, 323–329.
Kawchuk, L. M., Hachey, J., Lynch, D. R., 
Kulcsar, F., van Rooijen, G., & Waterer, 
D. R., et al. (2001). Tomato Ve disease 
resistance genes encode cell surface-like 
receptors. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 98, 6511–6515.

Kearney, B., & Staskawicz, B. J. (1990). 
Widespread distribution and fitness 
contribution of Xanthomonas campestris 
avirulence gene avrBs2. Nature, 346, 
385–386.

Keller, H., Pamboukdjian, N., Ponchet, M., 

Poupet, A., Delon, R., & Verrier, J. L., 
et al. (1999). Pathogen-induced elicitin 
production in transgenic tobacco generates 
a hypersensitive response and nonspecific 
disease resistance. Plant Cell, 11, 223–235.

Kesarwani, M., Azam, M., Natarajan, K., 

Mehta, A., & Datta, A. (2000). Oxalate 
decarboxylase from Collybia velutipes. 
Molecular cloning and its overexpression 
to confer resistance to fungal infection in 
transgenic tobacco and tomato. Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, 275, 7230–7238.

Kirsch, C., Logemann, E., Lippok, B., 

Schmelzer, E., & Hahlbrock, K. (2001). 
A highly specific pathogen-responsive 
promoter element from the immediate-early 
activated CMPG1 gene in Petroselinum 
crispum. Plant Journal, 26, 217–227.

Kliebenstein, D. J., & Rowe, H. C. (2009). 

Plant science. Anti-rust antitrust. Science, 
323, 1301–1302.

Koo, J. C., Chun, H. J., Park, H. C., Kim, M. 
C., Koo, Y. D., & Koo, S. C., et al. (2002). 
Over-expression of a seed specific hevein-
like antimicrobial peptide from Pharbitis nil 
enhances resistance to a fungal pathogen in 
transgenic tobacco plants. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 50, 441–452.

Kovalchuk, N., Li, M., Wittek, F., Reid, N., 

Singh, R., & Shirley, N., et al. (2010). 
Defensin promoters as potential tools for 
engineering disease resistance in cereal 
grains. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 8, 
47–64.

Kunze, G., Zipfel, C., Robatzek, S., Niehaus, 

K., Boller, T., & Felix, G. (2004). The N 
terminus of bacterial elongation factor 
Tu elicits innate immunity in Arabidopsis 
plants. Plant Cell, 16, 3496–3507.

Lacombe, S., Rougon-Cardoso, A., Sherwood, 
E., Peeters, N., Dahlbeck, D., & van Esse, 
H. P., et al. (2010). Interfamily transfer of 
a plant pattern-recognition receptor confers 
broad-spectrum bacterial resistance. Nature 
Biotechnology, 28, 365–369.

Lee, S. C., Hwang, I. S., Choi, H. W., & 

Hwang, B. K. (2008). Involvement of the 
pepper antimicrobial protein CaAMP1 gene 
in broad spectrum disease resistance. Plant 
Physiology, 148, 1004–1020.

Resistance to fungal and bacterial pathogens

C H A P T E R   2 1

Lee, S. W., Han, S. W., Sririyanum, M., Park, 
C. J., Seo, Y. S., & Ronald, P. C. (2009). A 
type I-secreted, sulfated peptide triggers 
XA21-mediated innate immunity. Science, 
326, 850–853.

Lin, Y. Z., Chen, H. Y., Kao, R., Chang, S. P., 

Chang, S. J., & Lai, E. M. (2008). Proteomic 
analysis of rice defense response induced by 
probenazole. Phytochemistry, 69, 715–728.

Liu, J. J., Ekramoddoullah, A. K., Piggott, N., & 

Zamani, A. (2005). Molecular cloning of a 
pathogen/wound-inducible PR10 promoter 
from Pinus monticola and characterization in 
transgenic Arabidopsis plants. Planta, 221, 
159–169.

Lorito, M., Woo, S. L., Garcia, I., Colucci, G., 

Harman, G. E., & Pintor-Toro, J. A., et al. 
(1998). Genes from mycoparasitic fungi 
as a source for improving plant resistance 
to fungal pathogens. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 95, 7860–7865.

Malnoy, M., Reynoird, J. P., Borejsza-Wysocka, 

E. E., & Aldwinckle, H. S. (2006). 
Activation of the pathogen-inducible Gst1 
promoter of potato after elicitation by 
Venturia inaequalis and Erwinia amylovora 
in transgenic apple (Malus x domestica). 
Transgenic Research, 15, 83–93.

Manners, J. M. (2007). Hidden weapons of 
microbial destruction in plant genomes. 
Genome Biology, 8, 225.

Manosalva, P. M., Davidson, R. M., Liu, B., 

Zhu, X., Hulbert, S. H., & Leung, H., et al. 
(2009). A germin-like protein gene family 
functions as a complex quantitative trait 
locus conferring broad-spectrum disease 
resistance in rice. Plant Physiology, 149, 
286–296.

Martini, N., Egen, M., Runtz, I., & Strittmatter, 

G. (1993). Promoter sequences of a 
potato pathogenesis-related gene mediate 
transcriptional activation selectively upon 
fungal infection. Molecular & General 
Genetics, 236, 179–186.

McDowell, J. M., & Woffenden, B. J. (2003). 

Plant disease resistance genes: Recent 
insights and potential applications. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 21, 178–183.

Mei, C., Qi, M., Sheng, G., & Yang, Y. 

(2006). Inducible overexpression of a 
rice allene oxide synthase gene increases 
the endogenous jasmonic acid level, PR 
gene expression, and host resistance to 
fungal infection. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 19, 1127–1137.

Michelmore, R. W. (2003). The impact zone: 
Genomics and breeding for durable disease 
resistance. Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 
6, 397–404.

Midoh, N., & Iwata, M. (1996). Cloning and 

characterization of a probenazole-inducible 
gene for an intracellular pathogenesis-related 
protein in rice. Plant and Cell Physiology, 
37, 9–18.

Montesinos, E. (2007). Antimicrobial 

peptides and plant disease control. FEMS 
Microbiology Letters, 270, 1–11.

Moreno, A. B., Penas, G., Rufat, M., Bravo, 
J. M., Estopa, M., & Messeguer, J., et al. 
(2005). Pathogen-induced production of 
the antifungal AFP protein from Aspergillus 
giganteus confers resistance to the blast 

fungus Magnaporthe grisea in transgenic 
rice. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions, 
18, 960–972.

Moschou, P. N., Sarris, P. F., Skandalis, N., 

Andriopoulou, A. H., Paschalidis, K. A., & 
Panopoulos, N. J., et al. (2009). Engineered 
polyamine catabolism preinduces tolerance 
of tobacco to bacteria and oomycetes. Plant 
Physiology, 149, 1970–1981.

Moscou, M. J., & Bogdanove, A. J. (2009). A 
simple cipher governs DNA recognition by 
TAL effectors. Science, 326, 1501.

Oldroyd, G. E., & Staskawicz, B. J. (1998). 
Genetically engineered broad-spectrum 
disease resistance in tomato. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 95, 10300–10305.

Palm, C. J., Costa, M. A., An, G., & Ryan, 
C. A. (1990). Wound-inducible nuclear 
protein binds DNA fragments that regulate 
a proteinase inhibitor II gene from potato. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 87, 
603–607.

Pandey, S. P., & Somssich, I. E. (2009). The 

role of WRKY transcription factors in 
plant immunity. Plant Physiology, 150, 
1648–1655.

Park, C. M., Bruenn, J. A., Ganesa, C., Flurkey, 

W. F., Bozarth, R. F., & Koltin, Y. (1994). 
Structure and heterologous expression of the 
Ustilago maydis viral toxin KP4. Molecular 
Microbiology, 11, 155–164.

Parlevliet, J. (2002). Durability of resistance 

against fungal, bacterial and viral pathogens; 
present situation. Euphytica, 124, 147–156.

Pavan, S., Jacobsen, E., Visser, R. G., & Bai, 

Y. (2010). Loss of susceptibility as a novel 
breeding strategy for durable and broad-
spectrum resistance. Molecular Breeding, 
25, 1–12.

Pedley, K. F., & Martin, G. B. (2005). Role of 
mitogen-activated protein kinases in plant 
immunity. Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 
8, 541–547.

Peng, J. L., Bao, Z. L., Ren, H. Y., Wang, J. 
S., & Dong, H. S. (2004). Expression of 
harpin(xoo) in transgenic tobacco induces 
pathogen defense in the absence of 
hypersensitive cell death. Phytopathology, 
94, 1048–1055.

Peschen, D., Li, H. P., Fischer, R., Kreuzaler, 
F., & Liao, Y. C. (2004). Fusion proteins 
comprising a Fusarium-specific antibody 
linked to antifungal peptides protect 
plants against a fungal pathogen. Nature 
Biotechnology, 22, 732–738.

Petersen, M., Brodersen, P., Naested, H., 

Andreasson, E., Lindhart, U., & Johansen, 
B., et al. (2000). Arabidopsis map kinase 
4 negatively regulates systemic acquired 
resistance. Cell, 103, 1111–1120.

Pieterse, C. M., Leon-Reyes, A., Van der Ent, 
S., & Van Wees, S. C. (2009). Networking 
by small-molecule hormones in plant 
immunity. Nature Chemical Biology, 5, 
308–316.

Piffanelli, P., Ramsay, L., Waugh, R., 

Benabdelmouna, A., D'Hont, A., & 
Hollricher, K., et al. (2004). A barley 
cultivation-associated polymorphism conveys 
resistance to powdery mildew. Nature, 430, 
887–891.

Poland, J. A., Balint-Kurti, P. J., Wisser, R. J., 

Pratt, R. C., & Nelson, R. J. (2009). Shades 
of gray: The world of quantitative disease 
resistance. Trends in Plant Science, 14, 
21–29.

Pontier, D., Balague, C., Bezombes-Marion, 

I., Tronchet, M., Deslandes, L., & Roby, D. 
(2001). Identification of a novel pathogen-
responsive element in the promoter of 
the tobacco gene HSR203J, a molecular 
marker of the hypersensitive response. Plant 
Journal, 26, 495–507.

Pontier, D., Godiard, L., Marco, Y., & Roby, 

D. (1994). hsr203J, a tobacco gene whose 
activation is rapid, highly localized and 
specific for incompatible plant/pathogen 
interactions. Plant Journal, 5, 507–521.

Punja, Z. K., & Utkhede, R. S. (2003). Using 
fungi and yeasts to manage vegetable crop 
diseases. Trends in Biotechnology, 21, 
400–407.

Ricci, P., Bonnet, P., Huet, J. C., Sallantin, M., 
Beauvais-Cante, F., & Bruneteau, M., et al. 
(1989). Structure and activity of proteins 
from pathogenic fungi Phytophthora eliciting 
necrosis and acquired resistance in tobacco. 
European Journal of Biochemistry, 183, 
555–563.

Romer, P., Recht, S., & Lahaye, T. (2009). 
A single plant resistance gene promoter 
engineered to recognize multiple TAL 
effectors from disparate pathogens. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
106, 20526–20531.

Rommens, C. M., & Kishore, G. M. (2000). 

Exploiting the full potential of disease-
resistance genes for agricultural use. Current 
Opinion in Biotechnology, 11, 120–125.

Rossi, L. M., Rangasamy, P., Zhang, J., Qiu, X. 
Q., & Wu, G. Y. (2008). Research advances 
in the development of peptide antibiotics. 
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 97, 
1060–1070.

Rushton, P. J., Reinstadler, A., Lipka, V., Lippok, 
B., & Somssich, I. E. (2002). Synthetic plant 
promoters containing defined regulatory 
elements provide novel insights into 
pathogen- and wound-induced signaling. 
Plant Cell, 14, 749–762.

Rushton, P. J., & Somssich, I. E. (1998). 
Transcriptional control of plant genes 
responsive to pathogens. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology, 1, 311–315.

Rushton, P. J., Torres, J. T., Parniske, M., 

Wernert, P., Hahlbrock, K., & Somssich, I. E.  
(1996). Interaction of elicitor-induced 
DNA-binding proteins with elicitor response 
elements in the promoters of parsley PR1 
genes. EMBO Journal, 15, 5690–5700.

Salmeron, J. M., Oldroyd, G. E., Rommens, C. 

M., Scofield, S. R., Kim, H. S., & Lavelle, 
D. T., et al. (1996). Tomato Prf is a member 
of the leucine-rich repeat class of plant 
disease resistance genes and lies embedded 
within the Pto kinase gene cluster. Cell, 86, 
123–133.

Schlaich, T., Urbaniak, B. M., Malgras, N., 
Ehler, E., Birrer, C., & Meier, L., et al. 
(2006). Increased field resistance to Tilletia 
caries provided by a specific antifungal virus 
gene in genetically engineered wheat. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 4, 63–75.

341

S E C T I O N   D

Controlling plant response to the environment: Abiotic and biotic stress

Segura, A., Moreno, M., Madueno, F., Molina, 
A., & Garcia-Olmedo, F. (1999). Snakin-1, 
a peptide from potato that is active against 
plant pathogens. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 12, 16–23.

Senthilkumar, R., Cheng, C. P., & Yeh, K. W. 
(2010). Genetically pyramiding protease-
inhibitor genes for dual broad-spectrum 
resistance against insect and phytopathogens 
in transgenic tobacco. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 8, 65–75.

Shah, J. (2009). Plants under attack: Systemic 
signals in defence. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 12, 459–464.

Shao, M., Wang, J., Dean, R. A., Lin, Y., 

Gao, X., & Hu, S. (2008). Expression of a 
harpin-encoding gene in rice confers durable 
nonspecific resistance to Magnaporthe 
grisea. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 6, 
73–81.

Shin, R., Park, J. M., An, J. M., & Paek, K. 
H. (2002). Ectopic expression of Tsi1 in 
transgenic hot pepper plants enhances host 
resistance to viral, bacterial, and oomycete 
pathogens. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 15, 983–989.

Shin, S., Mackintosh, C. A., Lewis, J., Heinen, 

S. J., Radmer, L., & Dill-Macky, R., et al. 
(2008). Transgenic wheat expressing a 
barley class II chitinase gene has enhanced 
resistance against Fusarium graminearum. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 59, 2371–
2378.

Singh, S., Sidhu, J. S., Huang, N., Vikal, Y., Li, 
Z., & Brar, D. S., et al. (2001). Pyramiding 
three bacterial blight resistance genes (xa5, 
xa13 and Xa21) using marker-assisted 
selection into indica rice cultivar PR106. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 102, 
1011–1015.

Sohn, S. I., Kim, Y. H., Kim, B. R., Lee, S. 

Y., Lim, C. K., & Hur, J. H., et al. (2007). 
Transgenic tobacco expressing the hrpN(EP) 
gene from Erwinia pyrifoliae triggers 
defense responses against Botrytis cinerea. 
Molecules and Cells, 24, 232–239.

Swords, K. M., Dahlbeck, D., Kearney, B., Roy, 
M., & Staskawicz, B. J. (1996). Spontaneous 
and induced mutations in a single open 
reading frame alter both virulence and 
avirulence in Xanthomonas campestris pv. 
vesicatoria avrBs2. Journal of Bacteriology, 
178, 4661–4669.

Tai, T. H., Dahlbeck, D., Clark, E. T., Gajiwala, 

P., Pasion, R., & Whalen, M. C., et al. 

(1999). Expression of the Bs2 pepper gene 
confers resistance to bacterial spot disease 
in tomato. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 96, 14153–14158.

Takakura, Y., Che, F. S., Ishida, Y., Tsutsumi, 

F., Kurotani, K., & Usami, S., et al. (2008). 
Expression of a bacterial flagellin gene 
triggers plant immune responses and confers 
disease resistance in transgenic rice plants. 
Molecular Plant Pathology, 9, 525–529.

Tang, X., Xie, M., Kim, Y. J., Zhou, J., 

Klessig, D. F., & Martin, G. B. (1999). 
Overexpression of Pto activates defense 
responses and confers broad resistance. Plant 
Cell, 11, 15–29.

Tao, Y., Yuan, F., Leister, R. T., Ausubel, F. M., 

& Katagiri, F. (2000). Mutational analysis 
of the Arabidopsis nucleotide binding site-
leucine-rich repeat resistance gene RPS2. 
Plant Cell, 12, 2541–2554.

Vailleau, F., Daniel, X., Tronchet, M., Montillet, 
J. L., Triantaphylides, C., & Roby, D. (2002). 
A R2R3-MYB gene, AtMYB30, acts as a 
positive regulator of the hypersensitive 
cell death program in plants in response to 
pathogen attack. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 99, 10179–10184.

van der Biezen, E. A. (2001). Quest for 

antimicrobial genes to engineer disease-
resistant crops. Trends in Plant Science, 6, 
89–91.

Wally, O., Jayaraj, J., & Punja, Z. K. (2009). 

Broad-spectrum disease resistance to 
necrotrophic and biotrophic pathogens 
in transgenic carrots (Daucus carota L.) 
expressing an Arabidopsis NPR1 gene. 
Planta, 231, 131–141.

Wang, G. L., Song, W. Y., Ruan, D. L., Sideris, 

S., & Ronald, P. C. (1996). The cloned 
gene, Xa21, confers resistance to multiple 
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae isolates in 
transgenic plants. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 9, 850–855.

Wang, W., Devoto, A., Turner, J. G., & Xiao, 
S. (2007). Expression of the membrane-
associated resistance protein RPW8 
enhances basal defense against biotrophic 
pathogens. Molecular Plant-Microbe 
Interactions, 20, 966–976.

White, F. F., Potnis, N., Jones, J. B., & Koebnik, 

R. (2009). The type III effectors of 
Xanthomonas. Molecular Plant Pathology, 
10, 749–766.

Wijayanto, T., Barker, S. J., Wylie, S. J., 

Gilchrist, D. G., & Cowling, W. A. (2009). 
Significant reduction of fungal disease 
symptoms in transgenic lupin (Lupinus 
angustifolius) expressing the anti-apoptotic 
baculovirus gene p35. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 7, 778–790.

Wise, R. P., Moscou, M. J., Bogdanove, A. J., & 
Whitham, S. A. (2007). Transcript profiling 
in host-pathogen interactions. Annual 
Review of Phytopathology, 45, 329–369.

Xiao, S., Ellwood, S., Findlay, K., Oliver, R. P., 

& Turner, J. G. (1997). Characterization 
of three loci controlling resistance of 
Arabidopsis thaliana accession Ms-0 to two 
powdery mildew diseases. Plant Journal, 12, 
757–768.

Yamamizo, C., Kuchimura, K., Kobayashi, A., 

Katou, S., Kawakita, K., & Jones, J. D., et al. 
(2006). Rewiring mitogen-activated protein 
kinase cascade by positive feedback confers 
potato blight resistance. Plant Physiology, 
140, 681–692.

Yang, Y., Zhang, H., Li, G., Li, W., Wang, X., 
& Song, F. (2009). Ectopic expression of 
MgSM1, a Cerato-platanin family protein 
from Magnaporthe grisea, confers broad-
spectrum disease resistance in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 7, 763–777.
Yevtushenko, D. P., Romero, R., Forward, B. 
S., Hancock, R. E., Kay, W. W., & Misra, 
S. (2005). Pathogen-induced expression 
of a cecropin A-melittin antimicrobial 
peptide gene confers antifungal resistance in 
transgenic tobacco. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 56, 1685–1695.

Zhang, Y., Fan, W., Kinkema, M., Li, X., & 

Dong, X. (1999). Interaction of NPR1 with 
basic leucine zipper protein transcription 
factors that bind sequences required for 
salicylic acid induction of the PR-1 gene. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 96, 
6523–6528.

Zipfel, C. (2009). Early molecular events in 

PAMP-triggered immunity. Current Opinion 
in Plant Biology, 12, 414–420.

Zipfel, C., Kunze, G., Chinchilla, D., Caniard, 
A., Jones, J. D., & Boller, T., et al. (2006). 
Perception of the bacterial PAMP EF-Tu by 
the receptor EFR restricts Agrobacterium-
mediated transformation. Cell, 125, 
749–760.

342

Plants as factories for bioplastics and 
other novel biomaterials

30

Jan B. van Beilen Yves Poirier
Département de Biologie Moléculaire Végétale, Université de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 481
Major Natural Plant Biopolymers  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 482
Starch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .482
Cellulose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .482
Rubber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .483
Proteins  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .485
Novel Polymers Produced in Transgenic Plants  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 485

A role for transgenic crops in  
the production of biopolymers? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .485
Which biopolymers should be  
targeted for production in transgenic crops? . . . . . . . .486
Which crops should be targeted?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .487
Fibrous proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .487
Cyanophycin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .488
Polyhydroxyalkanoate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .489
Conclusion and Prospects  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 491

Introduction

Well into the nineteenth century, biomass was a main source 
of  materials  and  energy  in  most  countries.  The  rapid  devel-
opment  of  petrochemistry  in  the  twentieth  century  led  to  a 
shift from biomass to fossil carbon (coal, oil, gas) as the major 
source  of  fuels  as  well  as  of  building  blocks  for  the  genera-
tion of a wide variety of chemicals and materials. The world-
wide share of biomass in energy production is around 10% and 
biomass still plays a significant role in some OECD countries, 
such  as  Sweden  and  Austria.  However,  fossil  carbon  is  cur-
rently the dominant source of both energy and the materials 
on which our society depend.

Climate  change  and  resource  constraints  now  force  us  to 
reconsider  the  use  of  plant  biomass  as  a  source  of  materials 
and  fuels.  However,  it  is  well  known  that  prior  to  the  nine-
teenth  century,  overuse  of  biomass  led  to  deforestation,  soil 

degeneration,  and  desertification.  In  the  early  twenty-first 
century,  the  world  fed,  clothed,  and  sheltered  almost  7  bil-
lion  people  instead  of  the  1  billion  population  at  the  start 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  while  increased  wealth,  changed 
habits,  and  excessive  consumption  drastically  increased  the 
per  capita  use  of  energy  and  materials.  At  the  same  time, 
increasing  droughts  and  changes  in  weather  patterns  linked 
to  climate  change  have  reversed  the  decades-long  trend  of 
increased global plant growth, according to a new analysis of 
NASA satellite data (Zhao and Running, 2010); ocean acidifi-
cation threatens to destroy marine ecosystems providing food, 
feed, and materials (Fabry et al., 2008); global biodiversity is 
collapsing (Ehrlich and Pringle, 2008); and human appropria-
tion of net primary production (fraction of the net amount of 
solar energy converted to plant organic matter through photo-
synthesis, used or lost by human activity, HANPP) may have 
already reached 50% (Erb et al., 2009). The inescapable con-
clusion is that biomass is a limited resource that should be put 
to the best (and most efficient) use possible.

Since  mankind  now  depends  on  fossil  fuels  for  80–90% 
of  its  energy  demands  and  the  present  level  of  biomass  use 
is  already  critically  high,  biomass  cannot  provide  more  than 
a  few  percent  of  present  fuel  consumption,  especially  if  the 
greenhouse gas balance and other unwanted side effects (soil 
degradation, water use, eutrophication, loss of nature, loss of 
jobs) are taken into account. It is evident that bioenergy will 
not be a major solution to our energy and climate change pre-
dicament; energy (carriers) for transport and heating will have 
to come from other, non-biological, sources.

The  story  is  different  for  carbon-based  materials,  because 
most  major  polymers  and  chemicals  depend  on  a  source  of 
carbon.  If  fossil  fuels  are  no  longer  available,  affordable,  or 
their  use  politically  acceptable,  the  chemical  industry  must 
become based on heterogeneous biomass sources (agricultural 
and forestry waste) or well-defined biomass fractions (sugars, 
starch, cellulose, vegetable oils, etc.). The first option is com-
plicated by the necessity to maintain soil carbon content and 
fertility, while the latter competes with the food market as it 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00030-4

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

is based on existing crops. A completely different scenario is 
based on the assumption that there will be sufficient oil avail-
able for chemicals and polymers if it is no longer squandered 
as  fuel.  Ultimately,  the  question  is  one  of  deciding  between 
scenarios, and life cycle analysis is essential in deciding what 
works best.

Several  recent  reviews  have  focused  on  the  specific  prod-
ucts  (chemicals,  polymers,  bioactives)  that  are  produced  in 
plants (van Beilen, 2008; Sharma and Sharma, 2009; Bornke 
and  Broer,  2010).  This  chapter  focuses  on  the  biopolymers. 
The first section covers major biopolymers based on naturally 
produced plant polymers that are applied widely in industry. 
The second section discusses efforts to produce new polymers 
in  transgenic  plants,  discussing  their  promise  and  potential 
shortcomings. The multitude of minor plant and algal biopoly-
mers is not discussed here.

Major Natural Plant Biopolymers

The following sections discuss natural plant biopolymers that 
are used on a large scale in industry for material application. 
Major  plant  polymers  that  are  mainly  used  for  energy  (e.g., 
lignin,  hemicellulose),  in  food  applications  (e.g.,  inulin,  pec-
tin),  or  in  their  original  state  (e.g.,  suberin  in  cork)  are  not 
discussed.

Starch

Starch  is  a  ubiquitous  and  abundant  biological  energy  stor-
age  polymer  that  is  used  on  a  very  large  scale  in  feed,  food, 
fuel, and materials. Eighty percent of the calories in our diet 
come  from  starch;  it  is  the  second  major  agricultural  com-
modity after cellulose, and it is the least expensive processed 
food commodity at around $0.5/kg. Non-food applications of 
starch already amounted to 3.6 million tons per year or about 
13% of the total starch market in the EU15 (van Beilen and 
Poirier,  2007a).  Accordingly,  biosynthesis,  genetics,  proper-
ties, and applications of starch are well characterized.

Starch can be converted to a thermoplastic, and currently 
about 50,000 tons/year of starch is converted to plastic mate-
rials by a range of small and large companies worldwide (van 
Beilen and Poirier, 2007a). Most of this bioplastic is marketed 
as biodegradable, and it is used for packaging films and foams 
and  for  disposables  such  as  cups  and  plates,  plant  pots,  and 
bags. The growth potential of this market is high, with stud-
ies referring to future market sizes in the range of 1,000,000 
tons/year  (Crank  et  al.,  2004).  However,  polymers  made 
primarily  of  starch  have  relatively  poor  physical  properties 
that  can  be  improved  by  the  addition  of  various  plasticizers 
and copolymers, but there are still major limitations. Starch-
based  polymers  typically  have  low  resistance  to  stress,  are 
sensitive  to  moisture,  and  the  glucoside  links  start  to  break 
at  temperatures  higher  than  150°C.  Fortunately,  the  multi-
ple    OH  groups  of  the  starch  molecule  are  susceptible  to 
substitution  reactions,  for  example,  with  acetate,  producing 
a  more  hydrophobic  polymer  retaining  its  tensile  properties 
in aqueous environments, or with silane, which improves dis-
persion in polyethylene. Thermoplastic starch can be blended 

with polycaprolactone or coated with a water barrier (Bastioli, 
2005)  to  produce  more  water-resistant  materials.  Blending 
with fibers such as cellulose, or fillers such as lignin and clay, 
yields  nano-  or  biocomposites,  which  may  have  markedly 
improved  mechanical  properties,  better  thermal  resistance, 
reduced  water  sensitivity,  and  better  post-processing  aging 
(Averous and Halley, 2009).

Because  the  native  starches  of  many  crops  do  not  have 
ideal  properties  for  specific  food  and  non-food  applications, 
efforts  to  create  transgenic  crops  with  altered  starches  or 
starch  metabolism  are  ongoing  (Jobling,  2004).  Yet,  as  the 
authors  of  a  recent  review  stated:  “despite  this  remarkable 
progress and the obvious economic importance, very little has 
been  achieved  in  terms  of  adding  value  to  starch  or  increas-
ing  starch  yield,  particularly  in  cereal  crops”  (Keeling  and 
Myers, 2010). Many plants have been bred and engineered for 
altered starch composition, resulting in high- and low-amylose 
starches,  amylose-free  amylopectin  (waxy  crops),  long  chain 
amylopectin  starch,  highly  branched  amylopectin,  and  phos-
phorylated  amylopectin.  Although  most  of  the  research  on 
the in planta modification of starch was carried out with food 
applications  in  mind,  some  of  these  modified  starches  have 
new  and  potentially  useful  properties  helping  their  applica-
tions  as  thermoplastic  starches  (Averous  and  Halley,  2009). 
However, the altered starches also still need further chemical 
or physical treatments for optimal functionality.

Two  major  reasons  for  a  lack  of  progress  are  the  great 
number  of  (starch  biosynthesis)  enzyme  variants  that  can  be 
generated,  and  the  lack  of  understanding  of  the  relationship 
between a given starch structure and its physiochemical prop-
erties.  To  test  the  properties  of  starch,  significant  quantities 
are necessary, which is costly for large numbers of genotypes 
(Zeeman et al., 2010). Furthermore, there are potential del-
eterious  consequences  of  starch  modifications  on  the  plant’s 
physiology.  For  example,  starch  granule  structure  is  likely 
to  be  affected  by  the  extensive  modifications,  which  in  turn 
will affect the amount of starch produced by the plant. Seed 
germination and other agronomic properties of the crop may 
be  affected.  On  another  level,  starch  mutants  produced  by 
genetic  engineering  were  deemed  too  problematic  due  to  a 
lack  of  public  acceptance  and  regulatory  hurdles,  especially 
in  Europe.  For  example,  only  after  waiting  for  13  years,  the 
European Commission finally approved AMFLORA of BASF, 
a  transgenic  potato  producing  a  pure  amylopectin  starch. 
Thus,  companies  such  as  AVEBE  have  gone  to  great  lengths 
to reproduce the desired mutations in the amylopectin potato 
by classical breeding, resulting in the non-genetically-modified 
amylopectin  potato  ELIANE  (www.avebe.com).  At  least  in 
Europe, other transgenic plants face similar hurdles.

Cellulose

In  its  unmodified  form,  cellulose  is  the  dominant  compo-
nent  of  many  major  agricultural  and  forestry  commodities, 
such  as  timber,  paper,  board,  cotton,  linen,  and  many  other 
fiber products. Purified cellulose is produced mainly from the 
bleached wood pulp resulting from the sulfite or Kraft proc-
ess,  which  removes  most  of  the  associated  hemicellulose, 

482

Plants as factories for bioplastics and other novel biomaterials

C H A P T E R   3 0

lignin,  pectin,  and  other  compounds.  Cellulose  as  isolated 
cannot  be  used  for  plastics,  because  it  is  crystalline,  has  a 
stiff rod-like conformation, and the individual chains are too 
tightly  connected  by  hydrogen  bonds.  Unmodified,  cellu-
lose  fibers  are  used  as  a  reinforcing  agent  in  biocomposites, 
improving  tensile  and  flexural  modus  (Averous  and  Halley, 
2009).

Various  chemical  modifications  or  treatments  have  ena-
bled a wide range of major applications for cellulose (Mooney, 
2009). Nitrocellulose combined with camphor and other com-
ponents  yielded  the  first  thermoplastic,  known  as  Parkesine 
and  Celluloid,  which  was  used  as  an  ivory  replacement. 
Because  of  its  flammability  and  easy  decomposition,  only 
minor  applications  such  as  guitar  picks  and  table  tennis  balls 
survived.  Cellophane  is  made  of  restructured  cellulose  pro-
duced by dissolving it in base and carbon disulfide (the solu-
tion is known as viscose), extruding through a slit into dilute 
sulfuric  acid  and  sodium  sulfate,  washing,  and  then  adding 
glycerol. The resulting film is still widely used for food pack-
aging.  Extruding  through  a  spinneret  (small  hole)  produces 
rayon  fibers.  Lyocell  or  Tencel  is  a  similar  material  produced 
using  a  more  environmentally  friendly  process,  in  which  the 
wood  pulp  is  dissolved  in  N-methylmorpholine  N-oxide, 
which  is  recovered  after  spinning  the  fibers.  However,  the 
process  still  consumes  solvents  and  is  energy  intensive. 
Cellulose-acetate,  resulting  from  a  treatment  of  purified  cel-
lulose with glacial acetic acid, is used in frames for eyeglasses, 
adhesives,  photography  film,  and  many  other  applications 
amounting  to  about  750,000  tons/year.  Other  derivatives 
are  carboxymethyl  cellulose  (CMC),  methyl  cellulose  (MC), 
hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC), and hydroxyethyl cellulose.

Most  of  the  bulk  applications  of  cellulose  have  not  sur-
vived  the  advent  of  oil-based  alternatives,  often  because  of 
the high cost of purified cellulose and the chemical or physi-
cal modification processes. The high cost of cellulose is due to 
the processing methods; it is difficult and costs a lot of energy 
to  separate  cellulose  fibers  from  lignin,  hemicellulose,  and 
other  compounds  present  in  the  woodchips  used.  A  century 
of research and industrial developments has brought improve-
ments, but has not solved these issues.

Rubber

Natural  rubber  (hereafter  simply  referred  to  as  rubber,  in 
contrast  to  synthetic  rubber)  is  a  remarkable  polymer  con-
sisting of isoprene units linked together in a 1,4-cis configura-
tion. Although rubber is produced in over 2500 plant species, 
commercial  rubber  is  currently  almost  exclusively  harvested 
from  one  biological  source,  the  Brazilian  Para  rubber  tree 
(Hevea  brasiliensis).  Nearly  90%  of  all  rubber  is  harvested 
in  Southeast  Asia,  and  the  major  producer  countries  include 
Indonesia,  Thailand,  and  Malaysia.  Rubber  is  used  at  nearly 
107  tons/year,  or  about  1.5  times  more  than  the  production 
of synthetic rubber, despite its labor-intensive production, by 
manually tapping the latex from the rubber trees. This occurs 
because of the superior properties of natural rubber: efficient 
heat  dispersion,  superior  resilience,  elasticity,  resealing  after 
puncture,  abrasion  and  impact  resistance,  and  malleability  at  

cold temperatures, properties that are a function of its enan-
tiopure  structure,  high  molecular  weight,  and  additional  —  
although  rather  ill-defined  —  components  present  in  the 
latex,  such  as  proteins,  lipids,  carbohydrates,  and  miner-
als  (Cataldo,  2000;  Cornish,  2001a).  Thus,  natural  rubber  is 
almost irreplaceable in many applications, such as heavy-duty 
tires for trucks, buses, and airplanes, as well as in latex prod-
ucts  for  medical  applications  (Cornish,  2001a).  Synthetic 
rubbers  (e.g.,  styrene-butadiene  or  acrylonitrile-butadiene 
copolymers)  are  also  produced  at  a  scale  of  several  million 
tons per year, but cannot match the price–performance ratio 
of  natural  rubber.  Whereas  some  plants  can  produce  other 
types of polyisoprenes, none of them have material properties 
or  value  similar  to  Hevea  rubber;  for  example,  gutta-percha 
or  balata  is  a  flexible  but  inelastic  material  from  Palaquium 
gutta and Manilkara bidentata, respectively, made of isoprene 
units  linked  together  in  a  1,4-trans  configuration  (Polhamus, 
1962). The inertness of gutta-percha or balata to biodegrada-
tion made them useful as an impermeable coating for under-
sea cables, and gutta-percha is still used in dentistry as a filling 
material. Chicle is a polyisoprene from Achras sapota contain-
ing both cis and trans bonds in a 1:2 ratio (Polhamus, 1962), 
which is still used in some chewing gums.

Because  rubber  is  an  essential  material  largely  produced  in 
one  region  of  the  world,  it  is  considered  as  a  strategic  com-
modity.  Despite  this  fact,  the  biosynthesis  of  rubber  still  is 
only  partly  characterized  (Cornish,  2001b).  Rubber  synthe-
sis  starts  with  cytosolic  acetyl-CoA,  which  is  converted  via 
3-hydroxy-glutaryl-CoA  to 
isopentenyl  diphosphate  (IPP). 
Farnesyl  diphosphate  is  the  likely  physiological  initiator  mole-
cule  for  rubber  synthesis  (Stubbe  et  al.,  2005).  The  rubber 
polymerase,  or  cis-prenyltransferase,  is  thought  to  be  embed-
ded in the membrane monolayer surrounding the rubber gran-
ules,  and  adds  isoprenyl  units  from  IPP  to  form  the  rubber 
polymer.  A  major  open  question  is  the  nature  of  the  protein 
(or protein complex) required for the synthesis of high mole-
cular  weight  rubber.  A  cloned  cis-prenyltransferase  from  H. 
brasiliensis expressed in Escherichia coli was found to catalyze 
the formation of only short chain cis-polyisoprenes (Ko et al., 
2003),  while  long  chain  rubber  polymer  was  only  synthesized 
when  the  purified  cis-prenyltransferase  was  combined  with 
washed rubber particles (i.e., the rubber granules with associ-
ated proteins and lipids; Asawatreratanakul et al., 2003). Thus, 
it is not clear whether the rubber particles contain the sought 
after long chain rubber polymerase, or whether another protein 
or co-factor present on the rubber granules aids the expressed 
cis-prenyltransferase in producing long chain rubber. Sequence 
comparisons  of  dominant  proteins  attached  to  rubber  parti-
cles in different plant species producing rubber do not provide 
clear answers, as between species these proteins differ strongly 
in  number,  size,  expression  level,  and  predicted  function 
(Cornish, 2001a; van Beilen and Poirier, 2007b).

The production of rubber from H. brasiliensis is threatened 
by the pathogen Microcyclus ulei, the causative agent of South 
American  leaf  blight  (SALB;  Lieberei,  2007;  Le  Guen  et  al., 
2007), and attempts to create resistant trees by breeding have 
not been very successful until now. SALB, a pathogen endemic 
to the Amazon basin, has made large-scale Hevea rubber pro-
duction in South America almost impossible. The rubber tree 

483

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

used  in  commercial  production  in  Southeast  Asia  has  a  very 
narrow genetic basis, coming essentially from a few seeds col-
lected at one location in Brazil by Dr. Henry Wickham in 1876 
(Polhamus,  1962).  Rubber  trees  in  Southeast  Asian  planta-
tions are thus sensitive to SALB and would be devastated by 
the  establishment  of  the  pathogen  (Davis,  1997).  Currently, 
the  only  barrier  to  prevent  the  spread  of  SALB  to  Asia  is  a 
strict quarantine. It is thus essential to further understand the 
biology of SALB on both the pathogen and host response sides 
to devise adequate defense strategies, which may, in the long 
term, involve the development of a genetically modified rub-
ber tree. Efficient transformation of calli and regeneration of 
plants was shown to be possible (Blanc et al., 2006). However, 
the narrow genetic base, prolonged breeding cycles and juve-
nile period, and highly heterozygous nature of H. brasiliensis 
make breeding complex, time-consuming, and labor-intensive 
(Lieberei, 2007).

World production of rubber is also influenced by other fac-
tors,  such  as  changes  in  weather  patterns  or  socioeconomic 
aspects. Climate change already affects producer countries in 
Southeast  Asia;  production  in  2009  was  lowered  by  5%  due 
to  severe  droughts  on  the  Indochina  peninsula,  and  heavy 
rains  during  the  tapping  season  in  Indonesia.  Socioeconomic 
changes increase labor costs in producer countries, especially 
in  Malaysia,  and  fewer  workers  are  available  for  tapping, 
while competition for land by oil palm, food, nature reserves, 
and  other  uses  is  increasing.  Furthermore,  trade  restrictions, 
including bilateral agreements with consumer countries in the 
region  (e.g.,  China)  and  the  possible  establishment  of  a  pro-
ducer cartel, may limit the amount of natural rubber available 
on the free market.

In  view  of  the  problems  related  to  rubber  from  H.  bra-
siliensis,  the  strategic  importance  of  natural  rubber  and  the 
uncertainties of its future supply, the development of alterna-
tive sources of natural rubber was identified as a clear prior-
ity (Mooibroek and Cornish, 2000). Large research programs 
were  established  during  WWII  that  aimed  at  identifying 
plants  that  could  be  used  as  alternative  crops  for  large-scale 
rubber production. While plants such as Goldenrod (Solidago 
leavenworthii),  lettuce,  or  sunflower  produce  rubber  hav-
ing unfavorable characteristics, such as very low yield or low 
molecular weight of the polymer, which makes them difficult 
subjects for the development of rubber producing crops, two 
main  plants  have  been  selected  as  promising  for  rubber  pro-
duction — the Russian dandelion (Taraxacum koksaghyz) and 
guayule  (Parthenium  argentatum  Gray).  Both  plants  produce 
high  amounts  of  high  molecular  weight  rubber,  an  essential 
determinant of rubber quality (van Beilen and Poirier, 2007b).
Russian  dandelion  accumulates  rubber  in  the  roots  and 
leaves  and  is  considered  a  potentially  attractive  annual  crop 
for temperate regions. Although Russian dandelion has laticif-
ers like the rubber tree, rubber must be harvested by homog-
enizing  the  roots.  Rubber  yields  of  150–500 kg/ha/year  have 
been  reported  (van  Beilen  and  Poirier,  2007b),  and  dande-
lion  rubber  was  produced  in  the  USSR  and  Germany  dur-
ing WWII to make tires. However, limited progress has been 
achieved since then, as research projects were stopped when 
Hevea  rubber  became  widely  available  again  after  WWII. 
Turning  Russian  dandelion  into  a  viable  crop  for  rubber 

production would require an increase of vigor and more favo-
rable agronomic properties, such as larger roots that are easier 
to harvest and increased rubber accumulation. In addition, the 
low yield per hectare, labor-intensive cultivation, crosses and 
seed contamination with other dandelions, and weed potential 
should be tackled (van Beilen and Poirier, 2007c).

Guayule is a shrub native to Mexico and the Southwestern 
United  States  that  can  also  be  grown  in  southern  Europe 
and  northern  Africa.  One  advantage  of  guayule  rubber  is 
that  its  latex  contains  less  proteins,  both  in  number  of  spe-
cies  and  total  amount,  than  latex  from  H.  brasiliensis,  and 
these proteins do not cross-react with immunoglobulins reac-
tive against H. brasiliensis latex proteins (Siler et al., 1996). 
This makes allergenic reactions to guayule rubber by consum-
ers  sensitized  to  Hevea  rubber  unlikely.  Indeed,  the  Yulex 
Corporation (www.yulex.com) is currently marketing guayule 
latex as a source of hypoallergenic rubber, particularly useful 
for  medical  applications.  In  guayule,  rubber  latex  accumu-
lates  intracellularly  in  the  bark  parenchymal  cells.  Thus,  the 
latex cannot be harvested by tapping, as with the rubber tree, 
but  the  guayule  shoot  material  must  be  harvested  and  thor-
oughly  disrupted  to  release  the  rubber  particles  (Cornish  et 
al., 2006). Thus, while rubber harvest can be mechanized for 
guayule,  extraction  is  technically  more  complicated  than  for 
H.  brasiliensis.  Productivity  of  rubber  from  guayule  up  to 
2000 kg/ha/year  has  been  reported,  while  up  to  3000 kg/ha/
year  can  be  produced  from  the  Brazilian  rubber  tree.  While 
high-value applications, such as hypoallergenic latex for medi-
cal  application,  at  present  justify  the  higher  cost  of  guayule 
rubber,  large-scale  use  of  guayule  rubber  as  an  alternative  to 
Hevea rubber in lower value items, such as tires, will require 
improvement in the level of productivity of the varieties used 
and  agronomic  and  harvesting  practices,  as  well  as  optimiza-
tion of the extraction method (van Beilen and Poirier, 2007c).
Modern  molecular  approaches  are  required  to  better 
understand  and  modulate  rubber  biosynthesis  in  both  guay-
ule  and  Russian  dandelion.  Although  large  gaps  are  present  in 
our  knowledge  of  the  rubber  polymerase,  there  is  generally  a 
good  understanding  of  the  enzymes  involved  in  the  synthe-
sis  of  IPP  and  farnesyl  diphosphate  and  this  knowledge  could 
be  used,  via  transgenesis,  to  over-express  or  downregulate  key 
genes  involved  in  rubber  biosynthesis  and  accumulation.  This 
type  of  functional  approach  is  easier  to  apply  to  Russian  dan-
delion  with  its  short  life  cycle,  and  because  detectable  rubber 
phenotypes  can  be  obtained  after  six  months.  In  contrast,  for  
H. brasiliensis, several years of growth are needed before clear 
rubber phenotypes can be determined, whereas for guayule one 
to  two  years  is  required.  Furthermore,  to  make  rubber  from 
either  Russian  dandelion  or  guayule  competitive  for  large-scale, 
low-value  applications,  it  is  essential  to  consider  the  plants  in 
the  context  of  a  biorefinery,  where  all  components,  including 
waste material, would be used. Co-products from both guayule 
and  Russian  dandelion  could  include  biogas  or  bioethanol  from 
the cellulosic waste, or various specialty chemicals from second-
ary metabolites. Side products from Russian dandelion process-
ing  could  also  include  inulin,  a  polymer  of  fructose,  which  is 
the  major  storage  sugar  of  dandelions  (25–40%  of  dry  root 
weight), which could be used directly in non-food applications, 
used to make the building block 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, used 

484

Plants as factories for bioplastics and other novel biomaterials

C H A P T E R   3 0

in  polymer  synthesis,  or  fermented  to  bioethanol  (van  Beilen 
and  Poirier,  2007b).  Public  research  programs  in  the  United 
States  (PENRA;  http://oardc.osu.edu/penra/)  and  Europe 
(EU-PEARLS;  http://www.eu-pearls.eu)  are  now  aimed  at 
improving Russian dandelion and guayule for rubber production.

Proteins

Various  materials  (bioplastic  and  fibers)  can  be  derived  from 
natural  plant  proteins  obtained  as  a  co-product  of  starch, 
vegetable  oil,  or  biofuel  production  (Mooney,  2009).  Zein 
(the major corn protein; Shukla and Cheryan, 2001; Lawton, 
2002), soy protein (Mohanty et al., 2005), and wheat gluten 
(Woerdeman et al., 2004; Pallos et al., 2006) have been con-
verted to plastics by cross-linking with formaldehyde, glutar-
aldehyde,  or  other  chemicals.  In  1950  about  2700  tons/year 
of  zein  plastics  for  coatings,  and  2200  tons/year  of  Vicara,  a 
zein-based  fiber,  were  produced.  The  current  cost  of  zein  is 
about $40 a/kg, but as a by-product from ethanol production, 
costs could be as low as $4/kg (Lawton, 2002).

Soy  protein-based  bioplastics  were  used  in  the  1930s 
by  Henry  T.  Ford  to  construct  car  parts.  Soon  after,  how-
ever,  petroleum-based  plastics  took  over,  in  part  because 
of  poor  properties  of  the  protein-based  plastics  and  fibers: 
the soy-based materials were (and still are) plagued by sus-
ceptibility  to  microbial  degradation,  water  permeability, 
and  a  persistent  bad  smell  (formaldehyde,  other  residual 
chemicals),  as  well  as  a  relatively  high  price  (Mohanty  et 
al.,  2005).  Progress  has  been  made  in  processing  by  extru-
sion  (Verbeek  and  van  den  Berg,  2010)  and  the  processing 
of wheat gluten. Nevertheless, “current gluten materials are 
still outperformed by their synthetic polymer counterparts” 
(Lagrain et al., 2010).

As  gluten,  zein,  and  soy  protein  are  by-products  derived 
from  food  and  feed  crops,  optimization  for  material  appli-
cations by genetic engineering is not a likely option. Also, in 
view of the complex structure of proteins, the effort required 
to  make  significantly  better  protein  bioplastics  may  be  out 
of  proportion  to  the  benefits.  Natural  limits  to  the  proper-
ties  are  given  by  the  peptide  bond  linking  the  amino  acids, 
and  the  reactivity  of  pendant  groups:  proteins  are  sensitive 
to hydrolysis by strong acids and bases, oxidation, heat dena-
turation,  and  decomposition.  Protein  engineering  can  signifi-
cantly  change  properties,  but  the  fundamental  limits  cannot 
be changed. Thus, progress is incremental, and mainly in the 
field of processing technology, biocomposites, plasticizers, and 
formulations.

The amount of protein co-products from large-scale biofuel 
production  potentially  greatly  exceeds  the  amount  required 
for  the  food  and  feed  markets,  which  could  help  the  devel-
opment  of  a  protein-based  bioplastics  industry  (Sanders  et 
al.,  2007).  If  10%  of  transportation  fuels  will  be  bio-based 
(providing  that  issues  such  as  indirect  land-use  change  do 
not interfere), up to 100 million tons of protein side product 
could  become  available  (Scott  et  al.,  2007).  Even  if  a  large 
fraction  is  absorbed  as  feed,  replacing  protein  crops  such  as 
soybeans, a significant amount of protein would still be avail-
able for the production of bioplastics.

Novel Polymers Produced in 
Transgenic Plants

A role for transgenic crops in the 
production of biopolymers?

Three  basic  production  strategies  can  be  distinguished  for 
renewable biomaterials from plants (Figure 30.1). The first is 
the  direct  use  of  the  plant  biomass  (wood,  cork)  or  biomass 
components (natural rubber, starch, cellulose) in biomaterials. 
The  second  option  is  the  conversion  of  plant  carbon  storage 
products  (lipids,  fatty  acids,  or  sugars)  into  new  compounds 
by  microbial  biotechnology  (also  called  white  biotechnol-
ogy)  involving  fermentation  or  by  chemical  polymerization 
methods. For example, PHA, biocellulose, xanthan, silk, and 
polythioesters can be produced by recombinant or wild-type 
microorganisms in fermentation processes using carbohydrates 
from  plants  (Thakor  et  al.,  2005),  while  polyesters  such 
as  polylactic  acid  (PLA),  polycaprolactone,  polytrimethy- 
lene  terephthalate  (e.g.,  Sorona®  by  Dupont),  and  polybuty-
lene succinate (e.g., Bionolle® by Showa) are produced using 
chemical  polymerization  of  substrates  that  are,  at  least  in 
part, renewable and generated by fermentation of plant sugars 
(Mecking, 2004). The third option is the production of novel 
or modified biopolymers directly in transgenic plants. As the 
production of biopolymers from white and green biotechnol-
ogy compete on the market, advantages and disadvantages of 
these two technologies must be compared.

Life  cycle  assessments  suggest  that  biopolymers  pro-
duced  in  plants  may  bring  considerable  savings  in  energy 
use  and  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  compared  to  petro-
chemical  polymers  or  biopolymers  produced  by  fermenta-
tion,  provided  that  the  product  concentration  in  the  plant  is 
high  and  the  remaining  biomass  is  used  to  generate  energy 
(Kurdikar  et  al.,  2001).  This  occurs  because  polymers  pro-
duced  in  plants  are  direct  products  of  photosynthesis-driven 
plant  metabolism,  while  in  white  biotechnology,  the  poly-
mers  (or  polymer  building  blocks)  are  indirectly  produced 
from  a  carbon  source  synthesized  and  extracted  from  crop 
plants,  such  as  sugars  or  lipids.  Thus,  the  direct  synthe-
sis  of  biopolymers  in  plants  is  theoretically  more  energy 
efficient  and  requires  fewer  steps.  Furthermore,  agricul-
tural  crops  offer  the  possibility  of  producing  biopolymers 
on  a  larger  scale  than  that  possible  by  microbial  biotechnol-
ogy,  an  important  factor  for  biopolymers  used  in  commod-
ity  products  that  are  typically  produced  above  the  million 
tons  per  year  range.  Under  the  condition  that  processing 
is  not  appreciably  more  difficult,  direct  production 
in 
plants  obviously  involves  fewer  steps  and  could  be  cost- 
effective  compared  to  microbial  biotechnology  (van  Beilen 
and Poirier, 2007a). However, several factors affect the com-
petitive  advantage  of  green  versus  white  biotechnology.  The 
first  is  that  the  level  of  control  over  key  factors  affecting 
biopolymers properties, such as molecular weight, polydisper-
sity, and monomer composition, is likely to be lower in trans-
genic plants compared to bacterial fermentations or chemical 
synthesis, which involve closed systems with extensive control 

485

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

wood, cork, paper, cotton, ramie, flax,

sisal,natural rubber, plant oils, starch, sugars

conventional
route
A

harvesting
processing

B

sugar

industrial

biotechnology

plant-oil

bacterial
polymer
production

chemical
conversion

in planta
polymer

prod.

harvesting
processing

C

transgenic
germplasm
development

harvesting
processing

photosynthesis

CO2

composting
incineration

biodegradation

Figure 30.1 l Production cycles l   Route A. Direct production of materials from plants. Route B. Conversion of plant products by industrial 
biotechnology or chemical methods to polymers. Route C. Production of new chemical building blocks or polymers in transgenic plants. In all 
cases, the cycle is closed by composting, incineration, or biodegradation. Reproduced with permission from van Beilen and Poirier (2008).

over the production conditions. Plant metabolism can be dif-
ficult to manipulate without affecting plant health and yield, 
while  external  environmental  conditions  can  change  fluxes 
through  metabolic  pathways.  The  synthesis  of  polymers  in 
plants  also  brings  up  the  issue  of  seasonal  harvesting  and 
processing,  and  consequently,  the  stability  of  the  polymer  in 
tissues  between  harvest  and  extraction.  Fermentation  and 
chemical  synthesis  are  more  flexible,  with  both  continuous 
production throughout the year or peaks of synthesis depend-
ing  on  the  possibility  of  demand.  A  partial  remedy  is  the  
production  of  polymers  in  plant  organs  that  can  be  easily 
stored  over  long  time  periods  and  where  polymers  are  likely 
to be stable, such as in dry seeds. Alternatively, crops that can 
be harvested throughout the year, such as sugarcane, may be 
used.

The requirement of transgenesis for the synthesis of novel 
biopolymers  in  plants  is  also  a  significant  factor  affecting  its 
competitiveness. The process of developing a transgenic crop 
is  more  complicated  and  costly  than  is  generally  realized, 
in  part  because  of  regulatory  issues  and  the  lack  of  public 
acceptance  (Devine,  2005).  The  overall  costs  of  discovery, 
R&D,  breeding,  production,  admission,  and  other  regulatory 
matters  associated  with  bringing  a  transgenic  crop  into  the 
field may run into several tens of millions of dollars (Devine, 
2005). Moreover, the required time for development of new 
registered  crop  varieties  may  take  8  to  12  years,  making  it 
very difficult to respond quickly to shifts in market demands 
using  genetically  modified  crops  relative  to  white  biotech-
nology  (Wenzel,  2006).  Thus,  only  a  few  novel  products  or 
characteristics  can  be  developed  to  marketable  crop  varie-
ties,  which  should  bring  a  high  return  on  investment,  either 
through the high value of the product or because of its high 

market volume. Thus, while transgenic plants with increased 
resistance to pests or herbicides have been a commercial suc-
cess, with annual growth rates of 12% and a total area planted 
of almost 115 million hectares in 23 countries (Khan and Liu, 
2009),  few  plants  engineered  for  new  products  or  product 
properties have reached the commercial stage, or promise to 
reach that stage in the near future. Promising transgenic crop 
products  include  altered  starch,  polyunsaturated  fatty  acids, 
new sugars, and organic acids (van Beilen, 2008).

Which biopolymers should be targeted for 
production in transgenic crops?

Only  a  few  biopolymers  (natural  rubber  stands  out  in  this 
respect) are now competitive with their petrochemical equiv-
alents  based  on  price  and  performance.  Polymers  that:  (1) 
can be produced more efficiently in plants than in microbes; 
(2)  can  be  extracted  easily  from  plant  biomass;  and  (3)  are 
needed on a large scale at low cost are worthwhile targets, in 
view of the strengths and weaknesses of plant biotechnology 
compared to white biotechnology.

The  advantages  of  direct  biopolymer  synthesis  in  plants 
must  be  weighed  against  the  cost  of  polymer  extraction. 
Because extraction and processing typically is a very large con-
tributor to the costs of biopolymer, the question of whether 
specific  polymers  can  be  isolated  easily  from  plants  must  be 
answered early. Natural rubber is harvested as a liquid (latex) 
that leaks from cuts in the bark of rubber trees. This is labor 
intensive (70% of production costs are labor costs), but little 
technology  is  needed  (chemical  additives,  cleaning,  drying). 
Starch granules are easily separated from seeds and tubers by 

486

Plants as factories for bioplastics and other novel biomaterials

C H A P T E R   3 0

technical  processes.  In  contrast,  the  most  abundant  biopoly-
mer  cellulose  is  very  difficult  to  separate  from  the  matrix 
containing  hemicellulose,  lignin,  proteins,  and  other  polysac-
charides. Initially a widely used base for plastics, cellulose lost 
out to petrochemical plastics. Other abundant polymers such 
as lignin suffer from the same drawback.

Because  of  the  scale  requirement  (the  cost  of  develop-
ing  a  transgenic  crop),  the  target  biopolymer  should  be  able 
to  compete  with  commodity  petrochemical  plastics  used  in 
consumer  products  (e.g.,  polyethylene  and  polypropylene) 
based  on  price  and  properties.  The  current  capacity  of  bio-
plastics  production  plants  is  estimated  at  400,000  tons/year 
worldwide  (www.european-bioplastics.org)  or  about  0.15% 
of  annual  worldwide  production  of  petroleum-based  plastics 
(260 million tons/year). A target of 10% of bioplastics or 26 
million tons per year of bioplastics could be met by synthesis 
in crop plants. For example, assuming synthesis of a biopoly-
mer  at  a  level  of  10%  dry  weight  in  leaves  of  Miscanthus, 
which  would  yield  2–3  tons  of  biopolymer/hectare,  would 
require 10 million hectares of such a crop, or 0.2% of world-
wide agricultural land.

Which crops should be targeted?

The  choice  of  the  crop  is  crucial  to  successfully  establish 
biopolymer  synthesis  in  plants.  Transgenic  crops  are  well 
accepted in North America, but this is not the case in Europe 
and other regions of the world. In the case of biomaterials, a 
clear-cut choice for industrial crops or non-food crops lacking 
close  relatives  in  the  cultivation  area  seems  prudent,  as  this 
clearly reduces real and perceived risks to consumers and the 
food  supply.  Most  industrially  processed  crops  (sugar  beet, 
corn, potato varieties, and fiber crops) belong to the same spe-
cies  as  food  varieties,  and  out-crossing,  weedy  variants,  and 
mix-ups  are  inevitable.  New  crops  developed  as  biomass  or 
energy crops, such as Miscanthus and switchgrass, could also 
be  used  to  produce  biopolymers  in  the  context  of  a  future 
biorefinery infrastructure, as they are high yielding, not used 
in food, and sterile variants can be used. Tobacco, a non-food 
crop  native  to  South  America;  is  another  promising  alterna-
tive with many potential advantages: it lacks close relatives in 
Europe and North America; does not persist in northern cli-
mates; seed production can be prevented by cytoplasmic male 
sterility and by regular harvesting of biomass before flowering; 
greenhouses  suffice  for  seed  production;  and  plastid  trans-
formation is very well established. Yields of leaf biomass can 
be  amazingly  high  at  up  to  14  tons/hectare  if  not  grown  for 
smoking, which compares reasonably well with sugar beet at 
18  tons/hectare  (average  yield  in  Europe),  but  is  lower  than 
sugarcane  or  Miscanthus  at  20–25  tons/hectare  and  20–30 
tons/hectare, respectively (van Beilen et al., 2007).

Fibrous proteins

Proteins  differ  from  other  polymers  in  that  they  are  com-
posed  of  20  different  natural  monomers  (amino  acids),  the 
order and composition of which is specified by the DNA code 
and can be controlled at will. This implies that the properties 

of the resulting materials can be changed and, to some extent, 
predicted. With further progress in our understanding of the 
structure–function  relationships,  proteins  with  the  desired 
properties  can  be  designed  and  produced  in  appropriate 
hosts (Sanford and Kumar, 2005). The proposed applications 
include  tissue  engineering  scaffolds,  drug  carriers,  hydrogels, 
coatings, glues, elastomers, and fibers.

The  so-called  fibrous  proteins  (silk,  elastin,  collagen, 
etc.)  typically  contain  short  blocks  of  repeated  amino  acids. 
They  have  received  a  good  share  of  attention  as  the  original 
materials  already  have  quite  favorable  properties,  includ-
ing  unique  strength-to-weight,  elastic,  or  adhesive  proper-
ties.  Well-known  fibrous  proteins  are  silk,  collagen,  elastin, 
keratin,  and  mussel  adhesive  proteins.  Silks  can  be  loosely 
defined as externally spun fibrous protein secretion. The best 
known silk is the one produced from the mulberry silkworm 
cocoons  and  used  for  clothing.  Many  other  insects  produce 
silks, but spider silk has received special attention due to its 
exceptional  mechanical  properties.  For  example,  silks  of  the 
spider  dragline,  the  main  structural  web  silk,  and  the  main 
spider’s lifeline are stronger than steel, when compared on a 
weight basis, and have a similar strength but are more elastic 
than Kevlar® (Hinman et al., 2000). Synthetic silk genes have 
been expressed in transgenic tobacco, potato, and Arabidopsis 
thaliana,  which  were  cultivated  in  greenhouses  as  well  as  in 
field trials (Menassa et al., 2004; Scheller and Conrad, 2005). 
Targeting  to  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)  in  tobacco  and 
potato  leaf  cells  yielded  2%  of  total  soluble  protein  (TSP; 
Scheller et al., 2001). Expression in leaf apoplasts of A. thal-
iana  yielded  8.5%  TSP,  while  targeting  to  seed  endoplasmic 
reticulum  yielded  18%  TSP  (Yang  et  al.,  2005),  close  to  the 
level of 10 and 30% TSP reported in E. coli and Pichia pas-
toris, respectively (Fahnestock and Bedzyk, 1997; Fahnestock 
and Irwin, 1997). However, clone instability due to homolo-
gous recombination of repetitive sequences, gene size limita-
tions,  a  distinct  codon  usage,  and  the  formation  of  inclusion 
bodies  are  general  problems  limiting  high-level  and  stable 
expression of silk-like proteins in microorganisms.

Production  of  a  silk-elastin  fusion  protein  in  tobacco  and 
potato plants was achieved through the targeting of the pro-
tein to the ER using the KDEL ER retention signal (Scheller 
and  Conrad,  2004).  Laboratory-scale  production  of  80 mg  of 
pure protein per kilogram of tobacco leaves was obtained by 
heating  a  simple  buffer-extract  to  95°C  for  1 hour,  causing 
aggregation of most proteins, while leaving the silk protein in 
the  supernatant.  However,  this  protein  preparation  lacks  the 
structural properties of silks, which are conferred by assembly 
of  the  proteins  during  the  process  of  spinning  in  specialized 
organs in the spider (Huang et al., 2007).

Floss  and  co-workers  have  developed  elastin-like  polypep-
tides  (ELPs)  that  are  biocompatible  and  exhibit  a  thermally 
responsive  reversible  phase  transition,  which  makes  ELPs 
attractive  for  various  applications  in  drug  delivery  and  tis-
sue  repair  or  engineering  (Floss  et  al.,  2010a).  ELPs  also  aid 
in  the  purification  of  recombinant  proteins  as  fusion  proteins 
(ELPylated  proteins),  which  also  exhibit  the  reversible  phase 
transition  property.  A  number  of  plant-based  expression  sys-
tems have been evaluated for the production of such proteins, 
which  may  help  in  using  plants  as  bioreactors  to  synthesize 

487

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

both  biopharmaceuticals  and  industrial  proteins  (Floss  et  al., 
2010b).  Elastin-like  polypeptides  also  appear  to  allow  a  wide 
range  of  expression  levels  in  plants,  helping  to  overcome  the 
typically low expression levels by depositing concentrated het-
erologous protein in stable protein bodies (Conley et al., 2009).
Expression  of  collagen,  of  a  synthetic  protein  made  from 
repeats of a motif found in elastin, and of a chimeric protein 
made of silk and elastin domains, have also been reported in 
tobacco  or  potato  (Guda  et  al.,  2000;  Ruggiero  et  al.,  2000; 
Scheller  et  al.,  2004).  A  recent  study  reported  the  synthe-
sis of a biofunctional procollagen at 2% of soluble protein in 
transgenic tobacco (Stein et al., 2009).

Improvements  in  fibrous  protein  synthesis  in  plants  may 
require  several  approaches  including  optimization  of  the 
amino acid and tRNA pools for the few amino acids that are 
over-represented in these proteins (such as glycine and alanine 
in  spider  silk),  co-expression  of  several  fibrous  proteins  as 
found  in  natural  silk,  and  improved  targeting  to  subcellular 
compartments  and  tissues  optimal  for  protein  synthesis  and 
storage. Beyond these strategies to optimize expression, effec-
tive synthesis of a fibrous protein does not ensure production 
of a good fiber. The properties of silk fibers depend to a large 
extent  on  the  correct  assembly  by  spinning  of  the  different 
types  of  proteins.  In  the  spider  or  silkworm  glands,  various 
types of silk proteins are spun together via an elaborate liquid 
spinning  process,  which  has  not  been  reproduced  in  the  lab 
(Huang et al., 2007). Recombinant spider silk obtained from 
mammalian cells has been spun into filaments showing similar 
toughness to dragline silk, but with a lower tenacity (Lazaris 
et  al.,  2002).  Thus,  while  processing  of  fibrous  proteins  is 
facilitated by the fact that proteins such as spider fibroins are 
extremely heat-stable and acid-soluble (Scheller et al., 2001; 

Scheller  et  al.,  2004),  advances  in  micro-spinning  and  other 
processing technologies are essential to make good fibers from 
fibrous proteins.

Assuming that expression and processing limitations can be 
solved,  heterologous  expression  in  plants  would  enable  pro-
duction on a much larger scale than is possible in bioreactors. 
However,  the  question  should  be  asked  if  any  of  the  fibrous 
proteins  has  a  (potential)  market  size  that  would  justify  the 
significant  cost  and  time  required  for  the  development  of  a 
transgenic  crop  germplasm.  Plant-based  fibrous  protein  pro-
duction  would  be  better  than  bacterial  fermentation  only  if 
the  fibrous  protein  is  to  be  used  on  a  commodity  scale,  for 
example, as a technical or textile fiber. In this scenario, pro-
duction costs in plants have been estimated at 10–50% of the 
cost for production in bioreactors (Scheller et al., 2001).

Cyanophycin

Cyanophycin is a nitrogen-storage polymer composed of a poly -
aspartate  backbone  with  arginine  side  chains  attached  with 
their α-amino group to the β-carboxy group of each aspartate 
(Figure  30.2).  It  is  synthesized  by  the  enzyme  cyanophycin 
synthase  and  deposited  as  granules  in  cyanobacteria  as  well 
as  several  photosynthetic  and  non-photosynthetic  bacteria 
(Berg et al., 2000; Oppermann-Sanio and Steinbüchel, 2002). 
While  arginine  is  the  most  common  side  chain  attached  to 
the polyaspartate backbone, other amino acids have also been 
found in cyanophycin produced in heterologous hosts, such as 
lysine, ornithine, or citrulline (Steinle et al., 2009).

Although cyanophycin is not suitable for material applica-
tions, it is a useful source of polyaspartate, which can be used 

Figure 30.2 l Structure of cyanophycin and potential products derived from cyanophycin l  Reproduced with permission from van 
Beilen and Poirier (2008).

488

Plants as factories for bioplastics and other novel biomaterials

C H A P T E R   3 0

as  a  super-adsorbent  or  antiscalant  (potential  market  $450 
million  per  year;  Tsao  et  al.,  1999),  replacing  the  chemically 
synthesized  compound  (Oppermann-Sanio  and  Steinbüchel). 
Cyanophycin could also be used as a valuable source of dipep-
tide and of amino acids in the nutritional and medical fields; 
for  example,  arginine  has  numerous  physiological  roles  in 
many  cardiovascular,  gastrointestinal,  and  immune  disorders 
(Sallam  and  Steinbuchel,  2010).  Aspartate  and  other  amino 
acids found in cyanophycin could also serve as a starting point 
for the synthesis of a range of chemicals that can be obtained 
by reductions, dehydrations, polymerization, decarboxylation, 
and deamination reactions (Werpy and Pedersen, 2004; Scott 
et al., 2007). As an example, reduction of aspartic acid would 
produce  3-aminotetrahydrofuran  and  2-amino-1,4-butane-
diol, close analogs of high volume chemicals currently used in 
industry,  while  arginine  could  be  converted  to  1,4-butanedi-
amine used to synthesize nylon-4,6 (Figure 30.2).

Expression  of  cyanophycin  synthase  in  plants  has  been 
pioneered  by  Broer  and  co-workers  (Neumann  et  al.,  2005). 
Transgenic  tobacco  and  potato  contain  cyanophycin  up  to 
1.1% dry weight through expression of the cyanophycin syn-
thase  in  the  cytoplasm  of  leaf  cells  (Neumann  et  al.,  2005), 
with some deleterious effects such as changes in leaf morphol-
ogy and decreased growth. The adverse effects were mitigated 
by  translocation  of  cyanophycin  synthesis  to  plastids,  which 
brought  an  increase  in  cyanophycin  content  up  to  9.4%  of 
dry  weight  in  tobacco  leaves  (Hühns  et  al.,  2008).  Minimal 
effects  on  growth  and  morphology  were  also  observed  when 
expression  of  cyanophycin  synthase  was  restricted  to  potato 
tubers.  Here,  up  to  7.5%  of  dry  weight  was  accomplished 
(Hühns  et  al.,  2009).  For  comparison,  recombinant  E.  coli, 
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae,  and  P.  pastoris  could  produce 
cyanophycin  at  39%,  15%,  and  23%  of  the  cell  dry  weight, 
respectively  (Hai  et  al.,  2006;  Steinle  et  al.,  2009,  2010). 
Economically  viable  levels  in  plants  may  require  optimiza-
tion  of  the  pathways  involved  in  supplying  aspartic  acid  and 
arginine, as well as engineering the cyanophycin synthase for 
maximal activity in the plant cell environment.

Polyhydroxyalkanoate

Polyhydroxyalkanoates  (PHAs)  are  biological  polyesters  pro-
duced by a wide variety of bacteria as carbon and energy storage 
compounds.  PHAs  accumulate  as  osmotically  inert  intracellu-
lar  inclusions.  Almost  all  naturally  occurring  PHAs  consists  of 
3-hydroxy  fatty  acids  with  a  chain  length  of  4  to  16  carbons 
polymerized  by  a  PHA  synthase  using  R-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA 
intermediates.  Under  special  circumstances  or  with  specific 
feed  compounds,  bacterial  PHAs  may  also  contain  4-,  5-,  and 
6-hydroxy  fatty  acids  or  monomers  substituted  with  vari-
ous groups such as aromatic rings, methyl- or hydroxy groups, 
ether-,  and  double-bonds  (Steinbüchel  and  Valentin,  1995). 
PHA  can  accumulate  to  high  levels  by  bacterial  fermentation, 
typically  between  50–80%  cell  dry  weight,  depending  on  the 
type of PHA, with some reports of up to 90% cell dry weight.

Depending  on  the  composition  and  resulting  proper-
ties,  PHAs  have  many  and  wide-ranging  potential  applica-
tions.  Due  to  their  impermeability  to  water  and  air,  PHAs 

are  considered  very  suitable  for  consumer  products  such 
as  bottles,  films,  and  fibers.  The  simplest  PHA,  poly-3-hy-
droxybutyrate  (PHB)  is  a  relatively  hard  and  brittle  mate-
rial  (Lenz  and  Marchessault,  2005).  Whereas  the  presence 
of  C5-monomers  to  produce  poly-3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyvalerate  (P(HB-co-HV))  improves  the  properties  of 
the  material  to  some  extent,  inclusion  of  a  small  proportion 
of  longer  monomers  (C6  and  longer)  has  resulted  in  materi-
als  that  are  much  easier  to  process,  and  are  similar  to  poly-
propylene  (Noda  et  al.,  2005).  PHAs  consisting  of  higher 
molecular weight monomers (C6–C16, referred to as medium 
chain  length  PHA;  mclPHA)  typically  are  rubber-like  mate-
rials  with  an  amorphous  soft-sticky  consistence.  These  poly-
mers  still  have  to  find  large-scale  applications,  which  may 
include the production of enantiopure R-3-hydroxy-carboxylic 
acids  (Witholt  and  Kessler,  1999).  The  range  of  properties 
and  applications  may  also  be  greatly  extended  by  chemi-
cal  modification  of  the  polymer  after  extraction  (Hazer  and 
Steinbüchel,  2007).  In  general,  PHAs  are  considered  for 
material  that  ends  up  in  the  environment,  such  as  flower-
pots used in planting, foils, bags, fishing lines and nets (which 
should decompose if lost), material used in biomedical appli-
cations, and for other disposable items such as bottles, cups, 
plates, and cutlery that can be composted but not recycled.

Considering the potential of using PHAs as substitutes for 
petrochemical  plastics  in  numerous  applications,  PHAs  are 
good  candidates  as  large-scale  commodity  plastics  that  could 
be  produced  in  transgenic  plants  in  the  million  ton  range, 
setting  PHA  apart  from  fibrous  proteins  and  cyanophycin 
(Poirier et al., 1995). The proof of concept was demonstrated 
in  1992  for  the  synthesis  of  PHB  in  transgenic  Arabidopsis 
expressing the biosynthetic enzymes from Ralstonia eutropha 
in  the  cytoplasm  (Poirier  et  al.,  1992).  Since  then,  synthe-
sis  of  various  types  of  PHA  in  transgenic  plants  has  been 
reported  in  more  than  10  different  plant  species  (Table 
30.1;  reviewed  in  van  Beilen,  2008;  Poirier  and  Brumbley, 
2010).  Most  experience  has  been  gathered  for  the  synthe-
sis of PHB. Whereas synthesis of PHB from the cytoplasmic 
pool  of  acetyl-CoA  led  to  only  low  (0.3%  dwt)  levels  of 
polymer accumulation, synthesis of PHB in the plastid led to 
the  highest  level  of  accumulation,  reaching  40%  dry  weight 
in  Arabidopsis  leaves  (Figure  30.3;  Bohmert  et  al.,  2000; 
Nawrath  et  al.,  1994).  However,  expression  of  such  high 
levels  of  PHB  led  to  severe  growth  retardation.  Collectively, 
data from the synthesis of PHB in the plastid leaves of vari-
ous  plants  indicate  that  accumulation  of  PHB  in  leaves  at 
5–8%  dry  weight  is  possible  without  any  apparent  growth 
defect,  but  higher  levels  typically  lead  to  chlorosis  and  pro-
gressively  more  growth  retardation.  Interestingly,  accumula-
tion of 8% PHB in the leucoplasts of seeds of oilseed rape was 
not  associated  with  any  growth  retardation  or  defect  in  ger-
mination,  indicating  that  seed  accumulation  of  PHA  may  be 
a better alternative than leaves (Houmiel et al., 1999). PHB 
accumulation  in  the  range  of  1–2%  dry  weight  using  acetyl-
CoA produced in the peroxisomes has been reported in both 
corn suspension cells and sugarcane leaves (Hahn et al., 1999; 
Tilbrook et al., 2011).

Since  PHB  is  a  rather  stiff  and  brittle  plastic  with  lim-
ited  application,  synthesis  of  PHA  co-polymers  with  better 

489

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

Table 30.1  Polyhydroxyalkanoates produced in transgenic plants

Plant 
species

Subcellular 
compartment

Tissue

PHA 
produced

PHA yield 
(% dwt)

Arabidopsis 
thaliana

Plastid

Plastid

Cytoplasm

Cytoplasm

Peroxisome

Peroxisome

Peroxisome

Plastid

Plastid

Peroxisome

Alfalfa

Corn

Cotton

Cytoplasm

Plastid

Potato

Plastid

Shoot

Shoot

Shoot

Whole 
plant

Whole 
plant

Whole 
plant

Whole 
seedling

Shoot

Shoot

Cell 
suspension

Vascular 
bundles

Vascular 
bundles

Shoot

Cytoplasm

Cell line

Oilseed 
rape

Plastid

Cytoplasm

Plastid

Plastid

Tobacco

Cytoplasm

Plastid

Plastid

Shoot

Shoot

Seed

Seed

Shoot

Shoot

P(3HB)

14–40

P(3HB-3HV)

P(3HB)

P(3HB-co-
3HV)

mclPHA

1.6

0.1

0.6

0.4

scl-mclPHA

0.04

P(3HB)

P(3HB)

P(3HB)

P(3HB)

P(3HB)

P(3HB)

P(3HB)

mclPHA

mclPHA

P(3HB)

P(3HB)

P(3HB-co-
3HV)

P(3HB)

P(3HB)

1.8

0.2

6

2

0.3

0.05

0.02

1

0.03

0.1

8

2.3

0.01

1.7

0.005

5

1.8

0.005

Leaves

mclPHA

Sugar beet

Plastid

Hairy roots

P(3HB)

Sugarcane

Plastids

Flax

Plastids

Leaves

Stem

P(3HB)

P(3HB)

Reproduced with permission from van Beilen and Poirier (2008).

properties  and  broader  applications  is  an  important  goal.  In 
this  perspective,  synthesis  of  the  PHA  copolymer  P(HB-
co-HV) copolymer was demonstrated in Arabidopsis leaves at 
1.6% dry weight, and seeds of oilseed rape at 2.3% dry weight. 
This  was  achieved  by  a  rather  complex  genetic  engineering 

490

feat,  implicating  the  expression  of  four  bacterial  genes  for 
the  supply  and  copolymerization  of  3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA 
and  3-hydroxyvaleryl-CoA  in  the  plastid  (Figure  30.3;  Slater 
et  al.,  1999).  Interestingly,  there  was  an  inverse  relation-
ship between the amount of PHA and the proportion of the 
hydroxyvalerate monomer, indicating a bottleneck in providing 
3-hydroxyvaleryl-CoA  to  the  PHA-synthase.  Other  types  of 
PHA  copolymers  have  also  been  synthesized  in  low  amounts 
in plants, including mclPHA consisting of C6–C16 monomers, 
produced to a level of 0.4–1% through the polymerization of 
3-hydroxyacyl-CoA intermediates from the ß-oxidation cycle 
of  fatty  acids  (Figure  30.3;  Mittendorf  et  al.,  1998,  1999; 
Poirier, 1999; Arai et al., 2002; Matsumoto et al., 2006).

Accumulation  of  PHA  in  plants  at  a  level  of  15%  dry 
weight is considered a minimal threshold level for commercial 
viability.  Considering  the  current  experience,  it  would  seem 
that  reaching  this  level,  although  feasible,  will  still  require 
considerable  research  efforts.  It  will  be  essential  to  gain  a 
better  understanding  of  how  the  synthesis  of  the  precur-
sors  is  regulated  and  how  it  could  be  more  efficiently  chan-
neled  (e.g.,  acetyl-CoA,  propionyl-CoA,  3-hydroxyacyl-ACP) 
toward  PHA  without  affecting  plant  growth.  Very  little  has 
been done to understand how carbon flux is affected through 
the introduction of a new carbon sink such as PHA, and it is 
likely that the tools of genomics, metabolomics, and flux anal-
ysis would provide very valuable information in this context; 
the  same  way  these  technologies  have  been  instrumental  in 
optimizing synthesis of new compounds through fermentation.
As  with  several  other  biopolymers,  commercially  viable 
PHA production in plants is not only determined by the costs 
and  technological  possibilities  of  production  in  plants,  but 
also  depends  on  the  competing  production  methods.  PHA 
production  through  bacterial  fermentation  is  now  a  com-
mercial reality with the PHA copolymer Mirel™ produced by 
Telles (http://www.mirelplastics.com/), as well as the P(HB-
co-HV)  co-polymer  by  Tianan  in  China  (http://www.tianan-
enmat.com). The PHA accumulation level in bacteria reaches 
50–85% dry weight, which is probably unattainable in plants. 
Such high level PHA accumulation leads to easier recovery of 
the  polymer  than  is  likely  to  be  possible  in  plants.  Although 
several  methods  for  PHA  extraction  in  plants  are  found  in 
the (largely prophetic) patent literature, actual experimenta-
tion on PHA extraction from plants is very limited and clearly 
deserves  more  attention  (Poirier  and  Gruys,  2001).  An  out-
standing feature of bacterial PHAs is the enormous flexibility 
in properties as a function of the nature and ratio of the dif-
ferent monomers. Bacterial fermentation allows the synthesis 
of  a  wide  spectrum  of  PHA  with  various  physical  properties 
(by  choice  of  polymerase,  host,  feedstock,  and  conditions), 
with  some  PHAs  suitable  for  low-value  commodity  applica-
tions and others for specific high-value niche market applica-
tion, such as medical implants (Philip et al., 2007). Reaching 
similar  levels  of  control  and  producing  a  wide  spectrum  of 
PHA types is unrealistic in the context of transgenic crops. It 
is thus clear that synthesis of PHA in crops must be limited 
to one or perhaps two types of PHAs that would be used for 
large-scale and low-cost bulk applications, such as a substitute 
for  plastics  used  in  consumer  products,  while  bacterial  PHA 
would be left for higher value, lower volume applications.

Plants as factories for bioplastics and other novel biomaterials

C H A P T E R   3 0

Figure 30.3 l Metabolic pathways leading to the production of PHB, P(HB-co-HV), and mclPHA in plants l  The pathway for PHB 
synthesis from acetyl-CoA (top left) has been implemented in the cytosol, plastid, and peroxisome. The pathway for P(HB-co-HV) synthesis in 
the plastid was created by combining the PHB biosynthesis pathway with a pathway generating 3-propionyl-CoA via a threonine deaminase 
and pyruvate decarboxylase (top right). Synthesis of P(HB-co-HV) in the cytosol involved an unidentified source of propionyl-CoA or 
3-hydroxyvaleryl-CoA. Other PHA copolymers, such as mclPHA, have been mainly synthesized in the peroxisome using the 3-hydroxyacyl-
CoA intermediates generated in the ß-oxidation cycle (bottom left). Synthesis of mclPHA from the conversion of R-3-hydroxyacyl-ACP to R-3-
hydroxyacyl-CoA is achieved via a bacterial 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA-ACP transacylase (lower right corner). Reproduced with permission from van 
Beilen and Poirier (2008).

The cost of synthesis of PHA in plants versus bacteria still 
remains  somewhat  speculative.  Previously,  PHAs  produced 
by  microbial  fermentation  were  considered  too  expensive 
and  lacking  in  environmental  benefits  (Gerngross,  1999). 
However,  the  rapid  development  of  biogas  technology  to 
utilize waste biomass for the production of process heat and 
electricity  makes  PHA  production  by  fermentation  more 
energy and CO2 efficient (Kim and Dale, 2005). According to 
some  sources,  PHAs  could  be  produced  by  fermentation  for 
approximately  $2/kg,  although  the  current  price  for  Mirel  is 
currently $5/kg (Ramseier, 2010). Thus, the cost of PHA pro-
duced  by  bacterial  fermentation  is  substantially  higher  than 
the  cost  of  polypropylene  and  polyethylene  at  around  $1/kg 
(Philip  et  al.,  2007).  Competitive  PHA  production  in  plants 
must  assume  that  PHA  is  only  one  of  several  valuable  prod-
ucts obtained from the crop. For example, strategies such as 

developing  Miscanthus,  sugar  beet,  or  sugarcane  as  crops  for 
biofuel,  commodity  chemicals,  and  PHA  would  considerably 
enhance  the  economic  benefit  of  PHA  in  crops  (Snell  and 
Peoples, 2009).

Conclusion and Prospects

Despite the large potential that plants may have as providers 
of biomaterials, progress in unlocking this potential and bring-
ing  it  into  commercial  applications  has  been  slow,  with  the 
exception of rubber, which has been used on a large scale for 
over a century. Various factors have contributed to this. First, 
it is clear that competing with petroleum-derived plastics is a 
challenging task. Biomass is a much more complicated mate-
rial to handle than crude oil. Oil can be cheaply transported 

491

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

over  large  distances  by  simply  pushing  it  through  a  pipeline, 
and it can be distilled into fractions based on vapor pressure, 
with  heavier  fractions  amenable  to  cracking  or  other  physi-
cal  or  chemical  process  steps.  In  contrast,  biomass  is  bulky 
and  more  expensive  to  transport.  It  contains  many  different 
compounds in variable amounts, of different polarity, molecu-
lar  weight,  solubility,  macromolecular  structure,  and  water 
content.  Whereas  some  plant  biopolymers  are  rather  easy  to 
purify, such as starch, fibrous proteins, and cyanophycin, oth-
ers are much more problematic, such as cellulose and polyhy-
droxyalkanoates. Nevertheless, this comparison has its limits, 
since  the  finite  supply  of  petroleum  and  the  carbon  foot-
print associated with its use creates a necessity to explore all 

possible  means  to  find  adequate  substitutes.  Whether  direct 
production of polymers in planta or microbiological synthesis 
via plant-derived carbon will, in the end, be used in commer-
cial biopolymers, depends on numerous factors: quality, quan-
tity, and cost of the biopolymers; their potential value-added 
properties;  the  development  of  efficient  and  economical 
methods in biorefineries, including success in economical con-
version of wood and straw into simple sugars; and the capac-
ity or willingness of the industry to replace petroleum-derived 
polymers with either identical polymers made from (at least 
partially) biological sources, such as polyethylene made from 
bioethanol 
(http://ethanolproducer.com/article.jsp?article_
id  7022), or with new substitutes, such as PHA.

References

Arai, Y., Nakashita, H., Suzuki, Y., Kobayashi, 

Y., Shimizu, T., & Yasuda, M., et al. 
(2002). Synthesis of a novel class of 
polyhydroxyalkanoates in Arabidopsis 
peroxisomes, and their use in monitoring 
short-chain-length intermediates of 
β-oxidation. Plant and Cell Physiology, 43, 
555–562.

Asawatreratanakul, K., Zhang, Y. W., 

Wititsuwannakul, D., Wititsuwannakul, R., 
Takahashi, S., & Rattanapittayaporn, A., 
et al. (2003). Molecular cloning, expression 
and characterization of cDNA encoding cis-
prenyltransferases from Hevea brasiliensis — 
A key factor participating in natural 
rubber biosynthesis. European Journal of 
Biochemistry, 270, 4671–4680.
Averous, L., & Halley, P. J. (2009). 

Biocomposites based on plasticized starch. 
Biofuels Bioproducts Biorefining, 3, 329–343.

Bastioli, C. (Ed.). (2005). Handbook of 

Biodegradable Polymers. Shawbury: RAPRA 
Technology Limited.

Berg, H., Ziegler, K., Piotukh, K., Baier, K., 

Lockau, W., & Volkmer-Engert, R. (2000). 
Biosynthesis of the cyanobacterial reserve 
polymer multi-L-arginyl-poly-L-aspartic 
acid (cyanophycin) — Mechanism of the 
cyanophycin synthetase reaction studied 
with synthetic primers. European Journal of 
Biochemistry, 267, 5561–5570.

Blanc, G., Baptiste, C., Oliver, G., Martin, F., & 
Montoro, P. (2006). Efficient Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens-mediated transformation of 
embryogenic calli and regeneration of Hevea 
brasiliensis Muell Arg. plants. Plant Cell 
Reports, 24, 724–733.

Bohmert, K., Balbo, I., Kopka, J., Mittendorf, 

V., Nawrath, C., & Poirier, Y., et al. 
(2000). Transgenic Arabidopsis plants can 
accumulate polyhydroxybutyrate to up 
to 4% of their fresh weight. Planta, 211, 
841–845.

Bornke, F., & Broer, I. (2010). Tailoring plant 

metabolism for the production of novel 
polymers and platform chemicals. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 13, 354–362.

Cataldo, F. (2000). Guayule rubber: A new 

possible world scenario for the production 
of natural rubber. Progress in Rubber and 
Plastics Technology, 16, 31–59.

492

Conley, A. J., Joensuu, J. J., Menassa, R., & 

Brandle, J. E. (2009). Induction of protein 
body formation in plant leaves by elastin- 
like polypeptide fusions. BMC Biology, 7.

Cornish, K. (2001). Similarities and differences 
in rubber biochemistry among plant species. 
Phytochemistry, 57, 1123–1134.

Cornish, K. (2001). Biochemistry of natural 
rubber, a vital raw material, emphasizing 
biosynthetic rate, molecular weight and 
compartmentalization, in evolutionarily 
divergent plant species. Natural Product 
Reports, 18, 182–189.

Cornish, K., McCoy, R. G., Martin, J. 

A., Williams, J., & Nocera, A. (2006). 
Biopolymer extraction from plant materials. 
14 pp.

Crank, M., Patel, M., Marscheider-Weidemann, 

F., Schleich, J., Hüsing, B., & Angerer, 
G. (2004). PRO-BIP. Techno-economic 
feasibility of large-scale production of 
bio-based polymers in Europe. European 
Commission’s Institute for Prospective 
Technological Studies, Utrecht, Karlsruhe.

Davis, W. (1997). The rubber industry’s 

biological nightmare. Fortune Magazine, 4, 
86–95.

Devine, M. D. (2005). Why are there not more 

herbicide-tolerant crops? Pest Management 
Science, 61, 312–317.

Ehrlich, P. R., & Pringle, R. M. (2008). Where 

does biodiversity go from here? A grim 
business-as-usual forecast and a hopeful 
portfolio of partial solutions. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 105, 11579–
11586.

Erb, K. H., Krausmann, F., Gaube, V., Gingrich, 

S., Bondeau, A., & Fischer-Kowalski, M., 
et al. (2009). Analyzing the global human 
appropriation of net primary production — 
processes, trajectories, implications. An 
introduction. Ecological Economics, 69, 
250–259.

Fabry, V. J., Seibel, B. A., Feely, R. A., & Orr, J. 
C. (2008). Impacts of ocean acidification on 
marine fauna and ecosystem processes. ICES 
Journal of Marine Science, 65, 414–432.
Fahnestock, S. R., & Bedzyk, L. A. (1997). 
Production of synthetic spider dragline 

silk protein in Pichia pastoris. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 47, 33–39.

Fahnestock, S. R., & Irwin, S. L. (1997). 

Synthetic spider dragline silk proteins and 
their production in Escherichia coli. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 47, 23–32.

Floss, D. M., Mockey, M., Zanello, G., Brosson, 
D., Diogon, M., & Frutos, R., et al. (2010). 
Expression and immunogenicity of the 
mycobacterial Ag85B/ESAT-6 antigens 
produced in transgenic plants by elastin-
like peptide fusion strategy. Journal of 
Biomedicine & Biotechnology, 2010, 274346. 
10.1155/2010/274346

Floss, D. M., Schallau, K., Rose-John, S., 

Conrad, U., & Scheller, J. (2010). Elastin-
like polypeptides revolutionize recombinant 
protein expression and their biomedical 
application. Trends in Biotechnology, 28, 
37–45.

Gerngross, T. U. (1999). Can biotechnology 

move us toward a sustainable society? 
Nature Biotechnology, 17, 541–544.

Guda, C., Lee, S. B., & Daniell, H. (2000). 

Stable expression of a biodegradable protein-
based polymer in tobacco chloroplasts. Plant 
Cell Reports, 19, 257–262.

Hahn, J. J., Eschenlauer, A. C., Sleytr, U. 
B., Somers, D. A., & Srienc, F. (1999). 
Peroxisomes as sites for synthesis of 
polyhydroxyalkanoates in transgenic plants. 
Biotechnology Progress, 15, 1053–1057.

Hai, T., Frey, K. M., & Steinbüchel, A. (2006). 

Engineered cyanophycin synthetase 
(CphA) from Nostoc ellipsosporum confers 
enhanced CphA activity and cyanophycin 
accumulation to Escherichia coli. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 72, 
7652–7660.

Hazer, B., & Steinbüchel, A. (2007). Increased 

diversification of polyhydroxyalkanoates 
by modification reactions for industrial and 
medical applications. Applied Microbiology 
and Biotechnology, 74, 1–12.

Hinman, M. B., Jones, J. A., & Lewis, R. V. 
(2000). Synthetic spider silk: A modular 
fiber. Trends in Biotechnology, 18, 374–379.

Houmiel, K. L., Slater, S., Broyles, D., 

Casagrande, L., Colburn, S., & Gonzalez, 
K., et al. (1999). Poly(β-hydroxybutyrate) 

Plants as factories for bioplastics and other novel biomaterials

C H A P T E R   3 0

production in oilseed leukoplasts of Brassica 
napus. Planta, 209, 547–550.

Huang, J., Foo, C. W. P., & Kaplan, D. L. 

(2007). Biosynthesis and applications of 
silk-like and collagen-like proteins. Polymer 
Reviews, 47, 29–62.

Hühns, M., Neumann, K., Hausmann, T., 

Klemke, F., Lockau, W., & Kahmann, U., et 
al. (2009). Tuber-specific cphA expression 
to enhance cyanophycin production in 
potatoes. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 7, 
883–898.

Hühns, M., Neumann, K., Hausmann, T., 

Ziegler, K., Klemke, F., & Kahmann, U., et 
al. (2008). Plastid targeting strategies for 
cyanophycin synthetase to achieve high-
level polymer accumulation in Nicotiana 
tabacum. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 6, 
321–336.

Jobling, S. (2004). Improving starch for food 

and industrial applications. Current Opinion 
in Plant Biology, 7, 210–218.

Keeling, P. L., & Myers, A. M. (2010). 
Biochemistry and genetics of starch 
synthesis. Annual Review of Food Science 
and Technology, Vol 1, 271–303.

Khan, E. U., & Liu, J. H. (2009). Plant 
biotechnological approaches for the 
production and commercialization 
of transgenic crops. Biotechnology & 
Biotechnological Equipment, 23, 1281–1288.

Kim, S., & Dale, B. E. (2005). Life cycle 

assessment study of biopolymers 
(polyhydroxyalkanoates) derived from no-
tilled corn. The International Journal of Life 
Cycle Assessment, 10, 200–210.

Ko, J. H., Chow, K. S., & Han, K. H. (2003). 

Transcriptome analysis reveals novel features 
of the molecular events occurring in the 
laticifers of Hevea brasiliensis (Para rubber 
tree). Plant Molecular Biology, 53, 479–492.
Kurdikar, D., Fournet, L., Slater, S. C., Paster, 
M., Gruys, K. J., & Gerngross, T. U., et al. 
(2001). Greenhouse gas profile of a plastic 
material derived from a genetically modified 
plant. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 4, 
107–122.

Lagrain, B., Goderis, B., Brijs, K., & Delcour, 
J. A. (2010). Molecular basis of processing 
wheat gluten toward biobased materials. 
Biomacromolecules, 11, 533–541.

Lawton, J. W. (2002). Zein: A history of processing 

and use. Cereal Chemistry, 79, 1–18.

Lazaris, A., Arcidiacono, S., Huang, Y., Zhou, 

J. -F., Duguay, F., & Chretien, N., et al. 
(2002). Spider silk fibers spun from soluble 
recombinant silk produced in mammalian 
cells. Science, 295, 472–476.

Le Guen, V., Garcia, D., Mattos, C. R. R., 

Doare, F., Lespinasse, D., & Seguin, 
M. (2007). Bypassing of a polygenic 
Microcyclus ulei resistance in rubber tree, 
analyzed by QTL detection. The New 
Phytologist, 173, 335–345.

Lenz, R. W., & Marchessault, R. H. (2005). 

Bacterial polyesters: Biosynthesis, 
biodegradable plastics and biotechnology. 
Biomacromolecules, 6, 1–8.

Lieberei, R. (2007). South American leaf blight 
of the rubber tree (Hevea spp.): New steps 
in plant domestication using physiological 
features and molecular markers. Annals of 
Botany, 100, 1125–1142.

Matsumoto, K., Arai, Y., Nagao, R., Murata, T., 

Takase, K., & Nakashita, H., et al. (2006). 
Synthesis of short-chain-length/medium-
chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) 
copolymers in peroxisome of the transgenic 
Arabidopsis thaliana harboring the PHA 
synthase gene from Pseudomonas sp. 61-3. 
Journal of Polymers and the Environment, 
14, 369–374.

Mecking, S. (2004). Nature or petrochemistry? 

— biologically degradable materials. 
Angewandte Chemie, 43, 1078–1085.

Menassa, R., Hong, Z., Karatzas, C. N., Lazaris, 

A., Richman, A., & Brandle, J. (2004). 
Spider dragline silk proteins in transgenic 
tobacco leaves: Accumulation and field 
production. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 2, 
431–438.

Mittendorf, V., Bongcam, V., Allenbach, L., 
Coullerez, G., Martini, N., & Poirier, Y. 
(1999). Polyhydroxyalkanoate synthesis 
in transgenic plants as a new tool to study 
carbon flow through β-oxidation. Plant 
Journal, 20, 45–55.

Mittendorf, V., Robertson, E. J., Leech, R. M., 

Kruger, N., Steinbüchel, A., & Poirier, Y. 
(1998). Synthesis of medium-chain-length 
polyhydroxyalkanoates in Arabidopsis 
thaliana using intermediates of peroxisomal 
fatty acid β-oxidation. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 95, 13397–13402.

Mohanty, A. K., Liu, W., Tummala, P., Drzal, 

L. T., Misra, M., & Narayan, R. (2005). 
Soy protein-based plastics, blends, and 
composites. In: Mohanty, A. K., Misra, M. 
and Drzal, L. T., (Eds.), Natural Fibers, 
Biopolymers, and Biocomposites (pp. 699–
725).

Mooibroek, H., & Cornish, K. (2000). 

Alternative sources of natural rubber. 
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 53, 
355–365.

Mooney, B. P. (2009). The second green 
revolution? Production of plant-based 
biodegradable plastics. The Biochemical 
Journal, 418, 219–232.

Nawrath, C., Poirier, Y., & Somerville, 

C. (1994). Targeting of the 
polyhydroxybutyrate biosynthetic-
pathway to the plastids of Arabidopsis 
thaliana results in high-levels of polymer 
accumulation. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 91, 12760–12764.

Neumann, K., Stephan, D. P., Ziegler, K., 
Huhns, M., Broer, I., & Lockau, W., et 
al. (2005). Production of cyanophycin, 
a suitable source for the biodegradable 
polymer polyaspartate, in transgenic plants. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 3, 249–258.
Noda, I., Green, P. R., Satkowski, M. M., & 
Schechtman, L. A. (2005). Preparation 
and properties of a novel class of 
polyhydroxyalkanoate copolymers. 
Biomacromolecules, 6, 580–586.

Oppermann-Sanio, F. B., & Steinbüchel, 

A. (2002). Occurrence, functions 
and biosynthesis of polyamides in 
microorganisms and biotechnological 
production. Naturwissenschaften, 89, 11–22.
Pallos, F. M., Robertson, G. H., Pavlath, A. E., 
& Orts, W. J. (2006). Thermoformed wheat 

gluten biopolymers. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry, 54, 349–352.

Philip, S., Keshavarz, T., & Roy, I. (2007). 
Polyhydroxyalkanoates: Biodegradable 
polymers with a range of applications. 
Journal of Chemical Technology and 
Biotechnology, 82, 233–247.

Poirier, Y. (1999). Production of new polymeric 

compounds in plants. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 10, 181–185.

Poirier, Y., & Brumbley, S. M. (2010). Metabolic 

engineering of plants for the synthesis of 
polyhydroxyalkanoates. In: Chen, G.-Q. 
(eds.). Plastics from Bacteria: Natural 
functions and applications (pp. 187–210).
Poirier, Y., Dennis, D. E., Klomparens, K., & 

Somerville, C. (1992). Polyhydroxybutyrate, 
a biodegradable thermoplastic, produced in 
transgenic plants. Science, 256, 520–523.
Poirier, Y., & Gruys, K. J. (2001). Production 
of PHAs in transgenic plants. In: Y. Doi & 
A. Steinbüchel (Eds.), Biopolyesters (pp. 
401–435). Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.

Poirier, Y., Nawrath, C., & Somerville, C. 

(1995). Production of polyhydroxyalkanoates, 
a family of biodegradable plastics and 
elastomers, in bacteria and plants. 
Biotechnology Advances, 13, 142–150.
Polhamus, L. G. (1962). Rubber. Botany, 

production, and utilization. London: Leonard 
Hill Limited.

Ramseier, T. (2010). Biopolymers from North 

America. International Symposium on 
Biopolymers, Stuttgart, Germany.

Ruggiero, F., Exposito, J. Y., Bournat, P., 

Gruber, V., Perret, S., & Comte, J., et al. 
(2000). Triple helix assembly and processing 
of human collagen produced in transgenic 
tobacco plants. FEBS Letters, 469, 132–136.

Sallam, A., & Steinbuchel, A. (2010). 

Dipeptides in nutrition and therapy: 
Cyanophycin-derived dipeptides as natural 
alternatives and their biotechnological 
production. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 87, 815–828.

Sanders, J., Scott, E., Weusthuis, R., & 

Mooibroek, H. (2007). Bio-refinery as the 
bio-inspired process to bulk chemicals. 
Macromolecular Bioscience, 7, 105–117.

Sanford, K., & Kumar, M. (2005). New proteins 

in a materials world. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 16, 416–421.

Scheller, J., & Conrad, U. (2004). Production 
of spider silk proteins in transgenic tobacco 
and potato. In: R. Fischer & S. Schillberg 
(Eds.), Molecular Farming (pp. 171–181). 
Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.

Scheller, J., & Conrad, U. (2005). Plant-

based material, protein and biodegradable 
plastic. Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 8, 
188–196.

Scheller, J., Gührs, K. H., Grosse, F., & Conrad, 
U. (2001). Production of spider silk proteins 
in tobacco and potato. Nature Biotechnology, 
19, 573–577.

Scheller, J., Henggeler, D., Viviani, A., 

& Conrad, U. (2004). Purification of 
spider silk-elastin from transgenic plants 
and application for human chondrocyte 
proliferation. Transgenic Research, 13, 51–57.

Scott, E., Peter, F., & Sanders, J. (2007). 

Biomass in the manufacture of industrial 

493

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

products — the use of proteins and 
amino acids. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 75, 751–762.

Sharma, A. K., & Sharma, M. K. (2009). Plants 

as bioreactors: Recent developments and 
emerging opportunities. Biotechnology 
Advances, 27, 811–832.

Shukla, R., & Cheryan, M. (2001). Zein: The 

industrial protein from corn. Industrial 
Crops and Products, 13, 171–192.

Siler, D. J., Cornish, K., & Hamilton, R. G. 

(1996). Absence of cross-reactivity of 
IgE antibodies from subjects allergic to 
Hevea brasiliensis latex with a new source 
of natural rubber latex from guayule 
(Parthenium argentatum). The Journal 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 98, 
895–902.

Slater, S., Mitsky, T. A., Houmiel, K. L., 

Hao, M., Reiser, S. E., & Taylor, N. B., 
et al. (1999). Metabolic engineering of 
Arabidopsis and Brassica for poly(3-
hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) 
copolymer production. Nature 
Biotechnology, 17, 1011–1016.

Snell, K. D., & Peoples, O. P. (2009). PHA 
bioplastic: A value-added coproduct for 
biomass biorefineries. Biofuels Bioproducts 
Biorefining, 3, 456–467.

Stein, H., Wilensky, M., Tsafrir, Y., Rosenthal, 
M., Amir, R., & Avraham, T., et al. (2009). 
Production of bioactive, post-translationally 
modified, heterotrimeric, human 
recombinant Type-I collagen in transgenic 
tobacco. Biomacromolecules, 10, 2640–2645.

Steinbüchel, A., & Valentin, H. E. (1995). 

Diversity of bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoic 
acids. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 128, 
219–228.

Steinle, A., Bergander, K., & Steinbuchel, 

A. (2009). Metabolic engineering of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae for production 
of novel cyanophycins with an extended 
range of constituent amino acids. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 75, 
3437–3446.

Steinle, A., Witthoff, S., Krause, J. P., & 

Steinbuchel, A. (2010). Establishment of 

cyanophycin biosynthesis in Pichia pastoris 
and optimization by use of engineered 
cyanophycin synthetases. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 76, 1062–1070.

Stubbe, J., Tian, J. M., He, A. M., Sinskey, A. 

J., Lawrence, A. G., & Liu, P. H. (2005). 
Nontemplate-dependent polymerization 
processes: Polyhydroxyalkanoate synthases 
as a paradigms. Annual Review of 
Biochemistry, 74, 433–480.

Thakor, N., Luetke-Eversloh, T., & 

Steinbuechel, A. (2005). Application 
of the BPEC pathway for large-scale 
biotechnological production of poly(3-
mercaptopropionate) by recombinant 
Escherichia coli, including a novel in 
situ isolation method. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 71, 835–841.
Tilbrook, K., Gebbie, L., Schenk, P.M., Poirier, 
Y., & Brumbley, S.M. (2011). Peroxisomal 
polyhydroxyalkanoate biosynthesis is a 
promising strategy for bioplastic production 
in high biomass crops. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, in press.

Tsao, G. T., Cao, N. J., Du, J., & Gong, C. S.  

(1999). Production of multifunctional 
organic acids from renewable resources. 
Advances in Biochemical Engineering/
Biotechnology, 65, 243–280.

van Beilen, J. B. (2008). Transgenic plant 

factories for the production of biopolymers 
and platform chemicals. Biofuels Bioproducts 
Biorefining, 2, 215–228.

van Beilen, J. B., Möller, R., Toonen, M., 
Salentijn, E., & Clayton, D. (2007). 
Industrial crop platforms for the production 
of chemicals and biopolymers. In: D. Bowles 
(Ed.), Outputs of the EPOBIO project. 
Berks: CNAP, University of York.

van Beilen, J. B., & Poirier, Y. (2007a). 

Prospects for biopolymer production in 
plants. Advances in Biochemical Engineering/
Biotechnology, 107, 133–151.

van Beilen, J. B., & Poirier, Y. (2007b). Guayule 
and Russian dandelion as alternative sources 
of natural rubber. Critical Reviews in 
Biotechnology, 27, 217–231.

van Beilen, J. B., & Poirier, Y. (2007c). 
Establishment of new crops for the 
production of natural rubber. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 25, 522–529.

van Beilen, J. B., & Poirier, Y. (2008). 

Production of renewable polymers from 
crop plants. Plant Journal, 54, 684–701.

Verbeek, C. J. R., & van den Berg, L. E.  

(2010). Extrusion processing and 
properties of protein-based thermoplastics. 
Macromolecular Materials and Engineering, 
295, 10–21.

Wenzel, G. (2006). Molecular plant breeding: 

achievements in green biotechnology and 
future perspectives. Applied Microbiology 
and Biotechnology, 70, 642–650.

Werpy, T., & Pedersen, G., eds. (2004). Top 

value added chemicals from biomass, 
Volume 1 – Results of screening for potential 
candidates from sugars and synthesis gas. 
PNNL, NREL, EERE (report 8674), Oak 
Ridge.

Witholt, B., & Kessler, B. (1999). 

Perspectives of medium chain length 
poly(hydroxyalkanoates), a versatile set of 
bacterial bioplastics. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 10, 279–285.

Woerdeman, D. L., Veraverbeke, W. S., 

Parnas, R. S., Johnson, D., Delcour, J. A., 
& Verpoest, I., et al. (2004). Designing 
new materials from wheat protein. 
Biomacromolecules, 5, 1262–1269.

Yang, J., Barr, L. A., Fahnestock, S. R., & Liu, 

Z. -B. (2005). High yield recombinant 
silk-like protein production in transgenic 
plants through protein targeting. Transgenic 
Research, 14, 313–324.

Zeeman, S. C., Kossmann, J., & Smith, A. M. 
(2010). Starch: Its metabolism, evolution, 
and biotechnological modification in 
plants. Annual Review of Plant Biology, 61, 
209–234.

Zhao, M., & Running, S. W. (2010). Drought-
induced reduction in global terrestrial net 
primary production from 2000 through 
2009. Science, 329, 940–943.

494

Vaccines, antibodies, and pharmaceutical 
proteins

29

Yuri Y. Gleba Anatoli Giritch
Nomad Bioscience GmbH, Halle, Germany

Table of Contents

Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 465
Expression Technologies: Nuclear Transformation  .  .  .  .  .  . 466
Expression Technologies: Plastid Transformation  .  .  .  .  .  . 469
Expression Technologies: Transient Expression Systems  . 469
“Full virus” vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .470
Magnifection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .470
Derisking the new manufacturing process . . . . . . . . . .471

Plant-Made Pharmaceuticals:  
A Unique Selling Proposition?  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 471
Plant-Based Manufacturing, Post-Translational 
Modifications, and Plant-Specific Sugars  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 472
Plant-Based Manufacturing and Downstream Issues   .  .  . 473
Plant-Based Expression Systems:  
Advantages and Limitations   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 474
Nuclear transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .475
Plastid transformation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .475
Transient expression  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .476
Conclusions and Outlook  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 476
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 476

Introduction

Plants are rapidly becoming accepted manufacturing hosts for 
biopharmaceuticals.  Until  recently,  investors  and  large  phar-
maceutical  companies  have  avoided  plants  as  manufactur-
ing hosts to avoid double (product and process) development 
risk,  but  such  an  attitude  is  changing.  Table  29.1  provides  a 
list  of  plant-derived  pharmaceutical  proteins  that  have  been 
approved by regulatory agencies or are in active clinical trials. 
There  are  currently  three  pharmaceutical  proteins  approved 
for market manufacturing: anti-caries antibody (developed by 
Planet  Biotechnology,  USA);  Newcastle  virus  subunit  vaccine 
(Dow  AgroSciences,  USA);  and  glucocerebrosidase  (Protalix 

Biotherapeutics, Israel); the last product is the most significant 
both  in  terms  of  potential  market  and  because  it  is  the  first 
injectable biopharmaceutical made in plants. Protalix, an Israeli 
company specializing in the use of cultured plant cells for man-
ufacturing biopharmaceuticals, has successfully completed the 
Phase III clinical trial with its biosimilar version of glucocere-
brosidase,  and  has  permission  to  use  it  on  a  compassionate 
basis (approval by the Food and Drug Administration, FDA, is 
expected shortly). Protalix has also entered into a joint venture 
deal  with  Pfizer,  the  world’s  largest  pharmaceutical  company, 
thus ensuring  the  best commercialization  effort for  the  prod-
uct.  All  previously  mentioned  biopharmaceuticals  have  been 
developed  on  the  basis  of  stable  nuclear  genetic  transforma-
tion,  and  their  successful  approval  significantly  lowers  both 
real and perceived risks associated with plants as new manufac-
turing hosts, paving the way to the new, more efficient plant-
based  manufacturing  processes.  Among  those  novel  processes 
that  have  made  the  most  significant  progress  in  recent  years 
are, in addition to stable nuclear transformation, plastid trans-
formation as well as various transient expression technologies.

In this regard, it is important to mention that most of the 
currently  announced  clinical  trials  are  based  on  the  biophar-
maceuticals  produced  using  transient  expression  systems. 
These  include  recombinant  antigens  and  immunoglobulins 
produced  using  deconstructed  viral  vectors  (Icon  Genetics/
Bayer,  Germany;  Mapp  Pharmaceuticals,  USA;  Fraunhofer 
Institute,  USA)  or  a  non-viral  transient  system  (Medicago, 
Canada).  Such  popularity  of  the  transient  systems  reflects 
their  speed  and  yields,  but  it  also  illustrates  their  scalability 
and acceptance by the regulatory agencies.

The  newly  found  confidence  of  investors  and  large  com-
panies  is  also  in  line  with  the  previously  mentioned  informa-
tion.  For  example,  Protalix  has  made  a  successful  reverse 
merger  and  is  listed  on  Nasdaq  with  a  cap  of  $500  million; 
SemBioSys  and  Medicago,  two  Canadian  companies,  have 
both  made  an  initial  public  offering  (IPO)  on  the  Canadian 
stock  exchange;  in  2008  alone,  Biolex,  a  U.S.-based  com-
pany, has raised $60 million in private investment for clinical 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00029-8

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

development  of  interferon  alpha,  whereas  Medicago  was  par-
tially (49% of shares) acquired by Philip Morris International 
and subsequently entered into a number of important business 
deals.  Acquisition  of  Icon  Genetics  by  Bayer  has  been  suc-
cessful to the acquirer and resulted in an active development 
of  plant-made  individualized  vaccines  by  Bayer.  Recently,  the 
U.S. governmental agency DARPA awarded grants worth over 
$100  million  to  Fraunhofer  Institute/USA,  G-Con,  KBP,  and 
Medicago, thus recognizing plant-based transient expression as 
the  technology  of  choice  for  rapid  large-scale  manufacturing 
processes of vaccines and antibodies. Manufacturing platforms 
have  also  matured,  with  a  number  of  companies  and  con-
tract  manufacturing  organizations  (CMOs)  possessing  cGMP-
compliant  manufacturing  facilities  (KBP,  Protalix,  Medicago/
PMI,  Biolex,  Icon/Bayer,  Fraunhofer/Germany,  Fraunhofer 
Institute/USA).  Thus,  the  overall  perceived  and  real  risks  of 
using plants as manufacturing hosts have been greatly reduced. 
Equally  important,  at  least  some  companies  have  developed 
new  processes  that  are  superior  over  existing  manufacturing 
alternatives in many respects.

The area of plant-made pharmaceuticals is an actively devel-
oping field and its progress has recently been the subject of a 
number of reviews (Gleba et al., 2004, 2005, 2007a,b; Hellwig 
et al., 2004; Canizares et al., 2005a,b; Santi et al., 2006; Bock, 
2007; McCormick and Palmer, 2008; Lico et al., 2008; Yusibov 
and Rabindran, 2008; Mett et al., 2008; Rybicki, 2009; Daniell 
et  al.,  2009b;  Smith  et  al.,  2009;  Karg  and  Kallio,  2009;  Ko  

et  al.,  2009;  Plasson  et  al.,  2009;  Sainsbury  et  al.,  2009;  De 
Muynck et al., 2010). This chapter provides a general overview 
of  the  plant-based  manufacturing  platform  as  a  novel  techni-
cal process and a new business opportunity, and discusses the 
strengths and weaknesses of plants and different plant expres-
sion  systems,  as  compared  to  the  established  manufacturing 
hosts and expression platforms.

Expression Technologies: Nuclear 
Transformation

Transgenic plants obtained through nuclear genetic transforma-
tion  are  historically  the  first  production  hosts.  Nuclear  trans-
formation  is  a  very  well  established  expression  technology; 
however, most applied work has been done with just one consti-
tutive promoter — the 35S promoter of the cauliflower mosaic 
virus. This promoter provides expression in most plant tissues, 
albeit at low levels of milligrams to tens of milligrams per kilo-
gram of fresh tissue weight. These levels in some cases can be 
significantly improved by co-expression of a silencing suppressor 
such as Hc-Pro or P19 (e.g., Marillonnet et al., 2004; Kalantidis 
et al., 2006). The best results have, nevertheless, been obtained 
using  tissue-specific  promoters  such  as  promoters  of  seed  pro-
teins, as well as regulatory elements of proteins highly expressed 
in leaves. Examples of high expression in nuclear transformants 
are  listed  in  Table  29.2;  and  it  is  clearly  evident  that  the  best 

Table 29.1  Plant-made pharmaceutical proteins approved or currently in clinical trials

Biopharmaceutical

Approval

Company

Expression system, host

CaroRx™ anti-caries Mab

EU (medical device)

Planet Biotechnology

Transgenic, tobacco

Newcastle virus subunit vaccine

Taliglucerase™ glucocerebrosidase

Interferon α

Insulin

H5N1 Influenza virus VLP vaccine

H1N1 Influenza virus subunit vaccine

Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma  
individualized vaccine

Anti-Ebola Mab

Anti-Clostridium difficile Mab

noroVAXX™ VLP vaccine

Anit-HIV Mab

Acetylcholinesterase

Lysozymea

Lacotrrina

U.S.

U.S.

Phase II

Phase II

Phase I

Phase I

Phase I

Phase I (2010)

Phase I (2010)

Phase I (2010)

Phase I (2010)

Phase I (2010)

—

—

DowAgro

Protalix

Biolex

SemBioSys

Medicago

Fraunhofer, U.S.

Transgenic, tobacco

Transgenic, carrot cells

Transgenic, duckweed

Transgenic, safflower

Transient, Nicotiana

Transient Nicotiana

Icon Genetics/Bayer

Transient, Nicotiana

Mapp Biopharmaceuticals

Transient, Nicotiana

Mapp Biopharmaceuticals

Transient, Nicotiana

VAXX

Pharma-Planta

Protalix

Ventria Bioscience

Ventria Bioscience

Transient, Nicotiana

Transgenic, maize

Transgenic, carrot cells

Transgenic, rice

Transgenic, rice

aAlthough not in clinical trials per se, these two products have undergone extensive toxicology and activity characterization.

466

Vaccines, antibodies, and pharmaceutical proteins

C H A P T E R   2 9

Table 29.2  Very high expression levels of recombinant proteins produced in plants

Protein

Nuclear transformants

Phytase

ScFV

β-Glucuronidase

Lactoferrin

Lysozyme

Lysozyme

Cellulase 1

Cellobiohydrolase 1

Transplastomic plants

Tetanus toxin C fragment

Canine parvovirus CTB-2L21

Bacillus anthracis pagA

Interferon α 2b

Human papillomavirus L1

HIV-1 p24 antigen

Yersinia pestis V-F1 antigen

Lysin PlyGBS

Lysin Pal

Lysin Cpl-1

Insulin-like growth factors

Transient systems

α-Amylase

Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma ScFv

GFP, DsRed

GFP

Human somatotropin

IgG1, Mab A5

TMV CP-Protein A

Yersinia pestis F1, V, F1-V

Hepatitis B core antigen

GFP

At adenosine kinase

Tuberculosis ESAT6 antigen

Expression cassette

Yield, mg/g (%tsp)

Reference

35S

Arc5-I

rbcS1

Gt1

Gt1

Puroindoline, Gt1

Globulin 1

Globulin 1

TMV

TMV

TMV

TMV

TMV

TMV/PVX

TMV

TMV

TMV

TMV

TMV

TMV

(14.4%)

(36.5%)

(10%)

5.0

5.0 (45%)

5.2–9.2

(16%)

(16%)

(25%)

(31%)

(4.5–14%)

(8–21%)

(20–26%)

Verwoerd et al. (1995)

De Jaeger et al. (2002)

Outchkourov et al. (2003)

Nandi et al. (2005)

Huang et al. (2002)

Hennegan et al. (2005)

Hood et al. (2007)

Hood et al. (2007)

Tregoning et al. (2003)

Molina et al. (2005)

Koya et al. (2005)

Arlen et al. (2007)

Fernandez-San Millan et al. (2008)

0.45 (4.5%)

McCabe et al. (2008)

(14.8%)

(70%)

2.0 (30%)

0.5 (10%)

(32%)

Arlen et al. (2008)

Oey et al. (2009a)

Oey et al. (2009b)

Oey et al. (2009b)

Daniell et al. (2009a)

(5% tsp)

Kumagai et al. (2000)

0.5

5.0

McCormick et al. (2003)

Marillonnet et al. (2004)

2.5–4.0

Marillonnet et al. (2005)

1.0

0.5

2–3

1–2

2.4

5.5

5.0

0.8

Gils et al. (2005)

Giritch et al. (2006)

Werner et al. (2006)

Santi et al. (2006a)

Huang et al. (2006)

Lindbo (2007a,b)

Lindbo (2007a)

Dorokhov et al. (2007)

(Continued )

467

Table 29.2  (Continued)

Protein

HPV antigen L1

Plasmodium PyMSP4/5 antigen

Norwalk virus CP

GFP

IgG HT-2G12

GFP

GFP

Hepatitis B core antigen

Norwalk CP antigen

Griffithsin

Murine IgG C5-1

Human IgG

G-CSF, GM-CSF

Aprotinin

35S

TMV

TMV

35S

35S

CMV

AMV/CMV

BeYDV

BeYDV

TMV

Plastocyanin

BeYDV

TMV

TMV

0.5

2.0

0.8

1.6

0.3

0.5

0.4

0.8

0.3

1.0

0.4–1.5

0.5

0.3–0.5

0.3–1.0

0.5–4.8

5.0

5.0

Maclean et al. (2007)

Webster et al. (2009)

Santi et al. (2008)

Sainsbury and Lomonossoff (2008)

Sainsbury and Lomonossoff (2008)

Fujiki et al. (2008)

Green et al. (2009)

Huang et al. (2009a)

Huang et al. (2009a)

O’Keefe et al. (2009)

Vezina et al. (2009)

Huang et al. (2009b)

Zvereva et al. (2009)

Vancanneyt et al. (2009)

Bendandi et al. (2010)

Nomad Bioscience data

Nomad Bioscience data

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

Expression cassette

Yield, mg/g (%tsp)

Reference

Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma twenty different IgG

TMV/PVX

Mini-insulin

Human interferon α

TMV

TMV

Abbreviations: 35S, 35S promoter of cauliflower mosaic virus; arc5-I, arcelin promoter of Phaseolus vulgaris; rbcS1, promoter of RUBISCO small subunit of 
Chrysanthemum; Gt1, glutenin promoter of Oryza sativa; puroindoline, purindoline B promoter of Triticum aestivum; globulin 1, globulin 1 promoter from Zea mays; 
TMV, tobacco mosaic virus; PVX, potato virus X; CMV, cucumber mosaic virus; AMV, alfalfa mosaic virus ; BeYDV, bean yellow dwarf virus; plastocyanin, Medicago 
sativa plastocyanin gene promoter.

results  have  thus  far  been  obtained  using  expression  cassettes 
with seed-specific promoters.

Seeds have proven to be versatile vehicles for recombinant 
proteins  of  all  types,  including  short  peptides  and  complex 
heterooligomeric  proteins  such  as  antibodies.  The  down-
stream  processing  of  seeds  is  greatly  assisted  by  the  stabil-
ity  of  recombinant  proteins  in  seeds  during  storage,  thus 
allowing  decoupling  of  processing  from  the  growth  and  har-
vest  cycle.  In  many  cases,  the  purification  is  also  simplified 
because  seeds,  compared  to  leaves  (another  main  produc-
tion organ), do not contain reactive small molecules (chloro-
phylls,  phenolics)  that  complicate  primary  processing  of  the 
biomass. In terms of net protein level per biomass, transgenic 
rice  plants  expressing  over  9 g/kg  of  seed  (Hennegan  et  al., 
2005)  hold  the  productivity  record.  However,  it  should  be 
mentioned  that,  since  seed  yields  per  hectare  are  far  below 
respective  yields  of  green  biomass  (standard  yields  would 
be  8–20  tons  per  hectare  for  seed  versus  100–300  ton  per 
hectare  for  leaves),  the  highest  productivity  on  a  per  hec-
tare  basis  is  achieved  with  plants  expressing  recombinant 

proteins  in  leaves  such  as  transplastomics  in  which  foreign 
genes  have  been  inserted  in  the  DNA  of  plastids  or  tran-
siently transfected plants. A number of companies are explor-
ing  seed-produced  recombinant  proteins  as  a  manufacturing 
platform, including SemBioSys (Canada), Ventria (USA), and 
Plantechno (Italy). Among the production hosts used are saf-
flower,  rice,  and  tobacco;  in  the  past,  maize  and  barley  have 
also been used. A recent general review of seed-based expres-
sion systems has been published by Boothe et al. (2010).

There  are  several  publications  that  describe  high  levels  of 
recombinant  protein  also  obtained  in  leaf  tissues  of  nuclear 
transgenic  plants,  starting  with  an  early  paper  of  Verwoerd 
et al. (1995) who described significant levels of expression (10% 
of total soluble protein, TSP) of phytase in leaves of transgenic 
tobacco using a 35S CaMV promoter. Later, superior results were 
obtained with a leaf-specific promoter and terminator signals such 
as  those  of  the  ribulose-1,4-bisphosphate  carboxylase-oxygenase 
(RUBISCO) small subunit (Outchkourov et al., 2003). A special 
case  is  the  manufacturing  platform  of  Biolex  (USA);  the  com-
pany is using duckweed, an aquatic plant, as a production host. 

468

Vaccines, antibodies, and pharmaceutical proteins

C H A P T E R   2 9

Expression  takes  place  in  green  photosynthesizing  tissues  and 
expression levels are high compared to those in terrestrial plants 
(Cox, 2006).

Last  but  not  least,  numerous  experiments  have  been 
directed  toward  the  expression  of  recombinant  proteins 
in  cultured  plant  cells  and  cultured  organs.  We  did  not  find 
exceptionally  high  expression  levels  in  the  literature,  so  this 
area seems to require further exploration. Plant cell fermenta-
tion is a very promising manufacturing platform and two out 
of the three approved products (Newcastle virus subunit vac-
cine of Dow AgroSciences and glucocerebrosidase of Protalix) 
are manufactured in plant cell fermenters.

Nuclear transformation allows for expression of proteins in 
all cellular compartments, thus it offers possibilities for vari-
ous post-translational modifications of the expressed proteins 
including glycosylation. Nuclear transformants are often sub-
ject to silencing, therefore, the development requires testing 
multiple transformation events over a number of generations, 
thus slowing down the research and development. Expression 
of proteins in seeds seems to have reached a certain level of 
maturity,  however,  in  our  opinion  future  efforts  should  con-
centrate  on  secondary  crops  (e.g.,  safflower  developed  by 
SemBioSys)  as  biopharmaceutical  production  hosts,  rather 
than relying on major crops and risk the segregation problems.
Another interesting application of nuclear transformation was 
demonstrated by Inge Broer and colleagues (Huhns et al., 2008, 
2009).  They  developed  stable  transgenic  lines  of  tobacco  and 
potato  expressing  the  cyanophycin  synthase  gene  from  cyano-
bacterium Thermosynechococcus elongatus, which resulted in the 
accumulation  of  cyanobacterial  storage  material  cyanophycin, 
a  copolymer  of  aspartic  acid  and  arginine.  Plastid  targeting  of 
expressed enzyme allowed a cyanophycin accumulation of about 
6.8% of dry weight in tobacco leaves (Huhns et al., 2008) and 
7.5% of dry weight in potato tubers (Huhns et al., 2009).

Expression Technologies: Plastid 
Transformation

In the plastid transformation process, foreign genes are incor-
porated into the chloroplast genome by homologous recombi-
nation,  eliminating  variation  of  expression  typically  common 
for nuclear transformants. Moreover, gene silencing does not 
seem to occur in transplastomic plants. The expression levels 
are  facilitated  by  the  fact  that  there  are  over  10,000  copies 
of  transgene  in  each  transformed  cell.  For  many  practically 
important proteins, very high levels of expression (up to 70% 
of TSP or up to 5 g/kg of fresh biomass, see also Table 29.2) 
have been achieved using this technology. In addition, unlike 
seed harvest, leaf biomass can be harvested several times per 
year, and for crops such as tobacco or alfalfa, annual biomass 
yields  of  up  to  300  tons  per  hectare  per  year  are  possible. 
Since  the  plastid  genes  are  inherited  (in  most  crop  species) 
strictly  maternally,  the  ecological  risk  of  transgene  escape 
through pollen to other crops is minimal. Although most work 
has  been  done  with  transplastomic  tobaccos,  plastid  trans-
formation can be performed on crops such as lettuce, which 
eventually would allow using an unprocessed or semi-purified 
biomass as edible medicinal material.

The gene expression in plastids (most often in chloroplasts) 
is similar to expression in bacterial cells with the same limita-
tions:  the  expressed  protein  will  start  with  methionine;  and 
plastid-produced  proteins  are  not  glycosylated.  This  second 
limitation especially narrows down the usefulness of the plat-
form, as most biopharmaceuticals used today are glycosylated 
proteins. We are, however, left with several important classes 
of  polypeptides  and  proteins  that  can  be  produced  in  plas-
tids, the most obvious cases are vaccines (especially bacterial 
subunit vaccines and adjuvants), and antimicrobial and antivi-
ral  polypeptides  and  proteins,  as  well  as  some  cytokines  and 
growth hormones.

The  first  chloroplast-derived  antigen  that  proved  to  be 
immunologically  active  in  animal  studies  was  a  subunit  vac-
cine  against  Clostridium  tetani,  the  causal  agent  of  tetanus 
(Tregoning et al., 2003). In the original work, the TetC frag-
ment of tetanus toxin was expressed in transplastomic plants 
at levels of 10–25% of TSP. The material was immunologically 
active  and  protected  mice  from  the  Clostridium  challenge. 
There  are  a  number  of  publications  describing  high  expres-
sion  levels  in  chloroplasts  of  immunologically  active  antigens 
and adjuvants from bacteria and protozoans, including Bacillus 
anthracis  (Watson  et  al.,  2004;  Koya  et  al.,  2005),  Borrelia 
burgdorferi  (Glenz  et  al.,  2006),  Vibrio  cholerae  (Davoodi-
Semiromi  et  al.,  2009,  2010),  Yersinia  pestis  (Arlen  et  al., 
2008),  and  Entamoeba  histolytica  (Chebolu  and  Daniell, 
2007).  Some  cases  reflecting  very  high  expression  levels  of 
functional antigens are listed in Table 29.2. Several papers also 
describe  expression  of  viral  antigens  in  a  form  of  subunit  or 
virus-like particles (Molina et al., 2005; Fernandez-San Millan 
et al., 2008).

Another  fascinating  opportunity  is  reflected  in  the  work 
of  R.  Bock  and  colleagues  who  developed  transplastomic 
plants expressing high levels of antibacterial proteins such as 
bacteriophage  lysins  that  are  toxic  to  bacteria  and  thus  can-
not be produced easily by microbial fermentation (Oey et al., 
2009a,b). Lysins act through hydrolysis of the bacterial walls, 
and  since  plastids  do  not  have  one,  expression  in  plants  can 
reach  very  high  (over  70%  of  TSP)  levels  without  obvious 
toxic  effects.  Specific  lysins  such  as  Pal  and  Cpl-1  effective 
against  Streptococcus  pneumoniae  and  plyGBS  active  against 
pathogenic group A and B streptococci have been successfully 
produced and exhibited full enzymatic activity.

It is a pity that the only company created to commercialize 
the transplastomic platform, Chlorogen (USA), was founded 
before  it  had  a  serious  product  candidate;  we  hope  that  in 
view  of  the  current  successes,  there  will  be  new  business 
attempts.

Expression Technologies: Transient 
Expression Systems

Plant  virus  vectors  have  been  developed  as  an  alternative  to 
other  expression  methods  (stably  transformed  transgenic  or 
transplastomic plants; reviewed in Gleba et al., 2004, 2007a) 
because  of  some  anticipated  advantages,  such  as  expres-
sion  speed  and  yield,  reduced  cost/duration  of  research  and 
development,  very  high  throughput,  and  so  forth.  There  has 

469

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

been  impressive  technical  progress  in  the  past  few  years  in 
the development of production processes and industrial plant 
hosts,  based  on  different  approaches,  including  the  virus 
vector-based approach. Most progress has been achieved with 
RNA viruses, and the most advanced vectors have been built 
using  just  a  handful  of  plant  virus  species  such  as  tobacco 
mosaic virus (TMV), but also including potato virus X (PVX), 
alfalfa  mosaic  virus  (AMV),  cowpea  mosaic  virus  (CPMV), 
and so forth.

“Full virus” vectors

Historically, the first approach was to design a vector capable 
of infecting a plant in the same way as a wild-type virus, but 
that  has  additionally  been  engineered  to  carry  and  express  a 
heterologous sequence coding for a gene of interest (this strat-
egy is also known as a “full virus” vector strategy). The most 
extensive  program  resulting  in  a  series  of  commercial  vectors 
used  in  various  laboratories  worldwide  has  been  executed  at 
Large  Scale  Biology  Corp.,  Vacaville,  California  (LSBC;  for-
merly  Biosource  Genetics),  together  with  associates  from 
several  universities.  LSBC  filed  for  bankruptcy  in  2006,  but 
most  of  its  assets,  including  intellectual  property,  are  owned 
and  are  being  further  developed  by  Kentucky  Bioprocessing 
in Owensboro, Kentucky. That effort focused on TMV as the 
vector backbone, and the resultant technology and viral vectors 
are known as Geneware® technology, and are documented in 
numerous  publications  (Donson  et  al.,  1991;  Kumagai  et  al., 
1993, 1995, 2000; Turpen et al., 1995; Shivprasad et al., 1999; 
Turpen, 1999; McCormick et al., 1999, 2003, 2008; Rabindran 
and Dawson, 2001; Lindbo, 2007a; O’Keefe et al., 2009). In 
several  cases,  high  yields  (10%  and  up  to  20%  of  TSP)  have 
indeed been observed (Table 29.2).

LSBC has developed a concept of an individualized vaccine 
for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma that in essence is a single-chain 
antibody  individually  tailored  to  induce  immune  response 
against  cancerous  B-cells  (McCormick  et  al.,  1999,  2003, 
2008).  The  company  has  performed  a  successful  Phase  I 
clinical trial, but economic problems shortly thereafter led to 
the discontinuation of product development. LSBC and oth-
ers have demonstrated that a number of proteins can be well 
expressed using Geneware® technology. Among the products 
described in the literature are α-galactosidase (Turpen, 1999), 
α-amylase  (Kumagai  et  al.,  2000),  and,  recently,  griffithsin 
(O’Keefe et al., 2009). LSBC’s manufacturing capabilities are 
currently  owned  and  operated  by  Kentucky  Bioprocessing, 
a  contract  manufacturing  organization.  Currently,  there  are 
several  proteins  in  late  preclinical  development  that  are 
expected  to  be  made  using  full  virus  technology.  Probably 
the most advanced case is that of griffithsin, an antiviral pro-
tein  that  can  be  expressed  in  Nicotiana  benthamiana  plants 
at  high  yield  (over  1 g/kg)  and  in  a  functional  form  by  using 
Geneware® vectors (O’Keefe et al., 2009). Plant viral vectors 
have also been successfully used to present different epitopes 
on  its  surface  through  expression  of  fusions  between  a  coat 
protein  gene  and  a  gene  encoding  short  polypeptide  (usually 
immunogenic epitope).

Magnifection

The “second generation” expression systems such as “magnifec-
tion” (derivative from “magnum infection”) integrate elements of 
viral machinery, such as RNA/DNA amplification, and cell-to-cell 
movement,  along  with  non-viral  processes  such  as  replicon  for-
mation  via  Agrobacterium-mediated  delivery  of  T-DNA  encod-
ing viral vector or via activation from a plant chromosomal DNA 
resulting in intracellular generation of replicons from a chromo-
somally  encoded  pro-replicon  or  pro-virus.  The  most  advanced 
transient  version  of  this  approach  is  the  technology  developed 
by Icon Genetics, Halle, Germany, and trademarked as magnI-
CON®  technology  and  vectors.  The  magnICON®  vectors  are 
being used by dozens of business and research laboratories world-
wide,  and  the  technology,  as  well  as  its  applications,  have  been 
covered in a number of publications (Gleba et al., 2004, 2005, 
2007a; Marillonnet et al., 2004, 2005; Gils et al., 2005; Giritch  
et al., 2006; Werner et al., 2006; Santi et al., 2006a, 2008; Huang 
et al., 2006; Vancanneyt et al., 2009; Bendandi et al., 2010).

The  magnifection,  an  indication  that  two  infection  agents 
are  being  used  such  as  a  bacterium  and  a  virus  process,  is  a 
simple and indefinitely scalable protocol for heterologous pro-
tein expression in plants, which relies on transient amplifica-
tion of viral vectors delivered to multiple areas of a plant body 
(systemic  delivery)  by  Agrobacterium  as  DNA  precursors. 
Such a process is an infiltration of whole mature plants with a 
diluted suspension of agrobacteria carrying T-DNAs encoding 
viral RNA replicons. The scale-up (industrial) version requires 
simple  apparatuses  for  high-throughput  Agrobacterium  deliv-
ery  to  whole  plants.  The  magnifection  platform  effectively 
addresses  most  of  the  major  shortcomings  of  earlier  plant-
based  technologies  by  providing  an  overall  best  combination 
of the following features: highest expression levels approach-
ing biological limits; highest relative yields; ability to express 
complex  proteins;  low  up-  and  downstream  costs;  very  fast 
and low R&D costs; and low biosafety concerns. The process 
has been brought to a QA/GMP compliance level at Bayer’s 
new  pilot  manufacturing  facility  in  Halle,  Germany,  and  a 
pilot manufacturing with a throughput capacity of 0.6 ton/day  
based  on  Bayer’s  technology  was  started  at  Kentucky 
Bioprocessing  LLC  in  2009.  There  are  several  magnICON®-
based products, mainly pharmaceutical proteins that are being 
developed  by  Bayer  and  its  licensees;  Bayer’s  lead  product 
candidate,  individualized  vaccines  for  non-Hodgkin’s  lym-
phoma produced in a cGMP-compliant manufacturing facility 
in Halle, entered clinical trials in January 2010 (Table 29.1).

Depending on the vector used (the host organism and the 
initial density of bacteria), this much more efficient and syn-
chronous  agro-mediated  local  transfection  leads  in  4  to  10 
days  to  a  dramatic  synthesis  of  proteins,  providing  yields  as 
high  as  5 g/kg  of  fresh  leaf  biomass.  The  viral  vectors  effec-
tively shut down normal biosynthetic processes in cells. As a 
result, in 10–14 days post-infection, the most abundant plant 
leaf protein, RUBISCO, all but disappears, and the amount of 
viral  vector-encoded  protein  reaches  as  much  as  80%  of  the 
TSP in a leaf. These reported data clearly demonstrated that 
TMV- and PVX-based vectors provide yields approaching bio-
logical  limits  of  the  plant-leaf-based  production.  Infiltration 

470

Vaccines, antibodies, and pharmaceutical proteins

C H A P T E R   2 9

of  plants/detached  leaves  with  bacteria  has  been  done  in 
many different ways; the simplest one is vacuum infiltration 
done by immersing whole aerial parts of plants in a bacterial 
suspension  and  applying  a  weak  vacuum.  Further  develop-
ment  and  automation  of  these  protocols  could  increase  the 
throughput of the process and reduce the amount of required 
manpower.

Table  29.2  provides  yield  data  for  selected  recombinant 
proteins of practical interest based on publications of numer-
ous  groups  as  well  as  our  unpublished  results.  It  is  obvious 
that  many  proteins,  including  multiple  biopharmaceuticals 
(interferons,  insulins,  growth  hormones,  colony-stimulating 
factors, numerous antigens, selected full IgG antibodies, etc.), 
can  be  expressed  at  very  high  yields  of  1–5 g/kg.  Most  pro-
teins  expressed  to  date  using  magnifection  have  been  prop-
erly  processed  and  folded,  and  were  functional.  This  is  true 
for high molecular weight proteins (up to 100 kDa), proteins 
requiring  specific  cleavage  of  signal  or  transit  peptides,  pro-
teins  requiring  extensive  disulfide  bond  formation,  proteins 
requiring complex processing (e.g., hemagglutinin of Influenza 
virus), and proteins forming virus-like particles (such as hepa-
titis  B  core  protein,  Norwalk  virus  capsid  protein,  papilloma 
virus L1 protein).

Derisking the new manufacturing process

There  were  several  real  and/or  perceived  risk  factors  in 
connection  with  the  new  process  that  have  been  carefully  
considered  and  addressed  when  developing  the  process  and 
later,  preparing  the  business  plan.  These  include  quality  of 
plant-made  proteins,  quality  of  proteins  made  by  transient 
process,  effects  of  plant-specific  protein  modifications,  risk 
of public acceptance of plant-made pharmaceuticals made in 
plants and, last but not least, a potential new regulatory bur-
den  imposed  by  regulatory  agencies  on  plant-based  produc-
tion.  Extensive  studies  at  Icon/Bayer  and  other  companies 
demonstrated  that  the  plant-based  manufacturing  in  general 
and  the  transient  expression  in  particular,  provides  proteins 
of  the  quality  and  purity  required  by  the  pharmaceutical 
industry. Our manufacturing plant host, N. benthamiana, has 
been  modified  to  be  free  of  plant-specific  sugars  added  to 
recombinant proteins, thus removing a potential risk of unde-
sired  host-specific  immunogenicity  of  plant-derived  proteins. 
Unlike  other  plant-based  manufacturing  processes,  because 
of the very high protein yields provided by the magnICON® 
process, this technology can, and is expected to be, commer-
cially run in a contained greenhouse facility, thus avoiding any 
real or political risks in connection with the release of geneti-
cally  modified  organisms  into  the  environment.  The  interac-
tion  of  Icon/Bayer  and  other  companies  (LSBC,  Protalix, 
Biolex,  SemBioSys,  etc.)  with  the  FDA  and  other  regula-
tory  agencies  did  not  result  in  any  new  essential  regulations 
imposed  on  plant-based  transgenic  or  transient  technology. 
It  has  been  proven  that  the  process  of  making  pharmaceuti-
cal proteins in plants can be run under proper quality control, 
and  where  needed,  in  compliance  with  cGMP  regulations. 
Existing  functioning  pilot  manufacturing  facilities  have  also 

proven  that  the  process  can  be  scaled  up  to  intended  indus-
trial levels without new unknown regulation risk.

Plant-Made Pharmaceuticals: A 
Unique Selling Proposition?

Recombinant  proteins  can  be  manufactured  in  different  liv-
ing  cells  and  organisms,  and  historically,  for  pharmaceutical 
proteins, bacteria, yeasts, and animal cells have been the main 
industrial  manufacturing  hosts.  It  is  not  so  easy  to  come  up 
with a general reason as to why plants should be better indus-
trial hosts. For many years, proponents of the idea of making 
pharmaceutical proteins in plants have claimed the low cost of 
this manufacturing process as the main argument. The experi-
mental  data  provided  did  not  support  this  claim;  however, 
because  the  expression  levels  of  proteins  achieved  in  most 
early experiments were very low (0.1–1% TSP), thus magni-
fying  the  purification  costs  that  already  accounted  for  more 
than  50%  of  manufacturing  costs  (direct  “costs  of  goods”). 
As a general rule, the purification costs are inversely propor-
tional  to  the  initial  concentration  of  the  active  ingredient  in 
a primary extract. To circumvent this obvious problem, many 
researchers  proposed  the  use  of  unpurified  or  partially  puri-
fied  plant  extracts  as  medicines,  applied  orally.  There  are 
probably some medical needs that can be addressed by such 
an approach, but generally speaking the high purification level 
of  a  biopharmaceutical  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  great  major-
ity  of  potential  applications.  We  are  therefore  left  with  the  
costs of downstream processing as the major bottleneck that 
needs  to  be  addressed  before  the  plant-based  manufacturing 
can be a really appealing cost-reduction proposition. Some of 
the  research  addressing  the  issue  of  the  purification  costs  is 
discussed  next.  In  conclusion,  our  best  message  to  an  inter-
ested  party  is  that  plant-based  manufacturing  is  20–25% 
cheaper  in  terms  of  running  costs  compared  to  the  animal-
cell-based process.

A  much  more  plant-made  pharmaceuitical  (PMP)  friendly 
conclusion can be made about the capital costs associated with 
green plants as production hosts. We estimate that, compared 
to  the  standard  animal-cell-based  manufacturing  process,  the 
plant-based production will be at least 40% cheaper in capital 
expenses, and it will provide much more flexibility to the man-
ufacturer.  In  the  case  of  Herceptin®  (trastuzumab)  and  other 
antibodies,  the  only  industrial  production  method  used  is  the 
expression of antibodies in transgenic animal cells such as CHO 
cells,  in  combination  with  affinity  capture-based  purification. 
Development  of  such  a  production  facility  is  connected  with 
very  high  capital  and  other  upfront  costs.  According  to  vari-
ous sources, for example Bernstein Research, capital costs for a 
mammalian cell facility with a capacity of 500 kg/year are over 
$300  million,  and  additional  costs  of  running  it  for  the  initial 
three years prior to entering the manufacturing phase will add 
another  $120  million,  also  required  upfront  (http://www.ftc
.gov/bc/workshops/hcbio/docs/fob/rgal.pdf).  Based  on  exist-
ing prototypes such as Icon and KBP facilities, we have made 
estimates of capital costs and costs of goods associated with our 
new  integrated  process.  Our  calculations  show  that  a  facility 

471

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

with the capacity of 1 ton of antibody per year would cost less 
than $50 million and operation costs for the first 3 years would 
amount to $45–60 million. Since this new manufacturing plat-
form  has  been  essentially  derisked,  such  a  low  financial  entry 
barrier represents a very attractive opportunity for medium-size 
companies in developed countries, as well as excellent opportu-
nities for manufacturers in developing countries.

Other  important  advantages  presented  by  plants  include 
the  speed  of  manufacturing,  speed  of  research  and  develop-
ment,  and  the  inherent  flexibility  of  the  transient  expres-
sion  systems.  So  far,  only  the  speed  of  the  system  has  been 
recognized,  for  example,  by  DARPA,  which  concluded  that 
plant-based transient systems are overall the best manufactur-
ing technologies when dealing with bioterrorism and pandem-
ics.  We  expect  that  in  the  near  future,  the  unique  flexibility 
and linear scalability of these technologies will win over many 
companies.

Many active PMP players have chosen biosimilars (follow-on 
versions of already approved biopharmaceuticals) as their first 
products;  the  main  rationale  is  to  avoid  the  product  develop-
ment  risk.  The  biosimilars  market  has  grown  fast  and  many 
developing  countries  are  ready  to  accept  the  new  process  in 
return for lower capital costs and lower costs of goods (COGs) 
or improved clinical performance. Many important patents will 
expire around 2010–2017 and as a result many highly success-
ful antibodies (including Herceptin®, Avastin®, and Rituxan®) 
and  other  proteins  (with  market  worth  of  over  $50  billion) 
will  lose  protection.  The  biosimilars  market  has  a  number  of 
big  and  medium-size  players  (Teva,  Novartis,  Stada,  Shanta 
Biotech,  etc.),  and  several  pharmaceutical  companies  (most 
recently  Merck)  announced  their  interest  in  biosimilars,  thus 
providing  various  exit  scenarios  for  plant  biotech  investors. 
The attractive niche in the biosimilars market is the so-called 
“biobetters,”  or  biosimilars  which,  through  a  relatively  simple 
modification of their structure such as modification of glycans, 
show better therapeutic properties (see the following section).

Yet  another  approach  taken  by  several  companies  is  to 
develop new products for which plant-based expression pro-
vides a unique technical opportunity. Examples of such prod-
ucts  would  be  medicinal  foods  developed  by  Ventria  (high 
volumes  of  production,  low  cost  of  products  that  do  not 
require  purification,  etc.)  or  products  requiring  rapid  manu-
facturing  such  as  vaccines  and  antibodies  needed  in  the  case 
of  pandemics  and  bioterrorism  and  individualized  medicines 
(speed, flexibility, and low cost manufacturing).

Plant-Based Manufacturing,  
Post-Translational Modifications,  
and Plant-Specific Sugars

With a few exceptions (insulin, serum albumin, apoliporotein 
A), proteins made by the human body and used as therapeu-
tics  are  glycosylated.  Glycans  are  sometimes  not  essential 
and  do  not  influence  the  clinical  performance;  for  example, 
in  the  case  of  some  interferons  and  colony-stimulating  fac-
tors. It appears that for many subunit and virus-like particle- 
based  vaccines,  glycosylation  does  not  seriously 
lower 

immunogenicity. In a few other cases, such as erythropoietins, 
a  complex  and  specific  glycosylation  is  critical  for  product 
performance. For most other proteins that require glycosyla-
tion,  such  as  antibodies,  the  issues  can  be  reliably  resolved 
through  the  use  of  the  glycoengineered  plants  mentioned 
next.

Plants are able to assemble complex proteins, and in cellu-
lar compartments such as Golgi, different proteins of human 
origin are properly processed, cleaved, folded, assembled, and 
post-translationally  modified.  In  particular,  plants  provide  a 
good host for heterooligomers such as human immunoglobu-
lins. The only essential difference in post-translational modi-
fication  by  a  plant  cell  is  glycosylation.  Although  plants  add 
main sugar scaffolds to the protein, the resultant glycoforms 
are  different  from  those  made  by  a  human  body.  Currently, 
Physcomitrella  moss  as  well  as  Lemna  (duckweed)  and 
N.  benthamiana  plants  lacking  xylose  and  fucose,  produced 
via  RNAi  technology,  are  available,  whereas  N.  benthamiana 
xyl-/fuc-plants  obtained  via  mutagenesis  at  Bayer  Crop 
Science will be available soon.

New  developments 

in  plant  glycoengineering  provide 
unique  opportunities  both  in  the  area  of  new-generation 
antibody-based therapeutics, but especially in the area of so-
called  biosimilars  that,  with  this  technology,  could  be  devel-
oped as proprietary biobetter analogs superior to the currently 
licensed  anticancer  antibodies.  Glycoengineered  production 
hosts  include  plants  that,  unlike  industrial  CHO  cells,  do 
not  add  fucose  and  galactose  to  the  glycans  attached  to  the 
recombinant  proteins  (Figure  29.1).  Current  studies  demon-
strated  that  the  effector  functions  (antibody-dependent  cell 
cytotoxicity, ADCC) and correspondingly the clinical efficacy 
of  existing  licensed  therapeutic  antibodies  such  as  Avastin® 
(bevacizumab),  Rituxan®  (retuximab),  or  Herceptin®  (tras-
tuzumab)  are  strongly  inhibited  due  to  non-specific  IgG 
competing  for  binding  of  the  therapeutics  to  the  receptor 
on  natural  killer  cells,  which  leads  to  the  requirement  for 
significantly  higher  amounts  of  drug.  This  problem  is  effec-
tively remedied by using a production host that does not add 
a  fucose  to  the  glycan  structure.  The  combined  market  for 
the three most successful antineoplastic antibodies (Avastin®, 
Rituxan®,  or  Herceptin®)  in  2007  was  $6.8  billion,  and  the 
peak  sales  are  projected  to  reach  $21.5  billion  by  2016.  By 
2017, all three will run out of patent protection in both the 
United  States  and  the  EU.  Development  of  non-fucosylated 
(and  perhaps  non-galactosylated)  analogs  that  show  superior 
therapeutic properties compared to the existing therapeutics 
represents a compelling business case.

Such a development, because it is based on similar, already 
registered  therapeutic  product(s),  but  takes  into  account 
the  latest  scientific  understanding  of  the  deficiencies  of  the 
licensed  therapies,  would  decrease  an  inherent  risk  of  fail-
ure in (late) clinical trials, which is historically above 85% for 
cancer  biopharmaceuticals.  Coupled  with  lower  capital  costs 
and costs of goods of plant-based production, as well as antici-
pated higher acceptance of a plant-based platform (in view of 
the successful Phase III clinical trials of plant-made biosimilar 
glucocerebrosidase  by  Protalix),  such  a  project  could  raise  a 
PMP company to the position of a serious player in the area of 
second-generation  biobetter  anticancer  therapies.  Essentially 

472

Vaccines, antibodies, and pharmaceutical proteins

C H A P T E R   2 9

Figure 29.1 l Plant glycan engineering l Glycan structures of human and plant secreted proteins. Red arrows indicate human-specific 
(α-1,6-linked fucose) and plant-specific (α-1,3- linked fucose and β-1,2-linked xylose) sugars. Magenta arrows indicate glycoengineering of 
plants through RNAi silencing of specific plant genes, mutagenesis, and the addition of new glycosyl-transferases. 

the  same  approach  could  also  be  applied  to  novel  antibody-
based  therapeutics  under  development.  Technically,  the  best 
studied  effect  is  expected  for  antineoplastic  antibodies  and 
antibody-based  molecules,  but  glycoengineered  plants  could 
be a source of molecules with new therapeutic properties also 
in other indication areas.

Production of non-fucosylated antibodies has been recently 
achieved  in  animal  host  lines  in  which  the  endogenous  fuco-
syltransferase  gene  is  knocked  out.  Several  clinical  trials  are 
underway at present, with much of the attention devoted to 
existing  commercial  therapeutics  such  as  Rituxan®  (rituxi-
mab)  and  Herceptin®  (trastuzumab),  which  have  been 
improved through removal of fucose (biosimilars now termed 
biobetters).

A  number  of  research  groups  have  engineered  plants  to 
perform  a  designer  glycosylation.  As  a  first  step,  galactose 
residues have been added to protein glycans via expression of 
proper  galactosyl-transferases  (Palacpac  et  al.,  1999;  Bakker 
et  al.,  2001).  As  a  second  step,  plants  lacking  plant-specific 
sugars such as xylose and α-1,3-linked fucose have been cre-
ated using RNAi technology (Cox et al., 2006; Schahs et al., 
2007; Strasser et al., 2008) and, recently, by chemical muta-
genesis  (Bayer  Crop  Science).  The  final  missing  step,  the 
addition  of  N-acetylneuraminic  acid,  has  also  been  demon-
strated in transient assays (Decker and Reski, 2008; Castilho 
et al., 2010). Such designer glycosylation does not have to be 
done  as  a  stable  genetic  transformation.  Recent  work  from 
Vezina  et  al.  (2009)  demonstrated  that  transient  co-expres-
sion  of  the  genes  encoding  the  protein  of  interest  together 
with  the  RNAs  suppressing  fucosyl-  and  xylosystransferases 
provides for the appropriately modified recombinant proteins.
For  those  in  need  of  plants  that  have  a  fully  controlled 
and defined glycosylation pattern, the platform developed by 
Greenovation,  Germany,  relying  on  manufacturing  in  cells  of 

a moss, Physcomitrella patens, could be the ultimate solution 
(Gorr  and  Altmann,  2006;  Schuster  et  al.,  2007;  Nechansky 
et al., 2007; Weise et al., 2007). The glycans added to proteins 
in this system are defined as those of glycoengineered yeasts.

Plant-Based Manufacturing and 
Downstream Issues

Usually, standard “low-cost arguments” of the proponents of 
plant-based  manufacturing  are  met  with  skepticism.  A  typi-
cal  investor’s  answer  is  that  even  if  the  plant-based  produc-
tion (upstream part of the manufacturing process) is 10 times 
cheaper, the overall process is unlikely to be 2 times cheaper 
because  of  high  costs  of  the  purification  (downstream  part), 
and  even  this  saving  would  be  difficult  to  achieve  with  an 
entirely  new  process.  Commercial  downstream  processes 
employed today are extremely complex and costly, accounting 
for  as  much  as  50–80%  of  total  manufacturing  costs  (Roque 
et  al.,  2004).  The  most  significant  part  of  the  downstream 
costs is costs of immunoadsorbents and other affinity adsorb-
ents.  For  example,  the  cost  of  Protein  A-based  immunoad-
sorbent, a standard reagent used for industrial purification of 
monoclonal  antibodies,  is  so  high  that  the  packed  columns 
have to be reused up to 50 times, resulting in significant new 
costs  due  to  cleaning  and  re-validation  of  the  columns.  An 
ideal  alternative  has  to  be  a  single-use  reagent  that  is  cheap 
enough to provide sufficient economic advantages.

A number of research groups have tried to develop down-
stream protocols that are simpler and cheaper, most of them 
addressing  the  cost  of  affinity  ligands  such  as  immunoad-
sorbents.  Several  potential  solutions  described  in  the  lit-
erature  propose  fusing  Protein  A  (or  other  affinity  ligands) 
to  elements  capable  of  polymerizing  or  to  structures  of  high 

473

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

molecular weight: bacterial S-layer proteins (Vollenkle et al., 
2004;  Nomellini  et  al.,  2007);  bacteriophages  (Kushwaha 
et  al.,  1994);  oleosins  recognizing  oil  bodies  (see  the  follow-
ing information); cellulose-binding domains (Cao et al., 2007; 
Hussack  et  al.,  2010);  and  so  forth.  The  process  based  on 
oleosin  fusions  (to  Protein  A  domains)  has  been  advanced 
to  the  stage  of  a  commercial  platform  by  SemBioSys  (www. 
sembiosys.com). The process is robust and utilizes principles 
and  industrial  flotation  centrifugation  machinery  used  in  the 
separation  of  lipids  from  aqueous  emulsions  such  as  milk  or 
seed  extracts.  Since  oleosin  and  oleosin-Protein  A  fusion 
move  together  with  oil  bodies,  a  simple,  inexpensive,  and 
highly selective purification process step is feasible.

Plant  tobamoviruses  provide  an  extremely  cheap  source  of 
protein  biopolymers  of  discrete  nanoparticle  sizes  than  can  be 
manufactured rapidly and under very simple conditions. In our 
studies, we have found that a functional fragment of Protein A 
(133 aa) can be displayed on the surface of TMV as a carboxy-
terminal  fusion  to  the  Coat  Protein  (CP)  via  a  15  aa  linker. 
The macromolecular nature of these nanoparticles allowed the 
design of a simple laboratory protocol for purification of mono-
clonal  antibodies  (Mab)  with  50%  recovery  yield  and  90% 
product  purity.  The  extremely  dense  packing  of  Protein  A  on 
the  nanoparticles  (over  2000  copies  per  TMV  particle)  results 
in  an  immunoadsorbent  with  a  binding  capacity  of  up  to  2 g 
Mab per g. This characteristic, combined with the high level of 
expression of the nanoparticles (up to 5 g adsorbent per kilogram 
of  leaf  biomass),  provides  a  very  inexpensive,  self-assembling  
matrix that could meet criteria for a single-use industrial immu-
noadsorbent for antibody purification (Werner et al., 2006). Our 
studies also showed that such nanoparticles can be engineered or 
conjugated chemically to add a second functionality, for exam-
ple, a magnetic property, thus allowing for an efficient separation 
of the nanoparticles in complex solutions.

There are a number of attempts to develop other purifica-
tion  principles  published  recently;  the  most  interesting  one 
is  based  on  the  use  of  elastin-like  polypeptides  that  revers-
ibly  change  solubility  at  different  temperatures,  thus  allow-
ing for a simple non-chromatographic purification of proteins 
fused  to  or  having  an  affinity  for  elastins  (Floss  et  al.,  2008, 
2009, 2010; Conley et al., 2009a,b). Expressed as fusions to 
proteins of interest such as single chain antibodies or antigens, 
they provide for a higher expression level and for an easy puri-
fication  step  (Floss  et  al.,  2008,  2009,  2010;  Conrad  et  al., 
2011).  There  is  a  need  for  subsequent  separation  from  the 
elastin, which can be engineered by the addition of a cleavage 
site; the alternative is using elastin fusions with affinity ligands 
such as Protein A domains. This technology principle has been 
“borrowed” by plant scientists, and it could be a very interest-
ing solution for a number of industrial processes and products.
A  more  plant-specific  approach  has  been  advocated  by 
M.D.  Ludevid  and  colleagues  (Kogan  et  al.,  2001;  Torrent 
et  al.,  2009a,b;  Alvarez  et  al.,  2010).  Their  platform  utilizes 
the  natural  ability  of  plants  to  accumulate  large  amounts  of 
storage  proteins  in  plant  seeds  by  storing  them  as  “plant 
bodies.”  Plant  body  sequestration  is  controlled  by  a  proline-
rich  N-terminal  domain  of  a  seed  storage  protein;  such  a 
domain  can  be  added  as  a  fusion  to  many  proteins  of  inter-
est. This technology has been exemplified using a number of 

commercially interesting proteins and is being currently devel-
oped by a Spanish company called Era Biotech.

Another possibility, at least for a limited number of cases, 
is the use of plant biomass without full purification. Such an 
approach  can  be  exemplified  by  the  products  developed  by 
Ventria — lactoferrin and lysozyme. Both proteins and prod-
ucts of their degradation in gut are extremely powerful anti-
bacterials with a known safety and efficacy. They can also be 
used  to  replace  antibiotics  or  other  antibacterials,  for  exam-
ple, in animal feed and infant formula. Since the products are 
expressed  at  very  high  levels  (5g/kg  of  seed),  the  transgenic 
rice  seed  could  be  eventually  used  as  a  basis  for  medicinal 
foods  or  animal  feed  admixtures  and  for  controlling  bacte-
rial  gut  flora,  as  well  as  for  other  purposes.  These  product 
candidates,  however,  require  a  different  regulatory  approval 
path  from  the  one  used  to  manufacture  biopharmaceuticals. 
During  the  early  years  of  plant  biotechnology,  a  great  deal 
of  excitement  was  generated  by  the  idea  of  edible  vaccines. 
Although the idea is still appealing, because of the lack of reg-
ulatory rules about such a product, neither investors nor com-
panies supported such projects.

Plant-Based Expression Systems: 
Advantages and Limitations

Because  of  the  inherent  speed  of  the  recently  introduced 
transient  systems  and  because  of  the 
latest  successful 
attempts  to  engineer  plants  with  a  designer  glycosylation, 
green plants represent a very attractive production host when 
compared  to  other  manufacturing  hosts.  In  addition,  recent 
clinical trials have also clearly demonstrated that plant-based 
platforms can meet criteria set by the regulatory agencies and 
in this respect, plant-based processes per se do not represent 
an  added  process  risk  any  more.  Unlike  other  production 
organisms used for the manufacturing of biopharmaceuticals, 
plants  and  plant  cells  do  not  contain  pathogens  capable  of 
infecting  humans.  Materials  used  to  grow  plants,  transgenic 
plants,  and  to  cultivate  agrobacteria  (in  the  case  of  transient 
expression)  are  or  can  be  made  animal-material-free.  In  this 
respect,  plant-derived  recombinant  proteins  are  inherently 
safer than materials generated using animal cells.

A  general  comparison  of  plants  and  other  living  cells  as 
manufacturing hosts is represented in Figure 29.2. The conclu-
sions  from  this  “strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-threats” 
(SWOT)  analysis  are  different  from  those  made  just  a  few 
years  ago  (Fischer  et  al.,  2004)  and  show  plants  as  overall 
the  most  attractive  manufacturing  platform  for  biopharma-
ceuticals.  Production  processes  based  on  bacteria,  yeasts,  and 
animal cells are current industrial standards, and plant based-
processes will not displace them any time soon, for a variety of 
reasons. We expect that the first successes will be led by small- 
and medium-size companies (attracted primarily by lower cap-
ital costs and higher development speed), and that the overall 
best  chances  for  adoption  of  manufacturing  based  on  plants 
will  be  in  developing  countries  that  so  far  have  not  invested 
in traditional manufacturing infrastructures and are more open 
toward new generation processes that promise lower manufac-
turing costs. Such an adoption would be greatly facilitated by 

474

Vaccines, antibodies, and pharmaceutical proteins

C H A P T E R   2 9

the development of less expensive purification processes, thus 
we continue to face numerous technology challenges.

The  plant-based  manufacturing  platform  represents  a 
number of different manufacturing processes, each with cer-
tain  advantages  and  disadvantages.  A  general  summary  of 
those is given in the following sections.

Nuclear transformation

An  important  advantage  of  the  nuclear  transformation  plat-
form  is  its  versatility  regarding  expression  in  various  subcel-
lular  compartments,  tissues,  and  organs,  including  seeds  and 
cultured  cells.  Expression  in  seeds  was  regarded  by  many  as 
the  main  advantage,  because  it  allows  inexpensive  storage 
of the harvested material in a stable form, thus allowing the 
disconnection  of  the  seasonal  plant  cultivation  (upstream) 
from  the  continuous  processing  (downstream)  phases  of  the 
manufacturing process. Also, the manufacturing based on fer-
mentation of cultured plant cells is currently utilizing nuclear 
transformants  only,  although  there  are  attempts  to  develop 
protocols based on transient expression. The main problem of 
nuclear transformants is generally low expression levels, with 
important  exceptions  representing  expression  in  seeds  using 
seed-specific promoters and to a lesser extent in leaves. The 
other problem is the long time needed to develop a transgenic 

production host (in part because of potential silencing of the 
transgene  of  interest  in  subsequent  progenies).  The  great 
majority of studies conducted thus far have relied on the 35S 
CaMV promoter, which is known to provide for constitutive 
expression in most plant tissues, but at fairly low (milligrams 
to tens of milligrams per kilogram) levels. It is not surprising 
that the best results have been obtained with other promot-
ers, and we hope that in the future, researchers will use more 
imagination when developing expression cassettes for nuclear 
transformants.

Plastid transformation

The  main  advantages  of  the  transplastomic  plants  are  very 
high  expression  levels  of  many  pharmaceutically  relevant 
proteins and the ability of plastids to fold and assemble fully 
functional  proteins  of  various  classes.  Transplastomics  are 
usually  stable  and  not  subject  to  silencing,  and  because  of 
the  maternal  inheritance  of  plastids  in  most  crops,  ecologi-
cal control of the transplastomics is easier than with nuclear 
transformants.  Among  the  main  disadvantages  is  the  lack 
of  glycosylation  of  proteins  made  in  plastids,  the  long  time 
needed to generate a production host, and to a lesser extent, 
the confinement of the (high) expression to photosynthesizing 
tissues  such  as  leaves.  The  proteins  expressed  in  plastids  are 

Figure 29.2 l Strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-threats (SWOT) analysis of production hosts for manufacturing biopharmaceuticals. 
Due to the recent advancements of the transient expression platforms and glycosylation engineering, plants are overall the most attractive 
manufacturing host. 

475

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

devoid  of  glycans,  and  since  most  pharmaceutically  relevant 
proteins  do  currently  require  glycosylation,  plastid  transfor-
mation is regarded as a valid platform for only a few biophar-
maceutical classes such as vaccines and antimicrobial proteins 
and  polypeptides,  and  perhaps  some  cytokines.  The  classical 
host  organism  for  plastid  manipulation  is  tobacco,  and  most 
studies  aimed  at  production  of  pharmaceutical  proteins  have 
been  made  using  this  organism.  Another  suitable  organism 
could be an edible leafy plant such as spinach.

Transient expression

Advantages  of  the  transient  systems  are  development  and 
manufacturing  speed,  along  with  very  high  expression  levels. 
Existing  technologies  allow  the  manufacture  of  all  classes  of 
recombinant  proteins,  including  antibodies,  proteins  with 
designer  glycosylation,  and  so  forth.  The  main  limitations 
stem  from  the  need  to  deliver  the  genetically  engineered 
Agrobacterium  into  the  intercellular  space  of  plants  (the 
throughput  of  the  current  “vacuum-infiltration  apparatuses” 
is 1 ton of green biomass per day but the process, in princi-
ple, is easily scalable) and to provide for physical containment 
of the bacteria. However, because of the very high expression 
levels provided by transient systems, the whole process can be 
contained  in  greenhouses  retrofitted  for  the  containment  of 
plants treated with Agrobacterium. The manufacturing organs 
are leaves, and in some cases, other aerial parts of plant. The 
transient  processes  have  been  developed  around  two  plant 
hosts: tobacco and its wild relative N. benthamiana. In princi-
ple, the technology works with a number of edible plants such 
as beets and spinach.

Conclusions and Outlook

Although  major  risk  factors  associated  with  the  plant-based 
manufacturing  of  biopharmaceuticals  have  been  effectively 
eliminated and a number of earlier anticipated advantages of 
PMP have indeed been demonstrated, this research and devel-
opment area still faces a number of challenges. The main one 
is the simple fact that the green plants are just one of many 
manufacturing  hosts  available  to  the  pharmaceutical  indus-
try and as such they do not bring unique qualitative features 
that the industry urgently needs. Plants are “late comers”: the 
major companies have already invested tens of billions of dol-
lars  in  microbial-  and  animal-cell-based  manufacturing  plat-
forms. These platforms are mature (i.e., they are accepted by 

regulatory  agencies,  robust,  and  provide  high  expression  lev-
els), and the related capital investments have been to a great 
extent amortized. The advantages of plants are more difficult 
to realize in the context of the current regulations that have 
been  “morphed”  around  earlier  developed  platforms;  some 
of the theoretically most appealing opportunities such as use 
of  semi-processed  plant  biomass  as  edible  medicine,  are  not 
easily compatible with the current regulations, or they appear 
too  extravagant  and  risky  to  companies  and  investors  capa-
ble of financing such projects. Last, but not least, the cost of 
goods parameter has never been the main factor driving phar-
maceutical companies’ strategies.

One is tempted to conclude that the most optimistic sce-
nario  for  PMP  would  be  its  initial  adoption  in  developing 
countries such as the BRIC (Brazil-Russia-India-China) coun-
tries.  For  the  biopharmaceutical  players  in  the  developing 
world,  initial  capital  cost  barriers  and  cost-of-goods  barriers 
are real problems. In addition, they have not yet invested so 
much  in  animal-cell-based  manufacturing  —  they  are  them-
selves late comers as well. They probably also have more lati-
tude  in  asking  regulatory  bodies  in  their  countries  to  look  at 
novel  processes  and  novel  product  opportunities,  and  stand 
to  benefit  directly  from  lower  costs  of  clinical  trials  in  their 
regions  and  faster  time  to  market  provided  by  some  plant-
based platforms. Using biosimilar (biobetter) molecules as ini-
tial targets, these companies would also be able to lower their 
overall  risk  by  minimizing  the  product  failure  risk,  whereas 
using  the  parameters  qualifying  their  product  as  “better”  to 
avoid  the  market  price  erosion  inherent  in  generic  competi-
tion. For all of this to happen, many remaining technical hur-
dles still have to be overcome, meaning that researchers active 
in  this  area  will  find  themselves  useful  for  many  years  to 
come.  Among  the  main  unresolved  issues  affecting  the  over-
all manufacturing cost of biopharmaceuticals are the costs of 
protein purification, especially the cost of affinity chromatog-
raphy. Although new inexpensive purification processes would 
benefit  both  plant-  and  other  cell-based  manufacturing,  the 
added low cost of manufacturing in green plants should pro-
vide an additional incentive to invest in such a new integrated 
(upstream plus downstream) process.

Acknowledgments

The  Authors  wish  to  thank  their  colleagues  at  Nomad 
Bioscience  (Halle,  Germany)  and  Icon  Genetics  (Halle, 
Germany) for valuable discussions.

References

Alvarez, M. L., Topal, E., Martin, F., & Cardineau, 

G. A. (2010). Higher accumulation of F1-V 
fusion recombinant protein in plants after 
induction of protein body formation. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 72, 75–89.

Arlen, P. A., Falconer, R., Cherukumilli, S., Cole, 
A., Cole, A. M., & Oishi, K. K., et al. (2007). 

Field production and functional evaluation of 
chloroplast-derived interferon-alpha2b. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 5, 511–525.

Arlen, P. A., Singleton, M., Adamovicz, J. J., 

Ding, Y., Davoodi-Semiromi, A., & Daniell, 
H. (2008). Effective plague vaccination via 
oral delivery of plant cells expressing F1-V 

antigens in chloroplasts. Infection Control 
and Hospital Epidemiology, 76, 3640–3650.

Bakker, H., Bardor, M., Molthoff, J. W., 

Gomord, V., Elbers, I., & Stevens, L. H.,  
et al. (2001). Galactose-extended glycans 
of antibodies produced by transgenic plants. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 

476

Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 
2899–2904.

Bendandi, M., Marillonnet, S., Kandzia, R., 
Thieme, F., Nickstadt, A., Herz, S., et al. 
(2010). Rapid, high-yield production in 
plants of individualized idiotype vaccines 
for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Annals of 
Oncology, 21(12), 2420–2427.

Bock, R. (2007). Plastid biotechnology: 

prospects for herbicide and insect resistance, 
metabolic engineering and molecular 
farming. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 
18, 100–106.

Boothe, J., Nykiforuk, C., Shen, Y., 

Zaplachinski, S., Szarka, S., & Kuhlman, 
P., et al. (2010). Seed-based expression 
systems for plant molecular farming. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 8, 588–606.

Canizares, M. C., Lomonossoff, G. P., & 

Nicholson, L. (2005). Development of 
cowpea mosaic virus-based vectors for the 
production of vaccines in plants. Expert 
Review of Vaccines, 4, 687–697.
Canizares, M. C., Nicholson, L., & 

Lomonossoff, G. P. (2005). Use of viral 
vectors for vaccine production in plants. 
Immunology and Cell Biology, 83, 263–270.

Cao, Y., Zhang, Q., Wang, C., Zhu, Y., & 
Bai, G. (2007). Preparation of novel 
immunomagnetic cellulose microspheres via 
cellulose binding domain-protein A linkage 
and its use for the isolation of interferon 
alpha-2b. Journal of Chromatography A, 
1149, 228–235.

Castilho, A., Strasser, R., Stadlmann, J., Grass, 

J., Jez, J., & Gattinger, P., et al. (2010). 
In planta protein sialylation through 
overexpression of the respective mammalian 
pathway. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 
285, 15923–15930.

Chebolu, S., & Daniell, H. (2007). Stable 

expression of Gal/GalNAc lectin of 
Entamoeba histolytica in transgenic 
chloroplasts and immunogenicity in mice 
towards vaccine development for amoebiasis. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 5, 230–239.
Conley, A. J., Joensuu, J. J., Jevnikar, A. M., 

Menassa, R., & Brandle, J. E. (2009a). 
Optimization of elastin-like polypeptide 
fusions for expression and purification 
of recombinant proteins in plants. 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 103, 
562–573.

Conley, A. J., Joensuu, J. J., Menassa, R., & 

Brandle, J. E. (2009b). Induction of protein 
body formation in plant leaves by elastin- 
like polypeptide fusions. BMC Biology, 7, 48.

Conrad, U., Plagmann, I., Malchow, S.,  

Sack, M., Floss, D. M., Kruglov, A. A.,  
et al. (2011). ELPylated anti-human TNF 
therapeutic single-domain antibodies for 
prevention of lethal septic shock. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 9(1), 22–31.

Cox, K. M., Sterling, J. D., Regan, J. T., 

Gasdaska, J. R., Frantz, K. K., & Peele,  
C. G., et al. (2006). Glycan optimization of 
a human monoclonal antibody in the aquatic 
plant Lemna minor. Nature Biotechnology, 
24, 1591–1597.

Daniell, H., Ruiz, G., Denes, B., Sandberg, L., 

& Langridge, W. (2009). Optimization of 
codon composition and regulatory elements 

Vaccines, antibodies, and pharmaceutical proteins

C H A P T E R   2 9

for expression of human insulin like 
growth factor-1 in transgenic chloroplasts 
and evaluation of structural identity and 
function. BMC Biotechnology, 9, 33.
Daniell, H., Singh, N. D., Mason, H., & 

Streatfield, S. J. (2009). Plant-made vaccine 
antigens and biopharmaceuticals. Trends in 
Plant Science, 14, 669–679.

Davoodi-Semiromi, A., Samson, N., & 

Daniell, H. (2009). The green vaccine: A 
global strategy to combat infectious and 
autoimmune diseases. Human Vaccines, 5, 
488–493.

Davoodi-Semiromi, A., Schreiber, M., Nalapalli, 
S., Verma, D., Singh, N. D., & Banks, R. K., 
et al. (2010). Chloroplast-derived vaccine 
antigens confer dual immunity against 
cholera and malaria by oral or injectable 
delivery. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 8, 
223–242.

De Jaeger, G., Scheffer, S., Jacobs, A., Zambre, 

M., Zobell, O., & Goossens, A., et al. 
(2002). Boosting heterologous protein 
production in transgenic dicotyledonous 
seeds using Phaseolus vulgaris regulatory 
sequences. Nature Biotechnology, 20, 
1265–1268.

De Muynck, B., Navarre, C., & Boutry, 

M. (2010). Production of antibodies in 
plants: Status after twenty years. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 8, 529–563.

Decker, E. L., & Reski, R. (2008). Current 

achievements in the production of complex 
biopharmaceuticals with moss bioreactors. 
Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering, 31, 
3–9.

Donson, J., Kearney, C. M., Hilf, M. E., & 

Dawson, W. O. (1991). Systemic expression 
of a bacterial gene by a tobacco mosaic virus-
based vector. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 88, 7204–7208.

Dorokhov, Y. L., Sheveleva, A. A., Frolova, 
O. Y., Komarova, T. V., Zvereva, A. S., & 
Ivanov, P. A., et al. (2007). Superexpression 
of tuberculosis antigens in plant leaves. 
Tuberculosis (Edinb), 87, 218–224.

Fernandez-San Millan, A., Ortigosa, S. M., 
Hervas-Stubbs, S., Corral-Martinez, P., 
Segui-Simarro, J. M., & Gaetan, J., et al. 
(2008). Human papillomavirus L1 protein 
expressed in tobacco chloroplasts self-
assembles into virus-like particles that are 
highly immunogenic. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 6, 427–441.

Fischer, R., Stoger, E., Schillberg, S., Christou, 

P., & Twyman, R. M. (2004). Plant-based 
production of biopharmaceuticals. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 7, 152–158.

Floss, D. M., Sack, M., Arcalis, E., Stadlmann, 

J., Quendler, H., & Rademacher, T., et al. 
(2009). Influence of elastin-like peptide 
fusions on the quantity and quality of a 
tobacco-derived human immunodeficiency 
virus-neutralizing antibody. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 7, 899–913.
Floss, D. M., Sack, M., Stadlmann, J., 

Rademacher, T., Scheller, J., & Stoger, E., 
et al. (2008). Biochemical and functional 
characterization of anti-HIV antibody-ELP 
fusion proteins from transgenic plants. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 6, 379–391.

Floss, D. M., Schallau, K., Rose-John, S., 

Conrad, U., & Scheller, J. (2010). Elastin-
like polypeptides revolutionize recombinant 
protein expression and their biomedical 
application. Trends in Biotechnology, 28, 
37–45.

Fujiki, M., Kaczmarczyk, J. F., Yusibov, V., &  
Rabindran, S. (2008). Development of a 
new cucumber mosaic virus-based plant 
expression vector with truncated 3a 
movement protein. Virology, 381, 136–142.

Gils, M., Kandzia, R., Marillonnet, S., 

Klimyuk, V., & Gleba, Y. (2005). High-
yield production of authentic human 
growth hormone using a plant virus-based 
expression system. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 3, 613–620.

Giritch, A., Marillonnet, S., Engler, C., van 

Eldik, G., Botterman, J., & Klimyuk, V., et al. 
(2006). Rapid high-yield expression of full-
size IgG antibodies in plants coinfected with 
noncompeting viral vectors. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 103, 14701–14707.
Gleba, Y., Klimyuk, V., & Marillonnet, S. 

(2005). Magnifection — a new platform for 
expressing recombinant vaccines in plants. 
Vaccine, 23, 2042–2048.

Gleba, Y., Klimyuk, V., & Marillonnet, S. 

(2007). Viral vectors for the expression 
of proteins in plants. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 18, 134–141.

Gleba, Y., Marillonnet, S., & Klimyuk, V. 

(2004). Engineering viral expression 
vectors for plants: The “full virus” and the 
“deconstructed virus” strategies. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 7, 182–188.

Gleba, Y., Marillonnet, S., & Klimyuk, 
V. (2007). Plant virus vectors (gene 
expression systems) (3rd ed.). In M. H. V. 
van Regenmortel & B. W. J. Mahy (Eds.), 
Encyclopedia of virology (Vol. 4, pp. 
229–237). San Diego: Academic Press.

Glenz, K., Bouchon, B., Stehle, T., Wallich, 

R., Simon, M. M., & Warzecha, H. (2006). 
Production of a recombinant bacterial 
lipoprotein in higher plant chloroplasts. 
Nature Biotechnology, 24, 76–77.

Gorr, G., & Altmann, F. (2006). Glycosylation 

of recombinant proteins in plants. In  
O. Kayser & W. Quax (Eds.), Medicinal 
Plant Biotechnology (Vol. 2, pp. 345–374). 
Wiley-VCH.

Green, B. J., Fujiki, M., Mett, V., Kaczmarczyk, 

J., Shamloul, M., & Musiychuk, K., et al. 
(2009). Transient protein expression in 
three Pisum sativum (green pea) varieties. 
Biotechnology Journal, 4, 230–237.

Hellwig, S., Drossard, J., Twyman, R. M., & 

Fischer, R. (2004). Plant cell cultures for the 
production of recombinant proteins. Nature 
Biotechnology, 22, 1415–1422.

Hennegan, K., Yang, D., Nguyen, D., Wu, 

L., Goding, J., & Huang, J., et al. (2005). 
Improvement of human lysozyme expression 
in transgenic rice grain by combining wheat 
(Triticum aestivum) puroindoline b and rice 
(Oryza sativa) Gt1 promoters and signal 
peptides. Transgenic Research, 14, 583–592.
Hood, E. E., Love, R., Lane, J., Bray, J., Clough, 

R., & Pappu, K., et al. (2007). Subcellular 
targeting is a key condition for high-level 

477

S E C T I O N   F

Plants as factories for industrial products, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and bioenergy

accumulation of cellulase protein in transgenic 
maize seed. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 5, 
709–719.

Huang, J., Nandi, S., Wu, L., Yalda, D., 

Bartley, G., & Rodriguez, R., et al. (2002). 
Expression of natural antimicrobial human 
lysozyme in rice grains. Molecular Breeding, 
10, 83–94.

Huang, Z., Chen, Q., Hjelm, B., Arntzen, C., & 
Mason, H. (2009a). A DNA replicon system 
for rapid high-level production of virus-
like particles in plants. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 103, 706–714.

Huang, Z., Phoolcharoen, W., Lai, H., Piensook, 
K., Cardineau, G., Zeitlin, L., et al. (2009b). 
High-level rapid production of full-size 
monoclonal antibodies in plants by a single-
vector DNA replicon system. Biotechnology 
and Bioengineering, 106(1), 9–17.

Huang, Z., Santi, L., LePore, K., Kilbourne, 

J., Arntzen, C. J., & Mason, H. S. 
(2006). Rapid, high-level production of 
hepatitis B core antigen in plant leaf and 
its immunogenicity in mice. Vaccine, 24, 
2506–2513.

Huhns, M., Neumann, K., Hausmann, T., 

Klemke, F., Lockau, W., & Kahmann, U.,  
et al. (2009). Tuber-specific cphA expression 
to enhance cyanophycin production in 
potatoes. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 7, 
883–898.

Huhns, M., Neumann, K., Hausmann, T., 

Ziegler, K., Klemke, F., & Kahmann, U.,  
et al. (2008). Plastid targeting strategies for 
cyanophycin synthetase to achieve high-level 
polymer accumulation in Nicotiana tabacum. 
Plant Biotechnology Journal, 6, 321–336.

Hussack, G., Grohs, B. M., Almquist, K. C., 

McLean, M. D., Ghosh, R., & Hall, J. 
C. (2010). Purification of plant-derived 
antibodies through direct immobilization 
of affinity ligands on cellulose. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 58, 
3451–3459.

Kalantidis, K., Tsagris, M., & Tabler, M. (2006). 

Spontaneous short-range silencing of a 
GFP transgene in Nicotiana benthamiana 
is possibly mediated by small quantities of 
siRNA that do not trigger systemic silencing. 
Plant Journal, 45, 1006–1016.

Karg, S. R., & Kallio, P. T. (2009). The 

production of biopharmaceuticals in plant 
systems. Biotechnology Advances, 27, 
879–884.

Ko, K., Brodzik, R., & Steplewski, Z. (2009). 

Production of antibodies in plants: 
Approaches and perspectives. Current Topics 
in Microbiology and Immunology, 332, 55–78.

Kogan, M. J., Dalcol, I., Gorostiza, P., Lopez-

Iglesias, C., Pons, M., & Sanz, F., et al. 
(2001). Self-assembly of the amphipathic 
helix (VHLPPP)8. A mechanism for 
zein protein body formation. Journal of 
Molecular Biology, 312, 907–913.

Koya, V., Moayeri, M., Leppla, S. H., & 

Daniell, H. (2005). Plant-based vaccine: 
Mice immunized with chloroplast-derived 
anthrax protective antigen survive anthrax 
lethal toxin challenge. Infection Control and 
Hospital Epidemiology, 73, 8266–8274.
Kumagai, M. H., Donson, J., della-Cioppa, 

G., & Grill, L. K. (2000). Rapid, high-level 
expression of glycosylated rice alpha-amylase 

478

in transfected plants by an RNA viral vector. 
Gene, 245, 169–174.

Kumagai, M. H., Donson, J., della-Cioppa, 

G., Harvey, D., Hanley, K., & Grill, L. K. 
(1995). Cytoplasmic inhibition of carotenoid 
biosynthesis with virus-derived RNA. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 92, 
1679–1683.

Kumagai, M. H., Turpen, T. H., Weinzettl, N., 

della-Cioppa, G., Turpen, A. M., & Donson, 
J., et al. (1993). Rapid, high-level expression 
of biologically active alpha-trichosanthin in 
transfected plants by an RNA viral vector. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 90, 
427–430.

Kushwaha, A., Chowdhury, P. S., Arora, K., 

Abrol, S., & Chaudhary, V. K. (1994). 
Construction and characterization of M13 
bacteriophages displaying functional IgG-
binding domains of staphylococcal protein 
A. Gene, 151, 45–51.

Lico, C., Chen, Q., & Santi, L. (2008). Viral 

vectors for production of recombinant 
proteins in plants. Journal of Cellular 
Physiology, 216, 366–377.

Lindbo, J. A. (2007). High-efficiency protein 

expression in plants from agroinfection-
compatible Tobacco mosaic virus expression 
vectors. BMC Biotechnology, 7, 52.

Lindbo, J. A. (2007). TRBO: A high-

efficiency tobacco mosaic virus RNA-based 
overexpression vector. Plant Physiology, 145, 
1232–1240.

Maclean, J., Koekemoer, M., Olivier, A. J., 

Stewart, D., Hitzeroth, II, & Rademacher, 
T., et al. (2007). Optimization of human 
papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) L1 
expression in plants: Comparison of the 
suitability of different HPV-16 L1 gene 
variants and different cell-compartment 
localization. Journal of General Virology, 88, 
1460–1469.

Marillonnet, S., Giritch, A., Gils, M., Kandzia, 

R., Klimyuk, V., & Gleba, Y. (2004). In 
planta engineering of viral RNA replicons: 
Efficient assembly by recombination of 
DNA modules delivered by Agrobacterium. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
101, 6852–6857.

Marillonnet, S., Thoeringer, C., Kandzia, R., 

Klimyuk, V., & Gleba, Y. (2005). Systemic 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated 
transfection of viral replicons for efficient 
transient expression in plants. Nature 
Biotechnology, 23, 718–723.

McCabe, M. S., Klaas, M., Gonzalez-

Rabade, N., Poage, M., Badillo-Corona, 
J. A., & Zhou, F., et al. (2008). Plastid 
transformation of high-biomass tobacco 
variety Maryland Mammoth for production 
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 
(HIV-1) p24 antigen. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 6, 914–929.

McCormick, A. A., & Palmer, K. E. (2008). 

Genetically engineered Tobacco mosaic virus 
as nanoparticle vaccines. Expert Review of 
Vaccines, 7, 33–41.

McCormick, A. A., Kumagai, M. H., Hanley, 

K., Turpen, T. H., Hakim, I., & Grill, L. K., 
et al. (1999). Rapid production of specific 

vaccines for lymphoma by expression of the 
tumor-derived single-chain Fv epitopes in 
tobacco plants. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 96, 703–708.

McCormick, A. A., Reddy, S., Reinl, S. J., 
Cameron, T. I., Czerwinkski, D. K., & 
Vojdani, F., et al. (2008). Plant-produced 
idiotype vaccines for the treatment of 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: Safety and 
immunogenicity in a phase I clinical study. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
105, 10131–10136.

McCormick, A. A., Reinl, S. J., Cameron, T. 
I., Vojdani, F., Fronefield, M., & Levy, R., 
et al. (2003). Individualized human scFv 
vaccines produced in plants: Humoral 
anti-idiotype responses in vaccinated mice 
confirm relevance to the tumor Ig. Journal of 
Immunological Methods, 278, 95–104.
Mett, V., Farrance, C. E., Green, B. J., & 

Yusibov, V. (2008). Plants as biofactories. 
Biologicals, 36, 354–358.

Molina, A., Veramendi, J., & Hervas-Stubbs, S. 
(2005). Induction of neutralizing antibodies 
by a tobacco chloroplast-derived vaccine 
based on a B cell epitope from canine 
parvovirus. Virology, 342, 266–275.

Nandi, S., Yalda, D., Lu, S., Nikolov, Z., Misaki, 

R., & Fujiyama, K., et al. (2005). Process 
development and economic evaluation of 
recombinant human lactoferrin expressed in 
rice grain. Transgenic Research, 14, 237–249.

Nechansky, A., Schuster, M., Jost, W., Siegl, 

P., Wiederkum, S., & Gorr, G., et al. 
(2007). Compensation of endogenous IgG 
mediated inhibition of antibody-dependent 
cellular cytotoxicity by glyco-engineering 
of therapeutic antibodies. Molecular 
Immunology, 44, 1815–1817.

Nomellini, J. F., Duncan, G., Dorocicz, I. R., 

& Smit, J. (2007). S-layer-mediated display 
of the immunoglobulin G-binding domain 
of streptococcal protein G on the surface 
of Caulobacter crescentus: Development 
of an immunoactive reagent. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 73, 
3245–3253.

Oey, M., Lohse, M., Kreikemeyer, B., & Bock, 

R. (2009). Exhaustion of the chloroplast 
protein synthesis capacity by massive 
expression of a highly stable protein 
antibiotic. Plant Journal, 57, 436–445.

Oey, M., Lohse, M., Scharff, L. B., 

Kreikemeyer, B., & Bock, R. (2009). Plastid 
production of protein antibiotics against 
pneumonia via a new strategy for high-
level expression of antimicrobial proteins. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
106, 6579–6584.

O'Keefe, B. R., Vojdani, F., Buffa, V., Shattock, 

R. J., Montefiori, D. C., & Bakke, J., et al. 
(2009). Scaleable manufacture of HIV-1 
entry inhibitor griffithsin and validation 
of its safety and efficacy as a topical 
microbicide component. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 106, 6099–6104.

Outchkourov, N. S., Peters, J., de Jong, J., 

Rademakers, W., & Jongsma, M. A. (2003). 
The promoter-terminator of chrysanthemum 

rbcS1 directs very high expression levels in 
plants. Planta, 216, 1003–1012.

Palacpac, N. Q., Yoshida, S., Sakai, H., Kimura, 
Y., Fujiyama, K., & Yoshida, T., et al. (1999). 
Stable expression of human beta1, 
4-galactosyltransferase in plant cells  
modifies N-linked glycosylation patterns. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 96, 
4692–4697.

Plasson, C., Michel, R., Lienard, D., Saint- 

Jore-Dupas, C., Sourrouille, C., & de 
March, G. G., et al. (2009). Production of 
recombinant proteins in suspension-cultured 
plant cells. Methods in Molecular Biology, 
483, 145–161.

Rabindran, S., & Dawson, W. O. (2001). 

Assessment of recombinants that arise from 
the use of a TMV-based transient expression 
vector. Virology, 284, 182–189.

Roque, A. C., Lowe, C. R., & Taipa, M. 

A. (2004). Antibodies and genetically 
engineered related molecules: Production 
and purification. Biotechnology Progress, 20, 
639–654.

Rybicki, E. P. (2009). Plant-produced vaccines: 
Promise and reality. Drug Discovery Today, 
14, 16–24.

Sainsbury, F., & Lomonossoff, G. P. (2008). 
Extremely high-level and rapid transient 
protein production in plants without the use 
of viral replication. Plant Physiology, 148, 
1212–1218.

Sainsbury, F., Liu, L., & Lomonossoff, G. P. 

(2009). Cowpea mosaic virus-based systems 
for the expression of antigens and antibodies 
in plants. Methods in Molecular Biology, 
483, 25–39.

Santi, L., Batchelor, L., Huang, Z., Hjelm, B.,  

Kilbourne, J., & Arntzen, C. J., et al. 
(2008). An efficient plant viral expression 
system generating orally immunogenic 
Norwalk virus-like particles. Vaccine, 26, 
1846–1854.

Santi, L., Giritch, A., Roy, C. J., Marillonnet, 
S., Klimyuk, V., & Gleba, Y., et al. (2006). 
Protection conferred by recombinant 
Yersinia pestis antigens produced by a rapid 
and highly scalable plant expression system. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
103, 861–866.

Santi, L., Huang, Z., & Mason, H. (2006). 
Virus-like particles production in green 
plants. Methods, 40, 66–76.

Schahs, M., Strasser, R., Stadlmann, J., 

Kunert, R., Rademacher, T., & Steinkellner, 

Vaccines, antibodies, and pharmaceutical proteins

C H A P T E R   2 9

H. (2007). Production of a monoclonal 
antibody in plants with a humanized 
N-glycosylation pattern. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 5, 657–663.

Schuster, M., Jost, W., Mudde, G. C., 

Wiederkum, S., Schwager, C., & Janzek, 
E., et al. (2007). In vivo glyco-engineered 
antibody with improved lytic potential 
produced by an innovative non-mammalian 
expression system. Biotechnology Journal, 2, 
700–708.

Shivprasad, S., Pogue, G. P., Lewandowski, D. 

J., Hidalgo, J., Donson, J., & Grill, L. K.,  
et al. (1999). Heterologous sequences 
greatly affect foreign gene expression in 
tobacco mosaic virus-based vectors. Virology, 
255, 312–323.

Smith, M. L., Fitzmaurice, W. P., Turpen, T. H., &  

Palmer, K. E. (2009). Display of peptides 
on the surface of tobacco mosaic virus 
particles. Current Topics in Microbiology and 
Immunology, 332, 13–31.

Strasser, R., Stadlmann, J., Schahs, M.,  

Stiegler, G., Quendler, H., & Mach, L.,  
et al. (2008). Generation of glyco-engineered 
Nicotiana benthamiana for the production of 
monoclonal antibodies with a homogeneous 
human-like N-glycan structure. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 6, 392–402.

Torrent, M., Llompart, B., Lasserre-Ramassamy, 
S., Llop-Tous, I., Bastida, M., & Marzabal, P., 
et al. (2009). Eukaryotic protein production 
in designed storage organelles. BMC Biology, 
7, 5.

Torrent, M., Llop-Tous, I., & Ludevid, M. D. 

(2009). Protein body induction: A new 
tool to produce and recover recombinant 
proteins in plants. Methods in Molecular 
Biology, 483, 193–208.

Tregoning, J. S., Nixon, P., Kuroda, H., Svab, 

Z., Clare, S., & Bowe, F., et al. (2003). 
Expression of tetanus toxin Fragment C 
in tobacco chloroplasts. Nucleic Acids 
Research, 31, 1174–1179.

Turpen, T. H. (1999). Tobacco mosaic virus 

and the virescence of biotechnology. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London Series B, Biological 
Sciences, 354, 665–673.

Turpen, T. H., Reinl, S. J., Charoenvit, Y., 

Hoffman, S. L., Fallarme, V., & Grill, L. K. 
(1995). Malarial epitopes expressed on the 
surface of recombinant tobacco mosaic virus. 
Biotechnology (NY), 13, 53–57.

Vancanneyt, G., Dubald, M., Schroder, W., 

Peters, J., & Botterman, J. (2009). A case 
study for plant-made pharmaceuticals 

comparing different plant expression and 
production systems. Methods in Molecular 
Biology, 483, 209–221.

Verwoerd, T. C., van Paridon, P. A., van Ooyen, 
A. J., van Lent, J. W., Hoekema, A., & Pen, 
J. (1995). Stable accumulation of Aspergillus 
niger phytase in transgenic tobacco leaves. 
Plant Physiology, 109, 1199–1205.

Vezina, L. P., Faye, L., Lerouge, P., D'Aoust,  
M. A., Marquet-Blouin, E., & Burel, C.,  
et al. (2009). Transient co-expression for 
fast and high-yield production of antibodies 
with human-like N-glycans in plants. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 7, 442–455.

Vollenkle, C., Weigert, S., Ilk, N., Egelseer, 
E., Weber, V., & Loth, F., et al. (2004). 
Construction of a functional S-layer fusion 
protein comprising an immunoglobulin 
G-binding domain for development of 
specific adsorbents for extracorporeal blood 
purification. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 70, 1514–1521.

Watson, J., Koya, V., Leppla, S. H., & Daniell, 
H. (2004). Expression of Bacillus anthracis 
protective antigen in transgenic chloroplasts 
of tobacco, a non-food/feed crop. Vaccine, 
22, 4374–4384.

Webster, D. E., Wang, L., Mulcair, M., Ma, C., 

Santi, L., & Mason, H. S., et al. (2009). 
Production and characterization of an  
orally immunogenic Plasmodium antigen  
in plants using a virus-based expression 
system. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 7, 
846–855.

Weise, A., Altmann, F., Rodriguez-Franco, M., 

Sjoberg, E. R., Baumer, W., & Launhardt, 
H., et al. (2007). High-level expression of 
secreted complex glycosylated recombinant 
human erythropoietin in the Physcomitrella 
Delta-fuc-t Delta-xyl-t mutant. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 5, 389–401.

Werner, S., Marillonnet, S., Hause, G., 

Klimyuk, V., & Gleba, Y. (2006). 
Immunoabsorbent nanoparticles based 
on a tobamovirus displaying protein A. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
103, 17678–17683.

Yusibov, V., & Rabindran, S. (2008). Recent 

progress in the development of plant derived 
vaccines. Expert Review of Vaccines, 7, 
1173–1183.

Zvereva, A. S., Petrovskaya, L. E., Rodina, A. V., 
Frolova, O. Y., Ivanov, P. A., & Shingarova, L. 
N., et al. (2009). Production of biologically 
active human myelocytokines in plants. 
Biochemistry (Mosc), 74, 1187–1194.

479

Fruit development and ripening: a 
molecular perspective

26

Avtar K. Handa1  Martín-Ernesto Tiznado-Hernández1,2
Autar K. Mattoo3
1Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,  2Centro de Investigación en Alimentación y 
Desarrollo, Sonora, México,  3USDA-ARS, Sustainable Agricultural Systems Laboratory, 
Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Beltsville, Maryland

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Fruit Classification  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 405
Fruit Development  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 406
Fruit shape, size, and mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .406
Fruit Ripening  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 409
Ripening mutations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .409
Nutritional mutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .411
Shelf life mutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .412
Ethylene and Fruit Ripening  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 413
Ethylene biosynthesis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .413
Ethylene perception and signal transduction . . . . . . . .414
Genetic intervention in ethylene  
biosynthesis and perception  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .416
Fruit Texture  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 417
Cell wall depolymerizing enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .417
Expansins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .418
Protein glycosylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .418
Future Perspectives  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 418

Fruit Classification

Botanically, a fruit is derived either from a flower or an inflo-
rescence.  Fruits  developed  from  one  flower  are  divisible 
into  two  broad  categories  referred  to  as  simple  or  aggregate, 
whereas  the  inflorescence-derived  fruit  are  considered  mul-
tiple fruit (Spjut, 1994). However, edible fruits also derived 
partially  or  fully  from  a  flower  are  referred  to  as  accessory 
fruit.  Simple  fruit  are  further  divided  into  fleshy,  dry,  and 
dehiscent, and dry and indehiscent categories with each rep-
resenting  several  types  (Stuppy  and  Kesseler,  2008).  Fleshy 
fruits include drupes, berries, pome, pepo, and hesperidium. 
A drupe has one seed, also known as a pit, which arises from 
hardened  endocarp  or  inner  ovary  walls  (coconut,  cherries, 
olive,  peach,  avocado),  whereas  a  berry  contains  many  seeds 

with  a  thin  skin  representing  the  outer  casing  of  the  ovary. 
The common edible berry fruits include blackcurrant, redcur-
rant, gooseberry, guava, pepper, pomegranate, kiwifruit, grape, 
cranberry, and blueberry. Pomes, such as apple and pear, have 
a  fleshy  hypanthium  that  primarily  originates  from  an  infe-
rior ovary that lies below the attachment of other floral parts. 
Pepo fruits also form from an inferior ovary, but have a thick 
leathery rind (pumpkin, squash, melons, watermelon, cucum-
ber,  and  zucchini).  Hesperidium  fruits,  which  include  most 
citrus  fruit,  have  a  leathery  rind  embedded  with  glands  pro-
ducing volatile compounds.

Dry  and  dehiscent  fruit  are  subdivided  into  several  types 
including capsule, silique, follicle, legume, loment, and schizo-
carp,  which  open  up  on  maturation  to  shed  seeds.  Capsule 
pods are formed from two or more carpels and, depending on 
species,  shed  seeds  in  a  number  of  ways  (nigella,  poppy,  lily, 
orchid, willow, cotton, and jimson weed). Silique fruit, whose 
length  is  generally  at  least  twice  its  width,  are  formed  after 
fusion  of  two  carpels  (Brassicaceae  family).  Follicle,  a  dry 
unilocular many seeded fruit, results from a single carpel (lark-
spur,  magnolia,  banksia,  peony,  and  milkweed).  Also,  a  sim-
ple carpel develops into a legume fruit that normally dehisces 
(alfalfa,  clover,  peas,  beans,  lentils,  lupins,  mesquite,  carob, 
soy,  and  peanuts).  A  loment  fruit  is  a  modified  legume  with 
narrowing between the seed segment and is dehiscent at matu-
rity.  A  schizocarp  fruit  is  a  product  of  multiple  carpels  that 
generally  split  up  into  one-seeded  mericarps  (these  include 
fruits from the genders Malva, Malvastrum, and Sida).

Dry and indehiscent fruit retain their seeds upon matura-
tion and form the third major category of simple fruit, which 
includes caryopsis, nuts, achene, cypsela, samara, and utricle. 
The caryopsis fruit, also known as grain, includes major agro-
nomical  crops  such  as  rice,  wheat,  and  corn.  These  indehis-
cent  fruits  arise  from  a  single  carpel  (monocarpelate)  with 
pericarp  fused  with  the  seed  coat.  Nuts  develop  from  the 
pistil with the inferior ovary. These indehiscent fruit normally 
contain one seed with the ovary walls becoming hard (woody 
or  stony)  at  maturity.  An  achene  fruit  develops  from  one 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00026-2

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

carpel and contains a single seed that nearly fills the pericarp 
without  adhering  to  it,  for  example,  buttercup,  buckwheat, 
and cannabis. Cypsela is an achene-like fruit derived from an 
inferior ovary and contains only one locule and one seed per 
fruit  (dandelion  and  Helianthus).  Utricles,  often  compared 
with  a  one-seeded  achene,  comprise  a  small,  bladder-like, 
thin-walled fruit with pericarp that is loose and fragile, which 
are  rarely  seen  (e.g.,  in  duckweed).  A  samara  fruit,  which 
develops  from  the  ovary  wall,  belongs  to  a  simple  dry  fruit 
and indehiscent type. Its shape as a flattened wing of fibrous 
and  papery  tissue  helps  the  wind  to  carry  the  seed  farther 
away from the parent tree (elms, maples, and ashes).

Aggregate  fruits  are  derived  from  multiple  carpels  of  the 
same  flower  where  each  of  the  unjoined  pistil  converts  to  a 
fruitlet.  Etaerio,  a  collection  of  these  fruitlets,  develops  into 
an  aggregate  fruit,  which  is  further  subdivided  into  achene, 
follicle, drupelet, or berry types. Although technically straw-
berry is an aggregate fruit, it consists of many achenes embed-
ded  in  a  fleshy  edible  receptacle.  Raspberry  is  derived  from 
separate  ovaries  within  a  single  flower  and  consists  of  many 
individual  small  fruitlets  attached  to  a  common  receptacle. 
Other  examples  of  aggregate  fruits  include  blackberry  and 
boysenberry.  Unlike  aggregate  fruits,  the  multiple  fruits  are 
derived from an inflorescence (a cluster of flowers). Fruit pro-
duced from each flower matures into a single mass. Examples 
are the pineapple, fig, mulberry, osage-orange, and breadfruit. 
A number of fruits in which some or the entire edible portion 
is  not  derived  from  ovary/ovaries  are  classified  as  accessory 
fruits. Generally, when inferior ovaries, and the receptacle or 
hypanthium, become part of the fruit (pseudocarp), they are 
known  as  false  or  spurious  fruit,  including  examples  such  as 
cashew fruits, apples, and pears.

Each  facet  of  the  development,  maturation,  and  ripen-
ing  of  diverse  classes  of  these  fruits  is  understood  to  differ-
ent  degrees,  but  presenting  a  detailed  overview  on  these  is 
clearly outside the scope of this chapter. Instead, we attempt 
to summarize some of the recent studies that have led to an 
increased  understanding  of  the  development  and  ripening  of 
fleshy fruit at a molecular level. The solanaceous tomato has 
provided the most information in this regard and is therefore 
the  prime  model  system  described  and  discussed  here  and, 
wherever appropriate, references to studies on other fruit spe-
cies are made in the text.

Fruit Development

Fruit development involves three basic phases. The first phase 
is the development of the ovary and the initiation of the cell 
division,  together  called  a  fruit  set.  In  the  second  phase,  cell 
division  is  the  predominant  feature.  During  the  third  phase, 
fruit increases in size mainly by cell expansion. Once the fruit 
cells  have  fully  expanded  and  the  fruit  matured,  the  ripen-
ing  process  ensues  (Gillaspy  et  al.,  1993;  Ezura  and  Hiwasa-
Tanase,  2010).  Each  phase  of  fruit  development  and  ripening 
involves  specific  gene  activity  as  revealed  by  transcriptomic 
analyses (Carrari et al., 2006; Mounet et al., 2009; Srivastava 
et  al.,  2010).  As  expected  many  genes  identified  include 
transcription  factors  known  to  control  large  alterations  of 

fruit  development  and  ripening,  like  the  Cnr  locus  (Manning 
et  al.,  2006)  and  several  MADS-box  genes  expressed  dur-
ing the early stages of tomato fruit ripening (Busi et al., 2003; 
Giovannoni,  2007).  Studies  geared  toward  our  understanding 
of genetic regulation of fruit ripening are growing exponentially 
(Giovannoni, 2007; Fatima et al., 2008; Bapat et al., 2010).

Fruit shape, size, and mass

The  transformation  from  their  wild  characteristics  that  made 
fruits  inedible  to  non-toxic,  attractive  and  edible  fruits  for 
human  consumption  involved  alterations  through  generations 
of domestication. Most modern fruit varieties are usually bigger 
compared  to  their  wild-type  as  a  result  of  the  domestication 
process (Smartt and Simmonds, 1995). For instance, the wild-
type Solanum lycopersicum var. cerasiforme bears fruit that has 
two locules and weighs only a few grams, whereas some of the 
modern  domesticated  tomato  varieties  contain  many  more 
locules  and  could  weigh  as  much  as  1 kg  (Tanksley,  2004).  In 
recent  years,  quantitative  trait  loci  (QTL)  mapping  and  the 
development  of  molecular  marker  technology  have  made  it 
possible  to  locate  the  genomic  regions  and  genes  responsible 
for several desirable fruit phenotypic attributes (van der Knaap 
et  al.,  2002;  Tanksley,  2004).  These  studies  led  to  the  iden-
tification  of  genetic  loci  as  well  as  genes  regulating  fruit  size, 
weight,  and  shape  in  several  species  including  tomato.  About 
30 QTL affecting the tomato fruit size, yield, and shape have 
been  identified.  However,  less  than  10  loci  account  for  most 
changes associated with tomato domestication (Grandillo et al., 
1999).  The  same  is  the  case  with  other  species.  Moreover, 
several loci first identified in other fruits have also been identi-
fied in tomato (Frary et al., 2000; Tanksley, 2004; Zygier et al., 
2005;  Brewer  et  al.,  2007;  Cong  et  al.,  2008;  Zhang  et  al., 
2008;  Bertin  et  al.,  2009),  apple  (Liebhard  et  al.,  2003),  and 
peach (Yamamoto et al., 2001). The orthologous loci of tomato 
QTL regulating fruit shape, mass, and size are also present in 
green  pepper  (Capsicum  annuum)  and  eggplant  (Solanum 
melongena), supporting the hypothesis that fruit domestication 
proceeded via mutations of a small number of genes with con-
served function (Tanksley, 2004; Frary et al., 2004).

Mutation  in  ovate,  sun,  and  fs8.1  loci  cause  elongated 
tomato  fruit  by  modulation  of  early  stages  of  carpel  devel-
opment  (Gonzalo  and  van  der  Knaap,  2008).  All  elongated 
tomato  shape  varieties  carry  mutation  in  at  least  one  of  
these  three  loci.  The  tomato  variety  Howard  German  car-
ries  the sun  mutation,  the  Sausage  in  the ovate,  and  the  Rio 
Grande in the fs8.1 locus (Gonzalo and van der Knaap, 2008). 
The sun and ovate loci play major roles in controlling the ratio 
of fruit height over width, which determines the fruit shape 
index. A nonsense mutation in the OVATE gene is responsible 
for the development of a pear-shaped fruit instead of an oval-
shaped in tomato (Table 26.1). All tested pear-shaped tomato 
varieties share the same nonsense recessive mutation in ovate 
(Ku  et  al.,  1999;  Liu  et  al.,  2002).  The  Ovate  gene  encodes 
a transcription repressor regulating AtGA20ox1, a gibberellic 
acid (GA) biosynthesis enzyme in Arabidopsis. The mutation 
in  this  gene  causes  the  deficiency  in  gibberellin  biosynthesis 
resulting in a reduction in cell elongation (Wang et al., 2007).

406

Fruit development and ripening: a molecular perspective

C H A P T E R   2 6

Table 26.1  Functional characterization of genes regulating fruit size, shape, mass, ripening, and composition in tomato

Gene

Transgene

Phenotype

Reference

Fruit shape, size, mass

fw 2.2
Negative regulator of cell division

Over-expression

Reduced fruit size and weight

Frary et al. (2000)

SUN IQ67 domain-containing gene

Over-expression

Fruit shape after anthesis

CNR1
Maize fw2.2 like gene

Over-expression

Reduced plant and organ size

Xiao et al. (2008)

Guo et al. (2010)

OVATE
Negative regulatory transcription factor

Ethylene regulated ripening

ACC synthase

ACC oxidase

ETR1
Ethylene receptor

SAMdc
SAM decarboxylase

SAM hydrolase

SfIAP
Inhibitor of apoptotic from Spodoptera frugiperda

Ripening mutations

MADS-RIN transcription factor

Downregulation

Increased growth, biomass, ear length, kernel per row

Guo et al. (2010)

Over-expression

Fruit shape pear to round

Liu et al. (2002)

Antisense

Impaired ethylene production and fruit ripening, 
extended fruit shelf life

Oeller (1991)

Under-expression

Prolonged fruit shelf life

Antisense

Delayed abscission, shorter internode length, no effect 
on pigmentation and fruit softening

Xiong et al. (2005)

Whitelaw et al. (2002)

Over-expression

Increased spermidine and spermine, lycopene, juice 
quality, and vine life

Mehta et al. (2002)

Over-expression

Delayed ripening, softening, extended shelf life

Good et al. (1994)

Over-expression

Delayed ripening

Li et al. (2010)

Over-expression 
Under-expression

Complements RIN mutation 
Regulates fruit ripening

Vrebalov et al. (2002)

Green ripe

Over-expression

Complement Gr mutation

Barry and Giovannoni (2006)

Green flesh homolog of rice STAYGREEN protein

Over-expression

Override Gf phenotype

VIGS

Inhibits fruit ripening

CNR, Colorless non-ripening SPB-box 
transcription factor

DDB1
UV-damaged DNA binding protein 1

det1
High-pigment-2

Fruit texture

PG  
Polygalacturonase

PG β-subunit

PME  
Pectin methylesterase

Barry et al. (2008)

Manning et al. (2006)

Over-expression

Complemented high pigment 1 mutation

Azari et al. (2010a,b)

Over-expression

Elevated carotenoid and flavonoid accumulation

Davuluri et al. (2004)

Over-expression

Increased pectin solubilization

Giovannoni et al. (1989)

Antisense

Antisense

Antisense

Slightly firmer fruit, increased juice viscosity, reduced 
pectin solubilization

Schuch et al. (1991)

Enhanced fruit softening, decreased middle lamella 
cohesion, reduced tissue integrity

Watson et al. (1994); Chun 
and Huber (1998)

Increased degree of methoxylation, molecular size of 
pecti, higher solids

Tieman et al. (1992)

(Continued)

407

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Table 26.1  (Continued)

Gene

Transgene

Phenotype

Reduced tissue integrity at late ripening, decreased 
bound calcium, no effect on softening

Increased juice and serum viscosity, paste 
consistency

Reference

Tieman and Handa (1994)

Thakur et al. (1996a,b)

PL
Pectate lyase

TBG1
β-galactosidase1

TBG3
β-galactosidase3

TBG4
β-galactosidase4

Exp
Expansin

Cel
Cellulase

Antisense

Increased strawberry fruit firmness

Jiménez-Bermúdez (2002)

Antisense

No effect of cell wall GalA loss and fruit softening

Carey et al. (2001)

Antisense

Reduction in TBG1 and TBG4 transcripts, higher GalA 
in cell wall, reduced fruit deterioration

de Silva and Verhoeyen 
(1998)

Antisense

Reduced fruit softening, higher GalA in cell wall

Smith et al. (2002)

Antisense

Increased firmness, reduced polymer size

Brummell et al. (1999b)

Antisense

No reduction in xyloglucan depolymerization

Harpster et al. (2002a)

Endo-1,4-β –glucanase

Over-expression

No increase in pepper's xyloglucan depolymerization

Harpster et al. (2002b)

EXP and PG

PG and PME

Both antisense

Increased fruit firmness, modified juice rheology

Kalamaki et al. (2003)

Both antisense

Modified juice rheology

Errington et al. (1998)

The sun gene encodes a member of the IQ67 protein fam-
ily  containing  the  calmodulin  binding  domain  (Xiao  et  al., 
2008). This protein plays a role in expansion of the tissue that 
likely  changes  the  fruit  shape  by  affecting  the  pattern  along 
the apical–basal axis (Xiao et al., 2008; Table 26.1). An unu-
sual  24.7 kb  gene  duplication  event  mediated  by  the  long 
terminal repeat retrotransposon rider caused the genomic con-
text resulting in the formation of this locus with increased sun 
expression relative to that of the ancestral copy. Although the 
mode of action of the sun gene is yet to be uncovered, altered 
expression  of  many  genes  involved  in  phytohormone  biosyn-
thesis  or  signaling,  organ  identity,  and  patterning  of  tomato 
fruit is associated with this mutation (Xiao et al., 2009).

The  fs8.1  gene  is  known  to  exhibit  pleiotropic  effects, 
including  increased  number  of  flowers  and  altered  carpel 
length  during  pre-anthesis,  consequently  increasing  the  fruit 
size  (Ku  et  al.,  2000).  A  mutation  in  fs8.1  initiates  changes 
in floral/carpel development that are responsible for increased 
fruit  size  (Ku  et  al.,  2000).  The  fs8.1  locus  is  allelic  of  the 
bell8.1 (van der Knaap and Tanksley, 2003). The bell8.1 locus, 
along  with  bell2.1  and  bell2.2,  was  identified  as  responsible 
for  a  bell  pepper  shape  of  fruits  of  tomato  cultivar  Yellow 
Stuffer (van der Knaap and Tanksley, 2003). The locus bell2.1 
increases  the  locule  number,  whereas  the  locus  bell2.2  has 
been suggested to enhance the fruit weight. Tomato fruit with 
Yellow Stuffer allele of fs8.1 exhibit convex locule walls with 
extended bumpy shape, characteristic of bell peppers (van der 
Knaap and Tanksley, 2003).

Crosses  between  small-fruited  wild  tomatoes  and  their 
large-fruited  cultivated  counterparts  led  to  the  identifica-
tion of fw1.1, fw2.2, fw3.1, and fw4.1 loci that play roles in 
fruit size and shape in tomato (Grandillo et al., 1999). With 
a  possible  exception  of  fw3.1,  these  loci  increase  fruit  mass 
by  enlarging  fruit  by  as  much  as  30%  (Tanksley,  2004).  The 
QTL fw2.2 seems to have the strongest effect on the fruit size 
(Table 26.1). The fw2.2 locus encodes a membrane-spanning 
protein  that  is  expressed  at  low  levels  only  during  the  cell 
division phase of fruit development (Frary et al., 2000; Cong 
et al., 2002; Tanksley, 2004). It has been suggested that fw2.2 
acts  as  a  negative  regulator  of  cell  division  and  affects  fruit 
size  by  regulating  either  transcriptional  activity  (Cong  et  al., 
2002;  Nesbitt  and  Tanksley,  2002)  or  photoassimilate  avail-
ability (Baldet et al., 2006). The fw2.2 protein has also been 
suggested to regulate the cell cycle controlled signal transduc-
tion  pathway  by  physically  interacting  with  the  regulatory 
β-subunit  of  a  CKII  kinase  at  or  near  the  plasma  membrane 
(Cong and Tanksley, 2006). Pafw2.2, a gene similar to Slfw2.2, 
has  been  cloned  from  avocado  and  its  higher  expression  is 
associated  with  smaller  fruit  phenotype  in  this  fruit  (Dahan 
et al., 2010).

The  fasciated  locus  (lcn11.1)  at  the  end  of  the  long  arm 
of  chromosome  11  and  the  locule  number  locus  (lcn2.1)  on 
chromosome 2 are associated with a higher number of flower 
carpels  (Barrero  and  Tanksley,  2004;  Barrero  et  al.,  2006). 
A  mutation  in  fasciated  locus  seems  to  be  associated  with 
enlarging the fruit size during tomato domestication (Barrero 

408

Fruit development and ripening: a molecular perspective

C H A P T E R   2 6

and  Tanksley,  2004).  The  fasciated  gene  is  expressed  prior 
to  the  earliest  stage  of  flower  organogenesis  and  thus  can 
alter  the  floral  meristem  to  form  more  carpels  (locules)  and 
greater fruit size. The exact nature of the gene(s) at these loci 
is  yet  to  be  characterized.  The  putative  tomato  homologs  of 
Arabidopsis  genes  known  to  be  involved  in  floral  meristem 
development  did  not  map  to  the  lcn11  locus  (Barrero  et  al., 
2006).  However,  putative  tomato  homologs  of  Arabidopsis 
WUSCHEL  (WUS,  a  homeodomain  TAF  associated  with 
reduction  in  floral  organs)  and WIGGUM  (WIG,  a  farnesyl-
transferase  subunit  protein  associated  with  increased  sepals 
and  petals)  mapped  to  lcn2.1,  with  WUS  showing  the  high-
est  association.  Impaired  expression  of  WEE1  kinase  (Solly; 
WEE1)  by  its  antisense  gene  caused  reduction  in  fruit  and 
plant  sizes  that  correlated  with  lower  DNA-ploidy  of  cells 
(Gonzalez  et  al.,  2007).  These  latter  studies  implied  that 
WEE1  kinase  plays  a  role  in  regulating  the  time  of  the  G 
phase;  its  reduction  would  lengthen  the  G  phase  causing  a 
higher  degree  of  endoreduplication.  The  resulting  hypertro-
phy of the nucleus would then cause cell enlargement.

Fruit Ripening

Fruit ripening is a complex process regulated by both genetic 
and epigenetic factors. It includes changes occurring in physi-
ologically mature green fruit through the early stages of senes-
cence  and  is  responsible  for  characteristic  aesthetic  and/
or  food  quality  attributes  of  fruit  (Brady,  1987).  During  the 
ripening  phenomenon,  a  fruit  undergoes  a  dramatic  shift  in 
gene expression that results in many desirable changes includ-
ing  texture  and  firmness,  sugar  accumulation,  reduction  in 
organic  acids,  alterations  in  pigments  leading  to  development 
of characteristic color, and production of volatiles responsible 
for flavor and aroma (Brady, 1987; Giovannoni, 2004; Fatima 
et al., 2008; Bapat et al., 2010). These transitions make fruit 
desirable for human consumption, but overripening of a fruit 
results in large losses of fruit crops (Negi and Handa, 2008). 
Significant  progress  has  been  made  in  understanding  genetic 
factors that regulate the fruit ripening process, and a number 
of  genes  that  play  a  role  in  fruit  development  and  ripening 
have  been  cloned  and  functionally  characterized  (Table  26.1; 
Alba et al., 2005; Seymour et al., 2008; Bapat et al., 2010).

Ripening mutations

The  availability  of  a  number  of  tomato  mutants  altered  in 
their  ripening  attributes,  and  pigment  quality  and  inten-
sity,  have  greatly  facilitated  the  identification  and  clon-
ing of the genes that play a central role in the fruit ripening 
process  (Table  26.1).  These  mutants  include  RIPENING 
INHIBITOR  (rin),  COLOURLESS  NON-RIPENING  (cnr), 
NON RIPENING (nor), NEVER RIPE (NR), GREEN RIPE 
(Gr)/NEVER-RIPE  2  (Nr-2),  ALCOBACA  (ALC),  HIGH 
PIGMENT  (hp),  DARK  Green  (dg),  ATROVIOLACEA 
(atv), INTENSE PIGMENT (IP), and the DELAYED FRUIT 
DETERIORATION  (DFD;  Kendrick  et  al.,  1994;  White, 
2002; Barry and Giovannoni, 2006; Levin et al., 2006; Saladié 

et  al.,  2007;  Lavi  et  al.,  2009).  Since  these  mutations  pri-
marily  affect  the  fruit  ripening  process  with  little  effect  on 
growth  and  development  of  the  parent  plant,  they  became 
powerful  tools  to  elucidate  and  understand  the  genetic  basis 
of fruit development and ripening. Although the physiological 
attributes of many of these mutants — including climacteric 
versus  non-climacteric  behavior,  accumulation  of  pigments, 
alteration of shelf life, changes in fruit texture and aroma — 
had  been  known  for  some  time  (Tigchelaar  et  al.,  1978),  it 
was  recombinant  DNA  technology  that  made  it  possible  to 
identify  and  characterize  genes  responsible  for  the  observed 
phenotypes  (Figure  26.1).  The  molecular  characterization  of 
these mutations has provided new insight into the fruit ripen-
ing process and made tools available to intervene in this agri-
culturally important process.

Chromosomal  walking  identified  two  MADS-box  genes  in 
tandem  (SlMADS-RIN  and  SlMADS-MC)  associated  with 
rin locus (Vrebalov et al., 2002). The MADS-box genes rep-
resent  a  family  of  transcription  factors  that  regulate  diverse 
developmental  processes  in  flowering  plants,  particularly  the 
molecular  architecture  during  flower  morphogenesis.  The 
ectopic  expression  of  SlMADS-RIN  complemented  muta-
tion in the rin fruits and its downregulation by the antisense 
gene imparted non-ripening phenotype similar to rin mutation 
(Vrebalov et al., 2002). The other MADS-box gene SlMADS-
MC  affected  sepal  development  and  inflorescence  determi-
nancy (Vrebalov et al., 2002). The normal RIN protein forms 
a  stable  homodimer  that  binds  to  MADS  domain-specific 
DNA  sites,  whereas  in  vivo  it  bound  to  the  CArG-box,  a 
highly  conserved  DNA  motif  that  binds  to  MADS-box  pro-
teins  of  SlACS2  (Ito  et  al.,  2008).  Although  the  rin  muta-
tion  truncated  the  RIN  protein  by  27  amino  acid  residues 
at  the  C-terminus,  it  still  exhibited  a  DNA  binding  activity. 
Nonetheless,  it  could  not  activate  transcription  and  ethylene 
production (Ito et al., 2008). These results provided an expla-
nation as to why rin tomato fruit was not affected in ethylene 
perception and responds to exogenous ethylene treatment. A 
fruit-specific  ortholog  of  SlMADS-RIN,  FvMADS9,  was  also 
identified in strawberry (Vrebalov et al., 2002).

Identification  of  tomato  rin  mutation  gene  as  a  member 
of  the  MADS-box  gene  led  to  isolation  of  other  MADS-box 
genes, including TAG1, TAGL2, TAGL11, TAGL12, TAGL1, 
TDR6,  and  TDR4  from  tomato  (Vrebalov  et  al.,  2002;  Busi 
et  al.,  2003).  Functional  roles  of  some  of  these  MADS-box 
paralogs were evaluated using over-expression or downregula-
tion approaches. The constitutive expression of TAG1 resulted 
in  the  conversion  of  first  whorl  sepals  into  mature  pericarpic 
tissue  with  ripening-like  cell  wall  metabolism,  thus  support-
ing its role in fruit development. The downregulation of TAG1 
by its antisense caused homeotic conversion of the third whorl 
stamens  into  petaloid  organs  (Vrebalov  et  al.,  2009).  The 
tomato  fruits  with  reduced  TAGL1  expression  exhibited  a 
yellow-orange  fruit  phenotype,  and  reduced  carotenoid  levels 
and  decreased  ethylene  production  and  thin  pericarp,  typi-
cal  symptoms  of  impaired  ripening  due  to  lack  of  availability 
of  sufficient  ethylene  (Vrebalov,  2009).  The  ectopic  expres-
sion  of  TAGL1  caused  expansion  of  sepals  and  accumula-
tion  of  lycopene.  Together  these  results  provided  evidence 
that  tomato  TAGL1  (AGAMOUS-LIKE1),  an  ortholog  of 

409

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Figure 26.1 l Temporal and developmental regulation of ripening and composition-altering genes in the wild-type fruits l 
Shown are the developmental (young to fully mature) and ripening (BR to RR) stages of the wild-type (WT) fruits. Also shown are the typical 
phenotypes of various altered ripening or composition mutants of tomato at a physiological stage comparable to BR    10 days WT fruits. 
The lines to the left of each mutant fruit represent the stages when the WT fruit exhibit expression of ripening and the composition-altering 
genes. The broken line indicates that RTE1 expresses at very low level throughout development and ripening of the WT fruit. 5, 10, 15, and 20 
represent days after anthesis and MG, BR, TR, and RR represent mature green, breaker, turning, and red ripe, respectively. Abbreviations: hp1, 
high pigment 1 (DDB1, UV-damaged DNA binding); hp2, high pigment 2 (SlDET1, deetiolated 1); Nr, never ripe (SlETR1, ethylene response 1); 
rin, ripening inhibitor (SlRIN-MADS, RIN-MADS box-transcription factor); nor, non-ripening (nor, nonripening); Cnr, Colorless non ripening 
(SlSPB-Cnr, squamosa promoter binding protein); and Gr, green ripe (RTE1, reversion to ethylene sensitivity 1). Except for the Gr mutation that 
activated expression of RTE1 in Gr mutant, all other shown mutations resulted in loss of functional expression of their respective genes. (Pictures 
of the various mutant fruits courtesy of Dr. J. Giovannoni.) 

SHATTERPROOF  (SHP)  MADS-box  genes  of  Arabidopsis 
thaliana) regulates fruit ripening (Pnueli et al., 1994).

The  TAGL2  is  a  tomato  homolog  of  the  Arabidopsis 
SEPALLATA  (SEP),  which  has  been  shown  to  interact  with 
four  MADS-box  proteins  (Busi  et  al.,  2003).  The  transgenic 
plants  with  downregulated  TAGL2  (TM29)  exhibited  sev-
eral  phenotypes  including  production  of  aberrant  flowers, 
morphogenetic  alterations  in  the  organs  of  the  inner  three 
whorls, green instead of yellow petals, infertile stamens, and 
parthenocarpic  fruit  set.  These  attributes  collectively  sug-
gested  this  gene  to  be  a  negative  regulator  of  fruit  develop-
ment  (Ampomah-Dwamena  et  al.,  2002).  The  MADS-box 
gene  TD4  is  likely  a  tomato  ortholog  of  the  Arabidopsis 
FRUITFULL (FUL) MADS-box gene that plays a role in sil-
ique  development.  The  constitutive  expression  of  FUL  pre-
vented  the  formation  of  the  dehiscence  zone  in  Arabidopsis 
(Ferrándiz et al., 2000). The expression of TD4 increases dur-
ing  fruit  development  and  is  not  affected  in  the  rin  and  nor 
genetic backgrounds; however, Cnr mutation eliminates fruit-
development-related  increase  in  TD4  transcripts  (Seymour 
et al., 2002). The TD4 gene may play a role in cell adhesion in 

tomato fruit as the expression of its apple (Malus domestica) 
ortholog, MdMADS2.1, was significantly associated with flesh 
firmness in apple fruit (Cevik et al., 2010).

The  COLOURLESS  NON-RIPENING  (Cnr)  mutation, 
a  dominant  single  gene  mutation  that  results  in  a  non-rip-
ening  fruit  phenotype,  was  observed  first  in  the  commercial 
population. The Cnr fruits had reduced ethylene production, 
impaired  softening,  severely  reduced  cell-to-cell  adhesion, 
and  a  yellow  skin  lacking  carotenoids  in  the  pericarp  tissue 
(Thompson  et  al.,  1999;  Fraser  et  al.,  2001).  The  ripe  Cnr 
fruit  has  a  mealy  texture  and  the  pericarp  contains  approxi-
mately  50%  more  intercellular  spaces  than  the  wild-type 
fruit  (Orfila  et  al.,  2001).  The  Cnr  locus  was  mapped  and 
its  positional  cloning  showed  that  it  contained  an  SBP-box 
(SQUAMOSA promoter binding protein-like) gene (Manning 
et  al.,  2006).  An  epiallele  of  SlSPL-CNR  is  responsible  for 
a  large  degree  of  methylation  in  the  286 bp  region  located 
2.4 kb upstream from the first ATG of the SlSPL-CNR gene 
in  the  Cnr  mutant  (Manning  et  al.,  2006).  The  high  degree 
methylation was observed only in fruit showing the Cnr phe-
notype (Manning et al., 2006). It has been proposed that the 

410

Fruit development and ripening: a molecular perspective

C H A P T E R   2 6

SlSPL-CNR  protein  interacts  with  sequence  motifs  in  the 
promoters  of  MADS-box  genes  of  the  SQUAMOSA  family 
and modulates expression of a MADS-box transcription factor 
such as TDR4. As discussed previously, Cnr mutation reduces 
transcription  of  a  MADS-box  gene  TDR4.  This  gene  family 
has  also  been  found  associated  with  the  development  of  dry 
fruiting  structures  during  maize  kernel  development  (Wang 
et  al.,  2005).  These  results  suggest  that  SBP-box  genes  play 
roles in modulating ripening in both dry and fleshy fruits.

The  MADS-box  genes  are  also  present  in  other  fruit 
crops  and  regulate  fruit  development  and  ripening.  Among 
the  MADS-box  genes  reported  in  apples,  six  (MdMADS5–9 
and  MdMADS11)  are  similar  to  APETALA1  (AP1)  and  one 
(MdMADS10)  to  the  AGAMOUS  (AG)  group.  These  are 
expressed  during  early  fruit  development  (Yao  et  al.,  1999). 
The  insertion  mutations  in  Rae  Ime,  Spencer  Seedless,  and 
Wellington  Bloomless  apple  mutants  were 
identified  as 
homologs of pistillata, a MADS-box gene involved in identity 
determination  of  petals  and  stamen  in  Arabidopsis  (Weigel 
and Meyerowitz, 1994; Yao et al., 2001). The functional char-
acterization  of  one  of  the  peach  MADS-box  genes,  carried 
out  in  transgenic  tomato,  suggested  that  PpPLENA  plays  a 
role in fruit formation (Tadiello et al., 2009). Ectopic expres-
sion  of  an  AGAMOUS/SHATTERPROOF  homolog  from 
grape, Vvmads1, altered the morphology in the outer two flo-
ral  whorls  in  tobacco  (Boss  et  al.,  2001).  Other  MADS-box 
genes isolated from grapes, VvMADS2 and VvMADS4, show 
relatedness to the SEP, VvMADS3 to AGL6 and AGL13, and 
VvMADS5 to AGL11 (Boss et al., 2002). Several MADS-box 
genes,  isolated  from  banana  (Liu  et  al.,  2009;  Elitzur  et  al., 
2010),  had  differential  temporal  expression  with  respect  to 
climacteric  ethylene  production  and  exogenous  treatment 
with  1-MCP,  suggesting  a  role  in  fruit  ripening.  However, 
MaMADS2  and  MaMADS1,  the  two  genes  that  showed 
low  similarity  to  SlRIN,  did  not  complement  the  tomato 
rin  mutation  (Elitzur  et  al.,  2010).  MADS-box  genes  are 
expressed  in  other  fruits  including  hot  pepper  (Sung  et  al., 
2001),  and  hazelnut  (Rigola  et  al.,  1998),  but  their  role  in 
fruit development and ripening remains to be investigated.

The gene encoding the never ripe (SlNr) mutation was the 
first  gene  to  be  identified  from  a  ripening  impaired  tomato 
mutant  (Wilkinson  et  al.,  1995).  The  Nr  fruit  does  not 
undergo  normal  fruit  ripening  and  externally  exhibits  orange 
color with marginal softening only after several months (Rick 
and  Butler,  1956).  The  Nr  seedlings  show  lack  of  character-
istic  triple  response  to  exogenous  ethylene,  flowers  exhibit 
impaired  senescence  and  abscission,  and  petioles  display  an 
epinastic  response,  all  suggesting  that  Nr  mutation  causes 
ethylene insensitivity (Lanahan et al., 1994). Molecular clon-
ing and characterization of gene mutated in Nr mutant iden-
tified a homolog of the Arabidopsis ethylene receptor ETR1, 
but  the  Nr  gene  was  missing  the  response  regulator  domain 
found in the Arabidopsis ETR1 and related prokaryotic two-
component  signal  transducers  (Wilkinson  et  al.,  1995). 
Variation  in  Nr  gene  expression  regulated  ethylene  response 
in ripening tomato fruit and a single amino acid change in the 
sensor domain eliminated ethylene response (Wilkinson et al., 
1995). The ETR1 ethylene receptor interacts with three dif-
ferent  tomato  Constitutive  Triple  Response  (CTR)  genes, 

designated as SlCTR1, SlCTR3, and SlCTR4, suggesting that 
this receptor plays a role in downstream signaling of ethylene 
through Ser/Thr type kinases (Zhong et al., 2008).

Although  Green-ripe  (Gr)  and  the  Never-ripe  2  (Nr-2) 
mutations  arose  independently,  their  close  physical  proxim-
ity  within  the  genome  and  molecular  cloning  showed  them 
to  be  allelic  (Barry  et  al.,  2005).  Both  mutants  were  identi-
fied  based  on  the  retention  of  chlorophyll  in  mature  fruit 
and  impaired  fruit  softening  and  lycopene  accumulation. 
The  mutant  fruits  were  insensitive  to  ethylene  and  subdued 
ethylene  responses  were  observed  during  floral  senescence, 
abscission,  and  root  elongation,  but  the  ethylene-regulated 
inhibition  of  hypocotyl  elongation  and  petiole  epinasty 
remained  intact  (Barry  et  al.,  2005).  The  ethylene  biosyn-
thetic  pathway  was  not  impaired,  but  the  expression  of  the 
ethylene-regulated  gene  E4  was  not  restored  by  exogenous 
application  of  ethylene.  The  positional  cloning  of  GR/NR-
2  locus  showed  an  identical  334 bp  deletion  in  Gr/Gr  and 
Nr-2/Nr-2  genotypes,  confirming  the  allelic  nature  of  muta-
tions (Barry and Giovannoni, 2006). The deletion was in the 
5-flanking  region  and  ectopic  expression  of  Gr  in  tomato 
recreated  the  Gr  mutant  phenotype,  except  that  the  whole 
transgenic plants did not exhibit ethylene insensitivity (Barry 
and  Giovannoni,  2006).  The  molecular  evaluation  of  the 
Gr/Nr-2 gene-encoded protein indicates it to be an evolution-
ary conserved protein with several trans-membrane domains, 
but its functional role is not yet fully understood (Barry and 
Giovannoni, 2006).

The  green-flesh  (gf)  and  chlorophyll  retainer  (cl)  are  two 
mutations  in  tomato  and  pepper,  respectively,  which  alter 
fruit  color  to  brown.  The  impaired  chlorophyll  degradation 
with  concomitant  accumulation  of  carotenoids  is  respon-
sible  for  the  observed  brown  color  of  fruits  from  these  two 
mutants.  The  positional  cloning  led  to  the  characterization 
of  a  point  mutation  at  the  gf  locus  in  tomato,  which  causes 
an amino acid substitution in an invariant residue of a tomato 
homolog  of  the  STAY-GREEN  (SGR)  protein  of  rice  (Barry 
et  al.,  2008).  A  similar  mutation  resulting  in  an  amino  acid 
substitution  at  an  invariant  residue  in  a  pepper  homolog  of 
SGR was shown to be responsible for the chlorophyll retainer 
(cl)  phenotype  in  pepper  (Barry  et  al.,  2008).  Expression  of 
both GF and CL are highly induced at the onset of fruit rip-
ening  and  are  coincident  to  the  ripening-associated  chloro-
phyll decline. However, the way the SGR subfamily associates 
with the chlorophyll degradation process is not yet elucidated.

Nutritional mutations

Since fruit is a good source of dietary vitamins, minerals, and 
many  phytonutrients  that  promote  good  nutrition,  there  has 
been  considerable  interest  in  boosting  their  nutrient  levels 
through  genetics,  breeding,  or  molecular  engineering  (Mehta 
et al., 2002; Razdan and Mattoo, 2007). Several single-point 
mutations  and  quantitative  trait  loci  affecting  levels  of  phy-
tonutrients  have  been  identified  and  characterized  in  tomato 
(Table  26.1).  Among  these  mutations,  the  recessive  high 
pigment  (hp-1,  hp-1w,  hp-2,  and  hp-2j)  and  dark  green  (dg) 
mutations show higher sensitivity to light than wild-type, and 

411

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

accumulate  higher  levels  of  the  health-promoting  metabo-
lites, such as carotenoids (mainly lycopene) and flavonoids in 
the red ripe fruit (Levin et al., 2006). The hp-1 is a sponta-
neous  mutant,  reported  first  in  1917  at  the  Campbell  Soup 
Company  farms  (Riverton,  NJ;  Reynard,  1956),  while  the 
hp-2 mutant was discovered in the Italian San Marzano variety 
in 1975 (Soressi, 1975). Seedlings homozygous in the mutated 
loci also show higher levels of anthocyanin and shorter hypocot-
yls compared to the corresponding isogenic lines. It was initially 
thought that the hp mutations were lesions in the genes encod-
ing enzymes in the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway, but map-
ping  showed  that  they  are  mutations  in  two  genes  regulating 
light  signal  transduction  responsible  for  photomorphogenesis 
(Levin et al., 2006). Whereas the mutation hp-1 was allelic to 
hp-1w, the hp-2 was allelic to hp-2j and dg. The role of light sig-
naling machinery in regulating fruit phytonutrient contents has 
been reviewed (Azari et al., 2010a).

Mapping  of  a  tomato  EST  sequence,  which  was  highly 
homologous to the human and A. thaliana UV-damaged DNA 
binding  protein  1  (DDB1),  to  the  hp-1  region  in  chromo-
some 2 suggested that hp-1 and hp-1(w) mutant phenotypes 
are associated with a mutation in DDB1. This was confirmed 
by sequencing the entire coding region of the DDB1 gene in 
hp-1and  and  hp-1(w)  mutants  and  their  near-isogenic  nor-
mal  plants.  A  single  A931-to-T931  base  transversion  in  the 
hp-1  mutant  and  G2392-to-A2392  transversion  in  the  hp-1(w) 
mutant,  respectively,  were  found  in  the  coding  sequence  of 
the  DDB1  gene  (Lieberman  et  al.,  2004).  These  mutations 
resulted  in  the  substitution  of  an  Asp  by  Tyr  at  residue  311 
in  hp-1  and  Glu  by  Lys  at  position  798  in  hp-1(w)  proteins, 
respectively. Further, these are two highly conserved residues 
in  the  DDB1  protein  both  in  plants  and  animals.  An  unam-
biguous  demonstration  that  DBB1  gene  mutation  is  respon-
sible  for  the  phenotypic  characteristics  of  hp-1  mutants  was 
obtained by complementing the hp-1 tomato mutant by over-
expression  of  a  non-mutated  tomato  DBB1  gene  under  the 
control of CaMV35S promoter (Azari et al., 2010a).

A  high  degree  of  similarity  between  CT151,  an  RFLP 
marker that mapped to the region containing the hp-2 muta-
tion,  and  the  Arabidopsis  DEETIOLATED1  (DET1)  gene 
suggested  that  the  hp-2  mutant  phenotype  resulted  from 
a  mutation  in  the  tomato  homolog  of  DET1  (Mustilli  et  al., 
1999). Isolation and sequencing of the tomato DET1 homolog 
confirmed  this  hypothesis.  DET1  is  implicated  in  photomor-
phogenic regulation since a mutation in this gene results in the 
deetiolated  phenotype  in  Arabidopsis  (Pepper  et  al.,  1994). 
DET1 is a nuclear protein present in a 350 kDa complex that 
also  contains  DDB1  (Schroeder  et  al.,  2002).  Since  DET1 
binds to hypoacetylated amino-terminal tails of the core his-
tone  H2B,  its  involvement  in  chromatin  remodeling  around 
photoregulated  genes  has  been  proposed  (Benvenuto  et  al., 
2002;  Schäfer  and  Bowler,  2002).  The  hp-2  and  hp-2j  phe-
notypes were shown to result from two independent and dif-
ferent mutations of the DET1 homolog. In the hp-2 mutant, 
a transversion of A to T introduced an alternative splicing to 
the tenth intron causing a deletion of three amino acids from 
the  nuclear  localization  signal,  which  likely  leads  to  mislo-
calization  of  the  DET1  protein  (Mustilli  et  al.,  1999).  The 
other  mutation  in  hp-2j  resulted  from  a  C  to  T  transition, 

which gave rise to the substitution of a serine for a conserved 
proline  residue  in  the  C-terminal  domain.  Although  post- 
transcriptional  silencing  of  DET1  expression 
in  tomato 
resulted in its hyper-responsiveness to light, which was often 
lethal  at  the  early  stages  of  plant  development,  it  increased 
carotenoids  in  the  transgenic  fruits  (Davuluri  et  al.,  2004). 
The  transgenic  repression  of  the  tomato  DET1/HP2  gene 
using  a  fruit-specific  promoter  allowed  elevated  carotenoid 
and  flavonoid  accumulation  in  fruit  without  the  deleterious 
effects such as dwarfism and reduced yield of such manipula-
tions in non-fruit tissues (Davuluri et al., 2005).

Mapping of the dg mutant found this gene to be allelic to 
the hp-2 gene but with a mutation in a different part of the 
gene  sequence.  The  dg  mutation  was  due  to  a  single  A  to  T 
transversion leading to the substitution of an Ile by Asn in the 
N-terminal  domain  of  the  protein  in  contrast  to  the  muta-
tion in the two alleles of hp-2, which are located toward the 
C-terminal  domain  of  the  protein  (Levin  et  al.,  2003).  The 
role  of  the  light  signal  transduction  in  regulating  the  levels 
of  carotenoids  and  other  antioxidants  has  also  been  shown 
by  ectopic  expression  of  positive  (CONSTITUTIVELY 
PHOTOMORPHOGENIC  1  [COP1]-like)  and  negative 
(tomato  ELONGATED  HYPOCOTYL  5  [HY5])  light  sig-
naling  regulators  and  CRY2  photoreceptor  (Liu  et  al.,  2004; 
Giliberto et al., 2005).

High pigment mutants were also selected using ethyl meth-
anesulfonate (EMS) and fast neutron bombardment mutagen-
esis. One of these mutants designated as high pigment 3 (hp3) 
accumulated  higher  levels  of  carotenoids  and  chlorophyll  in 
leaves  and  green  fruit,  with  30%  more  carotenoids  found  in 
ripe  fruits  compared  to  the  parental  wild-type  fruit  (Galpaz 
et al., 2008). The hp3 mutation was localized in a gene encod-
ing  the  enzyme  zeaxanthin  epoxidase  that  converts  zeaxan-
thin  to  violaxanthin.  This  mutation  lowered  the  ABA  levels 
and provided evidence, in addition to that obtained from two 
other  ABA-deficient  mutants  flacca  and  sitiens,  that  ABA 
plays  a  role  in  pigment  biosynthesis  and  accumulation  in 
tomato fruit (Galpaz et al., 2008).

Other  mutants  include  Atroviolacea  (atv;  Kendrick  et  al., 
1994) and the INTENSE PIGMENT (IP; Levin et al., 2006) 
that  have  altered  responses  to  light.  The  atv  gene  has  been 
proposed to encode a repressor of phytochrome signal ampli-
fication  based  on  a  loss-of-function  effect.  The  IP  mutant 
was  a  result  of  a  cross  between  S.  chmielewskii  and  the  cul-
tivated tomato S. lycopersicum. This mutant produces smaller 
and dark-red mature fruits as well as greener leaves than the 
nearly isogenic tomato lines. The red ripe IP fruit had higher 
amounts  of  total  soluble  solids,  different  carotenoids,  and 
more chloroplasts in outer mesocarp, inner mesocarp, and jelly 
tissues than the parental wild-type fruits (Lavi et al., 2009).

Shelf life mutations

In  addition  to  the  ripening  impaired  tomato  mutants  dis-
cussed  above,  several  other  mutants  are  known  to  extend 
fruit shelf life. These include ALCOBACA (alc) and “Delayed 
Fruit  Deterioration”  (DFD)  mutations.  The  alc  fruit  has 
reduced  ethylene  production,  respiration,  carotenoids,  and 

412

Fruit development and ripening: a molecular perspective

C H A P T E R   2 6

polygalacturonase (PG) activity, and maintains firmer texture 
during  storage.  The  alc  mutation,  in  combination  with  high 
pigment mutations, has provided an effective way to develop 
commercial tomato varieties with a longer fruit shelf life and 
a  saturated  red  color  (Kuzemenskii,  2007).  The alc  fruit  has 
about  a  three-fold  higher  putrescine  level  and  altered  wax 
profiles during fruit development, which are likely effects of 
this mutation (Kosma et al., 2010).

The DFD fruit also has a longer shelf life despite the exhi-
bition  of  a  normal  climacteric  peak  of  carbon  dioxide  and  a 
burst  of  ethylene  production  during  ripening  (Saladié  et  al., 
2007).  However,  the  mutant  fruit  shows  a  very  low  transpi-
rational  water  loss  and  substantially  elevated  cellular  turgor 
during  postharvest  storage.  Since  biochemical  characteriza-
tion revealed several changes in cuticle chemical composition, 
it was proposed that the altered cuticles in DFD fruits affect 
the softening of intact tomato fruit by providing both physi-
cal  support  and  regulating  water  loss  (Saladié  et  al.,  2007). 
However, the nature of mutations in both alc and DFD culti-
vars has yet to be determined.

Ethylene and Fruit Ripening

Ethylene,  a  gaseous  plant  hormone,  plays  a  critical  role  in 
many  physiological  processes  during  plant  development, 
including a massive metabolic shift during the ripening of cli-
macteric fruits (Lin et al., 2009; Bapat et al., 2010). Based on 
respiration patterns, fruits are divided into two broad catego-
ries:  climacteric  and  non-climacteric.  The  climacteric  fruits 
exhibit a surge in the rate of respiration at the onset of ripen-
ing that is associated with increased biosynthesis of ethylene. 
The role of respiratory surge in climacteric fruits at the onset 
of  ripening  is  still  a  mystery,  but  it  has  been  proposed  to  be 
related  to  coordination  and  synchronization  of  the  ripening 
process  in  these  fruits.  Both  climacteric  and  non-climacteric 
fruits  show  similar  changes  in  various  metabolic  processes 
leading  to  pigment  alterations,  sugar  accumulation,  textural 
change,  fruit  softening,  volatiles  production,  and  enhanced 
susceptibility  to  pathogens.  Also,  the  climacteric  and  non- 
climacteric distinction of fruits is not determined by phylogeny, 
since fruits from closely related species exhibit this distinction 
(Giovannoni, 2004). Although ethylene plays a significant role 
in  the  development  of  ripening  attributes  in  climacteric  fruit, 
it  is  not  required  for  the  metabolic  shifts  seen  in  non-climac-
teric fruits such as grape, citrus, and strawberry (Oeller et al., 
1991;  Giovannoni,  2004;  Bapat  et  al.,  2010).  These  observa-
tions have raised an interesting debate on ethylene-dependent 
and  -independent  processes  during  fruit  ripening.  Significant 
information has begun to emerge on ethylene regulation of the 
ripening process in climacteric fruits (Pnueli et al., 1994; Cara 
and Giovannoni, 2008; Bapat et al., 2010). Notably, the con-
trol of the onset of ripening in non-climacteric fruit is poorly 
understood, and suggestions of a control by sugar sensing and 
hormones  such  as  abscisic  acid  (ABA)  have  been  put  forth 
(Gambetta  et  al.,  2010).  Tomato  fruit  has  been  used  exten-
sively as a model system to understand ripening in climacteric 
fruit and strawberry as a model to investigate ripening in non-
climacteric fruits (Zhang et al., 2010). Other climacteric and 

non-climacteric fruits are also being investigated to study the 
fruit ripening process (Bapat et al., 2010).

Ethylene biosynthesis

to 

then  S-adenosylated 

The  biochemical  pathway  of  ethylene  synthesis  in  plants 
starts  from  methionine  (Lieberman  et  al.,  1966),  which 
is 
form  S-adenosylmethionine 
(SAM)  by  SAM  synthetase  (Fluhr  and  Mattoo,  1996). 
SAM 
is  subsequently  metabolized  to  1-aminocyclopro-
pane-1-carboxylic  acid  (ACC;  Adams  and  Yang,  1979)  and 
5-methylthioadenosine  (MTA)  by  ACC  synthase  (ACS). 
ACC,  the  first  committed  intermediate  in  the  ethylene  bio-
synthesis  pathway,  is  converted  to  ethylene  by  ACC  oxidase 
(ACO).  MTA,  the  other  product  of  ACS  reaction,  enters 
the  methionine  cycle.  Genes  encoding  ACS  and  ACO  were 
first identified from zucchini (Sato and Theologis, 1989) and 
tomato  fruit  (Hamilton  et  al.,  1990),  respectively.  Although 
several genes involved in methionine metabolism show altered 
expression  during  plant  development  and  in  response  to  the 
environment,  mostly  activities  of  ACS  and  in  some  cases 
ACO are generally considered the rate-limiting steps in ethyl-
ene production in fruit (Fluhr and Mattoo, 1996; Mattoo and 
Handa, 2004; Cara and Giovannoni, 2008).

ACS and ACO belong to a family of genes that have been 
characterized  and  from  tomato,  melon,  apple,  banana,  pear, 
kiwifruit, peach, and persimmon (Cara and Giovannoni, 2008; 
Lin  et  al.,  2009;  Bapat  et  al.,  2010).  The  members  in  each 
gene  family  are  differentially  expressed  during  development 
and in response to environmental cues (Cara and Giovannoni, 
2008; Lin et al., 2009). Nine ACS and five ACO genes were 
identified  in  tomato.  Among  them,  four  ACS  (SlACS1A, 
SlACS2,  SlACS4,  and  SlACS6)  and  three  ACO  (SlACO1, 
SlACO3, and SlACO4) members are differentially expressed 
during tomato fruit development (Cara and Giovannoni, 2008; 
Lin  et  al.,  2009).  SlACS6  is  predominantly  expressed  in  the 
green fruit and is associated with ethylene production during 
the early stages of fruit development (Figure 26.2). SlACS1A 
is  also  expressed  in  green  fruit  but  at  lower  levels  than 
SlACS6.  SlACS1A  and  SlACS4  are  induced  alongside  ripen-
ing transition and proposed to be responsible for the induction 
of SlACS2, a gene implicated in the autocatalytic production 
of  ethylene  during  the  robust  ripening  process  (Figure  26.2). 
The  autocatalytic  ethylene  production  may  exert  negative 
feedback inhibition on early ethylene production by reducing 
the  expression  of  SlACS1A  and  SlACS6  (Barry  et  al.,  2000). 
The RIN MADS-box transcription factor regulates the expres-
sion of SlACS1A and SlACS4 during ripening (Vrebalov et al., 
2002). Among the ACOs, SlACO1 and SlACO4 are expressed 
throughout  fruit  development,  but  their  expression  increases 
dramatically  at  the  onset  of  ripening  and  remains  elevated 
thereafter.  The  ripening-associated  induction  of  these  ACOs 
is  ethylene  dependent,  since  their  increased  expression  is 
impaired  by  treatment  with  1-methylcyclopropene  (1-MCP), 
an  ethylene  perception  inhibitor  (Mattoo  and  Suttle,  1991; 
Abeles et al., 1992). SlACO3 is expressed during fruit matu-
ration and is transiently induced at the breaker stage of fruit 
ripening (Cara and Giovannoni, 2008; Bapat et al., 2010).

413

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Figure 26.2 l Regulation of ethylene production and perception during tomato fruit ripening l Top panel: The participation of 
various ACC synthase (ACS), ACC oxidase (ACO), and ethylene receptor (ETR) genes in the System 1 (lower and auto-inhibitory amounts 
of ethylene), System 2 (autocatalytic ethylene production), and ripening-transition ethylene production and perception during fruit ripening. 
Middle panel: ETRs that are localized in the endoplasmic reticulum form disulfide bridges (yellow circles) and their dimers interact with copper 
ion (green circle) to bind ethylene. With the exception of NR, ETRs have four different domains depicted in different colors (green, sensor; 
gray, GAF; black, histidine kinase; and red, response regulator or receiver domains, respectively). In the absence of ethylene, constitutive 
triple response (CTR) protein binds to an ETR. This complex interacts with an ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE2 (EIN2) protein to negatively 
regulate ethylene response. Ethylene binding to ETR inhibits its interaction with CTR resulting in releasing inhibition on EIN2 activity. Other 
phytohormones may also use EIN2 to transduce their response. Lower Panel: Free EIN2 moves to nuclear membranes where it activates 
transacting protein (ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3) EIN3 and EIN3-like proteins (EIL) by an unknown mechanism. This facilitates binding of EIN3 
and EILs to ethylene response elements (ERE) present in the promoter regions of ethylene response factors (ERFs). This cascade activates 
expression ERFs, which in turn enables expression of ethylene responsive genes. 

Ethylene perception and signal 
transduction

During the last two decades, significant understanding of how 
plants  perceive  and  respond  to  ethylene  has  emerged  (Klee, 
2004; Cara and Giovannoni, 2008; Lin et al., 2009). Most of 
the  initial  information  about  the  molecular  components  of 
ethylene perception and action was obtained using A. thaliana 
mutants altered in seedling triple response to exogenous ethy-
lene treatment. A series of elegant experiments including the 
epistatic behavior of these mutations led to the development 
of  a  linear  model  for  ethylene  action  in  plants.  Figure  26.2 
is  a  model  showing  the  current  understanding  of  the  various 
interactions  of  the  molecular  components  in  the  biosynthe-
sis  and  perception  of  ethylene  during  tomato  fruit  ripening. 

Molecular  mechanisms  regulating  ethylene  perception  and 
signaling have been elegantly reviewed (Cara and Giovannoni, 
2008; Lin et al., 2009), therefore we briefly discuss only the 
salient features in this chapter.

Ethylene  is  perceived  by  receptors  encoded  by  a  multi-
gene  family  (ETRs).  Five  ETRs  (ETR1,  ETR2,  ERS1,  ERS2, 
and  EIN4)  genes  have  been  characterized  in  Arabidopsis. 
ETRs  show  homology  to  bacterial  two-component  regulators 
and  structurally  they  are  separable  into  three  domains  des-
ignated  as  sensor,  kinase,  and  receiver  domains  (Klee,  2004; 
Cara  and  Giovannoni,  2008;  Lin  et  al.,  2009).  The  sensor 
domain  present  at  the  N-terminal  of  ETR  contains  three  or 
more  hydrophobic  trans-membrane  stretches  that  bind  eth-
ylene  and  participate  in  their  localization  to  the  endoplas-
mic  reticulum  (and  possibly  to  the  Golgi  apparatus;  Chen 
et  al.,  2002).  All  of  the  known  dominant  ETR1  mutations 

414

Fruit development and ripening: a molecular perspective

C H A P T E R   2 6

are  located  in  this  domain.  The  kinase  domain  follows  the 
GAF  motif  (a  ubiquitous  motif  found  in  sensory  proteins  of 
both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells) domain and is present 
in  the  middle  of  ETRs.  It  shows  sequence  homology  to  His 
kinases and contains up to five subdomains including one with 
the  His.  The  receiver  domain  is  present  at  the  C-terminus 
of  these  polypeptides  and  shares  sequence  identity  with  the 
output  portion  of  bacterial  two-component  systems.  Based 
on  peptide  structural  attributes,  the  ETRs  have  been  classi-
fied into two subfamilies (Lin et al., 2009). The Arabidopsis 
ETR  subfamily  1  includes  ETR1  and  ERS1,  characterized  by 
the  presence  of  three  N-terminal  transmembrane  domains 
and  a  conserved  histidine  kinase  domain.  ETR2,  ERS2,  and 
EIN4 represent the subfamily 2 and are characterized by the 
presence of an additional transmembrane domain and lack of 
one  or  more  of  the  catalytic  subdomains,  including  the  His. 
The  subfamily  2  ETRs  are  thought  to  function  as  Ser/Thr  
kinases  (Moussatche  and  Klee,  2004).  The  expression  of  an 
altered  ETR1  gene  that  lacks  the  active  histidine  kinase  res-
cued  Arabidopsis  plants  harboring  double  mutations  in  both 
ers1and etr1, indicating that the histidine kinase activity may 
not  be  required  for  the  ethylene  signal  transmission  (Wang 
et  al.,  2003).  The  tomato  ETR  family  contains  six  members 
(SlETR1; SlETR2; SlETR3, also called NR; SlETR4; SlETR5; 
and  SlETR6).  Although  they  show  significant  divergence  in 
primary  sequence,  all  bind  to  ethylene  (Zhang  et  al.,  2010). 
SlETR1, SlETR2, and NR represent the three members of the 
tomato  ETR  subfamily  1  with  only  NR  lacking  the  receiver 
domain.  SlETR4,  SlETR5,  and  SlETR6  resemble  Arabidopsis 
subfamily 2 as they have an extra amino terminal membrane-
spanning  domain  but  are  missing  one  or  more  conserved 
HK  domains  (Klee  and  Tieman,  2002).  Ethylene  seems  to 
enhance  degradation  of  SlETR4  or  SlETR6  proteins,  likely 
by  the  26S  proteasome-dependent  pathway  (Kevany  et  al., 
2007). Tomato ETR1 is constitutively expressed in vegetative 
and reproductive tissues (Zhou et al., 1996).

The  functional  ethylene  receptors  are  disulfide-linked 
dimers  and  need  copper  ions  to  bind  ethylene  (Figure  26.2; 
Rodriguez  et  al.,  1999).  All  dominant  ethylene  insensitive 
Arabidopsis mutations have a single amino acid substitution in 
ETR1; the loss-of-function mutations in ETR1, ETR2, EIN4, 
and  ERS2  have  normal  phenotypes  (Hua  and  Meyerowitz, 
1998).  However,  quadruple  mutants  harboring  mutations 
in  ETR1,  ETR2,  EIN4,  and  ERS2  are  constitutively  ethyl-
ene  responsive,  providing  evidence  that  ethylene  receptors 
are  functionally  redundant  and  negatively  regulate  ethyl-
ene responses. In addition to the formation of a homodimer, 
heteromers of the ethylene receptors are known, which may 
mediate  ethylene  signaling  in  Arabidopsis  (Gao  et  al.,  2008; 
Schaller et al., 2008). The GAF domain that follows the sen-
sor  domain  in  all  of  the  ETRs  has  been  implicated  in  their 
dimerization,  since  ETR1  truncated  in  the  GAF  domain  did 
not dimerize when expressed in yeast (Gao et al., 2008). The 
role of GAF motif in ethylene signal transduction remains to 
be investigated.

Ethylene  receptors  negatively  regulate  ethylene  response 
through a constitutive triple response1 (CRT1) gene that acts 
downstream  of  ETR  (Kieber  et  al.,  1993).  CTR1  encodes  a 
Raf-like  ser/thr  kinase  that  physically  interacts  with  ETR 

(Clark  et  al.,  1998).  Arabidopsis  contains  a  single  CTR,  but 
four homologs — SlCTR1, SlCTR2, SlCTR3, and SlCTR4 — 
have  been  isolated  from  tomato.  All  tomato  CTR  homologs, 
with  the  exception  of  SlCTR2,  are  capable  of  complement-
ing  ctr1  mutations  in  Arabidopsis  (Adams-Phillips  et  al., 
2004; Lin et al., 2008). SlCTR2 shows higher similarity with 
Arabidopsis Enhanced Disease Resistance 1 (EDR1) than with 
CTR1,  suggesting  that  it  may  have  a  different  function  than 
a general role in ethylene action (Tang et al., 2005). The four 
members  of  tomato  CTR  are  differentially  expressed  during 
plant  development,  but  CTR1  is  predominantly  expressed 
in  abscission  zones,  flower  senescence,  and  fruit  ripening 
(Adams-Phillips et al., 2004).

ETHYLENE  INSENSITIVE2  (EIN2)  transduces  ethyl-
ene  response  through  downstream  transcription  factors  such 
as ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3) and other EIN3-like 
proteins  (EILs)  that  activate  ethylene  regulated  transcrip-
tional  (MAP  kinase)  cascade  (Roman  et  al.,  1995).  In  the 
absence  of  ethylene,  ETR  binds  to  CTR1,  which  then  inter-
acts  with  EIN2  and  inactivates  the  downstream  signals  of 
ethylene response. Ethylene binding to ETR eliminates CTR-
regulated  suppression  of  ethylene  signaling  pathway.  How 
EIN2 works at the molecular level to relay ethylene signal to 
EIN3, EILs, and ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTORs (ERFs), 
transcription  factors  that  regulate  ethylene  response,  is  not 
yet understood (Klee, 2004). Notably, the N-terminal domain 
of EIN2 shares sequence homology with the NRAMP family 
of  metal  ion  carriers,  and  loss-of-function  mutations  in  this 
domain result in ethylene insensitivity in Arabidopsis (Alonso 
et al., 1999). The C-terminal domain of EIN2 interacts with 
two  F-box  proteins,  ETP1  and  ETP2  (EIN2  TARGETING 
PROTEIN).  ETP1  and  EPT2  have  been  suggested  to  regu-
late  proteasome-mediated  degradation  (Qaio  et  al.,  2009). 
EIN2 expression is not regulated by ethylene and is constant 
throughout  fruit  development  (Zhu  et  al.,  2006).  EIN2  has 
also been suggested to participate in signal transduction path-
ways  of  other  phytohormones  including  ABA,  auxin,  cytoki-
nin, and jasmonate, and thus may regulate cross-talk between 
multiple  hormone  signaling  pathways  (Cara  and  Giovannoni, 
2008).

EIN3 and EILs comprise a family of DNA binding proteins 
that  bind  to  ethylene  response  elements  (ERE)  and  regulate 
expression  of  ethylene  sensitive  genes  (Solano  et  al.,  1998). 
ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1  (ERF1),  which  contains 
the tomato E4-element in its promoter, is an immediate tar-
get for EIN3 and is necessary and sufficient for ERF1 expres-
sion (Deikman et al., 1998). ERF1 acts downstream of EIN3 
and its constitutive expression activates a variety of ethylene 
response genes and phenotypes in Arabidopsis (Solano et al., 
1998).  Four  EILs  (SlEIL1,  SlEIL2,  SlEIL3,  and  SlEIL4)  are 
present in tomato fruit (Tieman et al., 2001; Yokotani et al., 
2009). Neither ripening nor ethylene induces SlEIL1, SlEIL2, 
and  SlEIL3,  but  expression  of  SlEIL4  is  ripening  inducible 
(Tieman et al., 2001; Yokotani et al., 2009). Antisense RNA-
based  inhibition  studies  suggested  that  SlEIL1,  SlEIL2,  and 
SlEIL3  were  functionally  redundant  (Tieman  et  al.,  2001). 
However,  ectopic  expression  of  SlEIL1  in  Nr  was  not  able 
to  restore  expression  of  ripening-regulated  genes,  suggest-
ing  independent  roles  for  specific  EILs  (Chen  et  al.,  2004). 

415

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

A complex post-transcriptional regulation seems to govern the 
cellular levels of EIN3 and EIL proteins in response to ethyl-
ene  (Yoo  et  al.,  2009).  Two  F-box  proteins  (EBF1/2),  which 
are Skp–Cullin–F-box (SCF) E3 ligases, target EIN3 and EILs 
for  26S  proteasome  degradation  (Guo  and  Ecker,  2003)  and 
MAPKK9–MAPK3/6  cascade  that  phosphorylates  EIN3  at 
specific sites influences their stability (Yoo et al., 2009).

Ethylene  response  factors  (ERFs),  also  called  ethylene-
responsive element binding proteins (EREBPs), are plant tran-
scriptional  regulators  that  mediate  ethylene  response  likely 
via  binding  to  a  conserved  motif  AGCCGCC  (GCC-box) 
located  in  the  promoter  region  of  ethylene-regulated  genes. 
Characterization  of  E4  and  E8  (ethylene  regulated  genes) 
promoters resulted in the identification of two E4-UpEREBP 
and E4/E8BP factors that exhibited DNA binding activity and 
were  required  for  the  expression  of  these  genes  (Deikman 
et  al.,  1998;  Guo  and  Ecker,  2003).  E4-UpEREBP  was 
present in unripe fruit and its activity was reduced in response 
to  ethylene  treatment  suggesting  it  to  be  a  transcriptional 
repressor  (Guo  and  Ecker,  2003).  Activity  of  E4/E8BP 
increases during fruit ripening and is implicated as a positive 
regulator of ethylene response (Deikman et al., 1998).

In  tomato,  five  ERFs  (SlERF1,  SlERF2,  SlERF3,  SlERF4, 
and  SlERF3b)  show  binding  capability  to  GCC-box  elements 
(Montgomery  et  al.,  1993).  These  genes  exhibit  differential 
expression patterns during plant development and fruit ripen-
ing.  SlERF2  (Sl-ERF2)  and  SlERF3b  transcripts  accumulate 
during  fruit  ripening.  The  promoter  of  SlERF2  contains  five 
putative EREs and its expression is similar to E8, in that both 
are  induced  during  ripening  and  absent  in  the  non-ripening 
tomato mutants NR, rin, and nor (Montgomery et al., 1993). 
The SlERF3b transcript accumulates in green fruits with a sharp 
decline at the onset of ripening. Its levels also increased in fruits 
that produce low levels of ethylene, such as NR fruit or trans-
genic  fruit  with  impaired  ACC  expression.  Unlike  the  regula-
tion  by  RIN-MADS,  CLEAR  NON-RIPENING,  TAGL1,  and 
LeHB-1  genes  act  as  positive  regulators  of  ripening  phenom-
enon.  APETALA2/ERF,  SlAP2a,  a  ripening  induced  gene,  acts 
as  a  negative  regulator  of  fruit  ripening  (Chung  et  al.,  2010). 
Repression  of  SlAP2a  by  targeted  RNAi  transgene  resulted  in 
fruit that produced higher levels of ethy lene, ripened early, and 
had altered carotenoid accumulation (Chung et al., 2010).

Genetic intervention in ethylene 
biosynthesis and perception

The  emerging  understanding  of  ethylene  biosynthesis  and 
perception  has  allowed  both  pharmacological  and  genetic 
approaches  to  reduce  undesirable  effects  of  ethylene  in  fruit. 
A  number  of  metabolic  inhibitors  are  available  that  alter  
production  or  perception  of  ethylene.  Among  them,  1- 
methylcyclopropene,  which  inhibits  ethylene  perception,  is  
now widely used to reduce postharvest losses of fruit and veg-
etable crops (Martínez-Romero et al., 2007). 1-MCP is active 
at  low  concentrations  and  has  10  times  more  affinity  for  the 
ethylene receptor than ethylene. Because it is a non-toxic com-
pound to humans, its use is expanding rapidly as a safe chemi-
cal to enhance postharvest shelf life of ethylene-sensitive crops. 

Nonetheless, 1-MCP is a volatile compound and attempts have 
been  made  to  develop  a  non-volatile  and  water-soluble  cyclo-
propene  derivative  as  an  ethylene  antagonist.  Importantly,  a 
water-soluble  sodium  salt  of  3-cyclopropyl-1-enyl-propanoic 
acid was synthesized and found to effectively delay fruit ripen-
ing and increase shelf life of fruit and cut flowers (Huberman 
et al., 2009).

As  an  alternative  to  synthetic  chemical  use  to  inhibit  fruit 
ripening,  molecular  engineering  has  provided  novel  and 
genetic toolkits to overcome the pro-ripening and -senescence  
effects of ethylene and enhance postharvest shelf life and man-
age  disease  in  horticultural  crops.  Downregulation  of  ACC 
synthase  expression  by  its  antisense  gene  in  tomato  resulted 
in  significant  increase  in  fruit  shelf  life,  a  study  that  estab-
lished  ethylene  as  a  ripening  hormone  (Oeller  et  al.,  1991). 
Since  then,  ACS  expression  has  been  modified  in  several 
fruits  including  bitter  apples  (Dandekar  et  al.,  2004),  melon 
(Lin  and  Do,  2008),  and  tomato  (Gao  et  al.,  2008),  whereas 
ACO  expression  was  modified  in  tomato  (Hamilton  et  al., 
1990),  melon  (Flores  et  al.,  2001),  apple  (Dandekar  et  al., 
2004),  and  papaya  (López-Gómez  et  al.,  2009).  Fruit  from 
these transgenic lines are altered in ripening behavior, particu-
larly  ripening-associated  pigment  alterations,  fruit  softening, 
and  volatiles  production.  Transgenic  pineapple  with  reduced 
amounts of ACC synthase, which decreased ethylene produc-
tion, was accompanied by a delay in the flowering time (Trusov 
and  Botella,  2006).  Transgenic  seedlings  of  pears  expressing 
antisense gene for an ACC oxidase produced 15 to 71% ethyl-
ene compared to parental wild-type; however, effects on fruit 
quality  were  not  reported  (Gao  et  al.,  2007).  Reduction  in 
ethylene  production  was  also  obtained  by  expressing  a  bacte-
rial gene encoding ACC deaminase (Klee et al., 1991) or bac-
teriophage T3-encoded SAM hydrolase (Good et al., 1994) in 
tomato, which resulted in altered fruit ripening (Klee, 1993). 
Bacteriophage  T3-SAM  hydrolase  was  also  introduced  in  avo-
cado under a fruit-ripening-specific cellulase promoter, but the 
effects on fruit ripening were not evaluated (Litz et al., 2007).

Manipulation  of  the  ethylene  receptors  to  impact  fruits 
and  other  plant  parts  was  achieved  by  up-  and  downregula-
tion of various ETRs under the control of constitutive or rip-
ening  induced  promoters.  Downregulation  of  SlETR4  and 
SlETR6 receptors using an antisense RNA approach under the 
CaMV35S  promoter  resulted  in  severe  epinasty,  enhanced 
flower  senescence,  and  accelerated  fruit  ripening  in  tomato 
(Tieman  et  al.,  2000;  Kevany  et  al.,  2007,  2008).  Ethylene-
associated developmental effects were not seen in transgenic 
lines that had reduced expression of SlNR, SlETR1, SlETR2, 
or  SlETR5,  suggesting  that  SlETR4  or  SlETR6  plays  a  more 
important role in mediating ethylene response (Tieman et al., 
2000;  Kevany  et  al.,  2007).  Transgenic  fruits  with  reduced 
NR  expression  showed  higher  accumulation  of  SlETR4. 
However,  its  over-expression  resulted  in  tomato  lines  with 
lowered  SlETR4  gene  expression  and  ethylene-resistant  phe-
notype,  implicating  that  in  spite  of  structural  differences, 
these  receptors  could  functionally  complement  each  other 
and  are  therefore  functionally  redundant  (Martïnez-Romero 
et al., 2007; Tieman et al., 2000). Downregulation of SlETR4 
using tmf7, a promoter active during early fruit development, 
led to early fruit ripening but without an effect on fruit size, 

416

Fruit development and ripening: a molecular perspective

C H A P T E R   2 6

yield, and flavor-related chemical composition (Kevany et al., 
2008).  Impaired  SlETR1  expression  by  its  antisense  did  not 
affect fruit ripening but delayed abscission and reduced plant 
size  in  tomato  (Whitelaw  et  al.,  2002).  Studies  with  trans-
genic  tomato  expressing  Arabidopsis  etr1-1  under  an  induci-
ble promoter showed that the transgenic plants were sensitive 
to  ethylene  in  the  absence  of  the  inducer  but  insensitive  in 
the  presence  of  inducers.  Furthermore,  the  level  of  ethyl-
ene  sensitivity  had  a  linear  relationship  with  the  amount  of 
inducer used (Gallie, 2010).

Fruit Texture

Fruit texture, especially softening, during ripening is an essen-
tial attribute that makes fruits desirable for human consump-
tion.  However,  it  is  also  associated  with  reduced  postharvest 
shelf  life  and  increased  susceptibility  to  microbial  infection. 
Because of the economic significance of fruit textural changes, 
there is a significant interest in understanding the biochemical 
mechanisms  regulating  this  process.  Ripening-associated  fruit 
softening usually involves modifications to the polysaccharide 
and protein components of the primary cell wall and middle 
lamella, resulting in a weakening of the structure (Brummell, 
2006; Vicente et al., 2007; Negi and Handa, 2008). However, 
the process of fruit textural changes is very complex and many 
protein  families  along  with  water  relations  and  free  radicals 
contribute to it. Developmental regulation of cell wall stabiliz-
ing  and  depolymerizing  proteins  as  well  as  protein  glycosyla-
tion have been demonstrated during fruit ripening (Brummell, 
2006;  Vicente  et  al.,  2007;  Negi  and  Handa,  2008).  These 
include  polygalacturonase  (PG),  pectin  methylesterases 
(PMEs),  β-galactosidase,  β-mannanase,  xyloglucan  xylogluco-
syltransferase/endohydrolase (XET), pectate lyase (PL), endo-
β-1,4-glucanases  (EGases,  cellulases),  expansins,  α-Man,  and 
β-Hex (Table 26.1).

Cell wall depolymerizing enzymes

Since  middle  lamella  is  made  primarily  of  pectin,  it  was 
hypothesized that the pectin depolymerizing enzymes regulate 
fruit  softening  by  controlling  cell  separation.  This  hypothesis 
gained additional support when a correlation between reduced 
softening  and  impaired  expression  of  SlPG2  was  found  in 
ripening-impaired  tomato  mutants  (Tigchelaar  et  al.,  1978; 
Biggs  and  Handa,  1989;  DellaPenna  et  al.,  1989).  However, 
ectopic  expression  of  SlPG2,  a  ripening  induced  enzyme, 
failed to enhance softening of rin tomato, suggesting that PG 
played  only  a  limited  role  in  this  process  (Giovannoni  et  al., 
1989).  Antisense  inhibition  of  SlPG2  led  to  the  develop-
ment of “Flavr Savr” tomato, the first commercially marketed 
genetically  modified  edible  crop  (Kramer  and  Redenbaugh, 
1994).  Unfortunately,  Flavr  Savr  did  not  meet  the  mar-
ket  expectation  of  the  extended  shelf  life  of  fruit  (Kramer 
and  Redenbaugh,  1994).  The  antisense  inhibition  of  SlPG2, 
however,  resulted  in  increased  viscosity  of  processed  tomato 
juice (Thakur et al., 1997). Antisensing of FaPG1 was found 
to  reduce  ripening-associated  fruit  softening  in  strawberry 
(Quesada  et  al.,  2009).  These  transgenic  fruit  were  about 

95% reduced in FaPG1 expression and had higher amounts of 
covalently bound pectins. As the expression of FaPG2 was not 
impaired  by  the  FaPG1  antisense,  the  fruit  PG  activity  was 
only slightly reduced.

PMEs exist as multiple isozymes during fruit ripening, but 
their  role  in  fruit  texture  is  not  yet  clear  (Harriman  et  al., 
1991;  Tieman  and  Handa,  1994;  Gaffe  et  al.,  1994;  Phan 
et  al.,  2007).  Transgenic  tomato  fruits  expressing  SlPME3 
and  with  over  95%  reduction  in  PME  transcripts,  protein, 
and  enzymatic  activity,  were  unaffected  in  fruit  softening 
(Tieman  and  Handa,  1994).  However,  processing  attributes 
of low PME fruit were greatly enhanced: the transgenic fruits 
had  higher  juice  viscosity  and  increased  total  soluble  solids 
(Tieman  et  al.,  1992;  Thakur  et  al.,  1996a,b).  The  negative 
effect  was  on  fruit  integrity,  which  was  compromised  upon 
extended  storage  of  fully  ripe  fruits.  Silencing  of  a  ubiqui-
tously expressed PME isozyme, SlPMEU1, did not impart any 
detectable phenotype to leaf tissue, but enhanced fruit soften-
ing  even  though  the  transgenic  fruits  had  only  a  25%  reduc-
tion in PME activity (Phan et al., 2007; Gaffe et al., 1997).

Loss  of  galactose  and/or  arabinose  from  cell  walls  dur-
ing  early  fruit  ripening  (Gross  and  Sams,  1984)  led  to  the 
suggestion  that  β-galactosidase  plays  an  important  role  in 
fruit  textural  changes.  At  least  seven  β-galactosidase  genes 
(SlTBG1  to  7)  are  expressed  during  tomato  fruit  develop-
ment  (Smith  and  Gross,  2000).  The  homology-dependent 
silencing  of  SlTBG1that  resulted  in  about  90%  reduction 
in its transcripts in tomato fruit did not affect the total exo-
galactanase  activity,  cell  wall  galactose  content,  or  fruit  sof-
tening  (Carey  et  al.,  2001).  Antisense  RNA  suppression  of 
SlTBG3  caused  about  75%  reduction  in  TBG1  and  TBG4 
transcript  levels  and  extractable  exo-galactanase  enzymatic 
activity and higher retention of the cell wall galactose, but still 
had  little  effect  on  fruit  softening  (de  Silva  and  Verhoeyen, 
1998). Transgenic fruits with impaired expression of SlTGB4 
showed  about  90%  reduction  in  extractable  exo-galactanase 
activity,  free  galactose  levels  in  mature  green  fruit,  and  40% 
firmer fruit as compared to the control (Smith et al., 2002). 
The enzyme endo-β-mannanase (β-Man) hydrolyzes mannose 
in  hemicellulose  polymers  to  mannobiose  and  mannotriose. 
Transgenic tomato fruits with reduced β-Man were developed 
by  expressing  an  antisense  RNA  or  by  gene-specific  hairpin 
RNAi. These transgenic fruits exhibited reduced β-Man activ-
ity, but a clear correlation between fruit firmness and β-Man 
activity was not obtained (Wang et al., 2009).

It  is  suggested  that  xyloglucan  xyloglucosyltransferase/
endohydrolase  (XTHs:  EC  2.4.1.207  and/or  EC  3.2.1.151) 
plays  a  dual  role  in  cell  wall  chemistry  by  integrating  newly 
secreted  xyloglucan  chains 
into  an  existing  wall-bound 
xyloglucan,  and  restructuring  existing  cell  wall  material 
by  catalyzing  transglucosylation  between  previously  wall-
bound  xyloglucan  molecules.  Its  role  in  fruit  development 
and  texture  was  examined  by  ectopic  expression  of  SlXTH, 
a  tomato  homolog  of  Nicotiana  tabacum  NtXET-1  gene, 
under  the  CaMV35S  promoter.  The  transgenic  fruit  had 
more  than  a  four-fold  increase  in  XET  activity  and  reduced 
in  xyloglucan  depolymerization  and  fruit  softening,  suggest-
ing  a  role  in  maintaining  the  structural  integrity  of  cell  walls 
(Miedes  et  al.,  2010).  Multiple  genes  for  the  pectate  lyase 

417

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

(PL),  an  enzyme  that  hydrolyzes  the  unesterified  galacturon-
osyl  linkages  by  a  β-elimination  reaction,  have  been  identi-
fied  in  many  fruit  species.  Their  expression  increases  during 
fruit  ripening,  and  understanding  their  role  in  pectinolysis 
and  fruit  texture  changes  has  only  recently  begun.  The  anti-
sense  inhibition  of  PL  gene  expression  in  strawberry  led  to 
extended  postharvest  shelf  life,  reduction  in  pectin  solubil-
ity,  decreased  depolymerization  of  bound  polyuronides,  and 
loss  of  cell–cell  adhesion  in  the  transgenic  fruits  (Jiménez-
Bermúdez  et  al.,  2002;  Santiago-Doménech  et  al.,  2008). 
A family of endo-β-1,4-glucanase (EGases, cellulases) genes is 
present in many fruit, some of them are expressed in an ethy-
lene-dependent  manner  and  inducible  during  fruit  ripening 
(Brummell et al., 1999a). Repression of SlCEL1 and SlCEL2, 
the  two  ripening-related  Endo-β-1,4-glucanases  (EGases),  led 
to reduced abscission of pedicel and fruit, respectively, but had 
little effect on tomato fruit softening (Lashbrook et al., 1998). 
Similar results were obtained in strawberry where downregu-
lation  of  Cel1  and  Cel2  did  not  influence  fruit  softening  but 
resulted  in  slightly  higher  abundance  of  the  larger  hemicellu-
losic polymers (Mercado et al., 2010).

Expansins

Expansins  induce  extension  in  isolated  plant  cell  walls  and 
are therefore implicated in fruit textural changes (Rose et al., 
1997).  Expansins  belong  to  a  multi-gene  family  with  differ-
ent  members  exhibiting  differential  expression  during  fruit 
development and ripening (Choi et al., 2006). Antisense RNA 
inhibition of SlExp1, a ripening-specific expansin, resulted in 
firmer fruits that exhibited reduced polyuronide depolymeri-
zation  but  were  not  impaired  in  the  breakdown  of  structur-
ally  important  hemicelluloses,  a  major  component  of  fruit 
softening.  The  transgenic  fruit  with  constitutive  expression 
of  SlExp1  had  an  opposite  phenotype,  showing  enhanced 
fruit  softening  correlated  with  the  precocious  and  extensive 
depolymerization  of  structural  hemicelluloses  (Brummell 
et al., 1999). However, polyuronide depolymerization was not 
affected. It was proposed (Brummell et al., 1999) that Exp1 
regulates  polyuronide  depolymerization  late  in  ripening  by 
direct modulation of relaxation of the cell walls, likely by con-
trolling access of a pectinase to its substrate. The depolymeri-
zation of hemicellulose occurs independent of or requires only 
very small amounts of Exp1 protein. Simultaneous downregu-
lation  of  Exp1  and  PG  resulted  in  fruit  that  retained  firmer 
texture  and  maintained  cellular  integrity  for  a  longer  period 
compared to parental wild-type fruit (Powell et al., 2003).

Protein glycosylation

Protein  glycosylation  may  play  an  important  role  in  regu-
lating  fruit  softening  and  control  shelf  life.  The  role  of  pro-
tein glycosylation in fruit ripening was first demonstrated by 
treating tomato pericarp disc with tunicamycin, which inhib-
its  the  UDP-HexNAc:polyprenol-P  HexNAc-1-P  family  of 
enzymes and blocks the synthesis of all N-linked glycoproteins 
(N-glycans).  Tunicamycine  treatment  impairs  their  ripening 

(Handa  et  al.,  1985).  Later,  it  was  reported  that  injecting 
Man3(Xyl)GlcNAc(Fuc)GlcNAc and Man3GlcNAc into fruit 
enhanced  fruit  ripening  (Priem  and  Gross,  1992).  Genetic 
proof  of  this  concept  was  only  recently  provided  when 
N-glycan processing enzymes were suppressed and the result-
ing transgenic tomato fruit found to have enhanced fruit shelf 
life (Meli et al., 2010). These authors have identified two rip-
ening-specific N-glycoprotein modifying enzymes, α-Man and 
β-Hex, and showed that their suppression reduced the rate of 
ripening-associated  softening  leading  to  improved  fruit  shelf 
life. Over-expression of α-Man or β-Hex genes caused exces-
sive softening of the transgenic fruit. These studies provided 
a novel way to alter fruit ripening and extend their shelf life.

Future Perspectives

Fruit  development  and  ripening  have  occupied  a  major  stage 
in plant biology and horticulture. Economic losses due to short 
shelf life of produce have intensified research in this important 
basic  and  applied  field.  Therefore,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the 
first  genetically  engineered  marketed  crop  was  a  fruit,  tomato 
(or you could call it a vegetable). It has been known for a long 
time that ethylene plays a central role in fruit ripening, and only 
recently  the  recognition  has  also  dawned  that  other  molecules 
and/or processes likely interact and impact the fruit physiology 
and desirable attributes of edible fruits. Molecular dissection of 
fruit development and ripening processes has revealed a map of 
complex  interactions  that  regulate  fruit  quality  and  shelf  life. 
Thus,  studies  with  mutants  impacted  in  ripening,  nutritional 
attributes,  or  photomorphogenesis  have  shown  the  importance 
of not only ethylene biosynthesis and perception, but also a con-
nection with light responsive elements in achieving the desired 
changes. In addition to ethylene, other phytohormones including 
auxin,  cytokinin,  gibberellins,  ABA,  jasmonates,  and  brassinos-
teroids  play  significant  roles  in  fruit  development  and  ripening 
(Srivastava and Handa, 2005; Seymour et al., 2008). Recently, 
polyamines  have  emerged  as  significant  growth  regulators  of 
both fruit quality and shelf life (Mehta et al., 2002; Nambeesan 
et al., 2008, 2010). The tools of breeding and molecular genet-
ics are providing significant insight into specific genetic determi-
nants  critical  in  improving  the  shelf  life  and  response  of  fruits 
to abiotic and biotic signals. While research is ongoing to meet 
such major challenges, it is becoming clear that added efforts are 
needed to unravel the role of epigenetic factors in these proc-
esses (Martienssen and Colot, 2001; Seymour et al., 2008). The 
role of protein glycosylation, particularly of those enzymes that 
modify  N-glycosylation  of  enzymes,  in  altering  shelf  life  and 
fruit  texture  has  been  demonstrated.  Thus,  added  challenges 
include identifying the hierarchy of regulators or a specific pat-
tern  of  events  that  control  desirable  attributes  and  then  use 
genetic  intervention  to  modify  critical  and  beneficial  processes 
without any negative impact to the plant, ecosystem in which it 
is grown, or to the consumer. There is a definite need to develop 
and  field  test  transgenic  plants  that  are  particularly  suited  to 
grow  well  in  ecologically  friendly,  sustainable  agricultural  sys-
tems  that  have  minimal  reliance  on  chemical  input  and  syner-
gistically (positively) influence plant metabolism (Neelam et al., 
2008; Mattoo and Teasdale, 2010).

418

References

Abeles, F., Morgan, P., & Saltveit, M. (1992). 

Ethylene in plant biology. San Diego: 
Academic Press.

Adams, D. O., & Yang, S. F. (1979). 

Ethylene biosynthesis: Identification of 
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid 
as an intermediate in the conversion of 
methionine to ethylene. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 76, 170–174.

Adams-Phillips, L., Barry, C., Kannanz, P., 

Leclercq, J., Bouzayen, M., & Giovannoni, J. 
 (2004). Evidence that CTR1-mediated 
ethylene signal transduction in tomato 
is encoded by a multigene family whose 
members display distinct regulatory features. 
Plant Molecular Biology, 54, 387–404.
Alba, R., Payton, P., Fei, Z., McQuinn, R., 
Debbie, P., & Martin, G., et al. (2005). 
Transcriptome and selected fruit metabolite 
analysis reveal multiple points of ethylene 
regulatory control during tomato fruit 
development. Plant Cell, 17, 2954–2965.

Alonso, J. M., Hirayama, T., Roman, G., 

Nourizadeh, S., & Ecker, J. R. (1999). EIN2, 
a bifunctional transducer of ethylene and 
stress responses in Arabidopsis. Science, 284, 
2148–2152.

Ampomah-Dwamena, C., Morris, B., 
Sutherland, P., Veit, B., & Yao, J. 
(2002). Down-regulation of TM29, a 
tomato SEPALLATA homolog, causes 
parthenocarpic fruit development and floral 
reversion. Plant Physiology, 130, 605–617.

Azari, R., Reuveni, M., Evenor, D., Nahon, 

S., Shlomo, H., & Chen, L., et al. (2010). 
Overexpression of UV-DAMAGED 
DNA BINDING PROTEIN 1 links 
plant development and phytonutrient 
accumulation in high pigment-1 tomato. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 
3627–3637.

Azari, R., Tadmor, Y., Meir, A., Reuveni, M., 

Evenor, D., & Nahon, S., et al. (2010). 
Light signaling genes and their manipulation 
towards modulation of phytonutrient 
content in tomato fruits. Biotechnology 
Advances, 1, 108–118.

Baldet, P., Hernould, M., Laporte, F., Mounet, 

F., Just, D., & Mouras, A., et al. (2006). 
The expression of cell proliferation-related 
genes in early developing flowers is affected 
by a fruit load reduction in tomato plants. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 57, 
961–970.

Bapat, V. A., Trivedi, P. K., Ghosh, A., Sane, 
V. A, Ganapathi, T. R., & Nath, P. (2010). 
Ripening of fleshy fruit: Molecular insight 
and the role of ethylene. Biotechnology 
Advances, 28, 94–107.

Barrero, L. S., Cong, B., Wu, F., & Tanksley,  

S. D. (2006). Developmental characterization 
of the fasciated locus and mapping of 
Arabidopsis candidate genes involved in the 
control of floral meristem size and carpel 
number in tomato. Genome, 49, 991–1006.

Barrero, L. S., & Tanksley, S. D. (2004). 

Evaluating the genetic basis of multiple-
locule fruit in a broad cross section of 

Fruit development and ripening: a molecular perspective

C H A P T E R   2 6

tomato cultivars. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 109, 669–679.

Barry, C. S., & Giovannoni, J. (2006). Ripening 
inhibition in the tomato Green-ripe mutant 
results from ectopic expression of a novel 
protein which disrupts ethylene signal 
transduction. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 103, 7923–7928.

Barry, C. S., Llop-Tous, I., & Grierson, D. 

 (2000). The regulation of 
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid 
synthase gene expression during the 
transition from system-1 to system-2 
ethylene synthesis in tomato. Plant 
Physiology, 123, 979–986.

Barry, C. S., McQuinn, R. P., Chung, M. Y., 
Besuden, A., & Giovannoni, J. J. (2008). 
Amino acid substitutions in homologs of 
the STAY-GREEN protein are responsible 
for the green-flesh and chlorophyll retainer 
mutations of tomato and pepper. Plant 
Physiology, 147, 179–187.

Barry, C. S., McQuinn, R. P., Thompson, A. J., 

Seymour, G. B., Grierson, D., &  
Giovannoni, J. J. (2005). Ethylene 
insensitivity conferred by the Green-ripe 
and Never-ripe 2 ripening mutants of 
Tomato. Plant Physiology, 138, 267–275.
Benvenuto, G., Formiggini, F., Laflamme, P., 
Malakhov, M., & Bowler, C. (2002). The 
photomorphogenesis regulator DET1 binds 
the amino-terminal tail of histone H2B in a 
nucleosome context. Current Biology, 12, 
1529–1534.

Bertin, N., Causse, M., Brunel, B., Tricon, D.,  

& Génard, M. (2009). Identification of 
growth processes involved in QTLs for 
tomato fruit size and composition. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 60, 237–248.

Biggs, M. S., & Handa, A. K. (1989). Temporal 

regulation of PG gene expression in fruits 
from normal, mutant and heterozygous 
tomato genotypes. Plant Physiology, 89, 
117–125.

Boss, P. K., Sensi, E., Hua, C., Davies, C., &  

Thomas, M. R. (2002). Cloning and 
characterization of grapevine (Vitis vinifera 
L.) MADS-box genes expressed during 
inflorescence and berry development. Plant 
Science, 162, 887–895.

Boss, P. K., Vivier, M., Matsumoto, S., Dry, 
I. B., & Thomas, M. R. (2001). A cDNA 
from grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.), which 
shows homology to AGAMOUS and 
SHATTERPROOF, is not only expressed 
in flowers but also throughout berry 
development. Plant Molecular Biology, 45, 
541–553.

Brady, C. J. (1987). Fruit ripening. Annual 
Review of Plant Physiology, 38, 155–178.
Brewer, M. T., Moyseenko, J. B., Monforte, 

A. J., & van der Knaap, E. (2007). 
Morphological variation in tomato: A 
comprehensive study of quantitative trait 
loci controlling fruit shape and development. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 58, 
1339–1349.

Brummell, D. A. (2006). Cell wall disassembly 

in ripening fruit. Functional Plant Biology, 
33, 103–119.

Brummell, D. A., Hall, B. D., & Bennett, A. B. 

(1999). Antisense suppression of tomato 
endo-beta-1,4-glucanase Cel2 mRNA 
accumulation increases the force required 
to break fruit abscission zones but does 
not affect fruit softening. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 40, 615–622.

Brummell, D. A., Harpster, M. H., Civello, P. 
M., Bennett, A. B., & Dunsmuir, P. (1999). 
Modification of expansin protein abundance 
in tomato fruit alters softening and cell wall 
polymer metabolism during ripening. Plant 
Cell, 11, 2203–2216.

Brummell, D. A., Harpster, M. H., & 

Dunsmuir, P. (1999). Differential expression 
of expansin gene family members during 
growth and ripening of tomato fruit. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 39, 161–169.

Busi, M. V., Bustamante, C., D’Angelo, C., 

Hidalgo-Cuevas, M., Boggio, S. B., & Valle, 
E. M., et al. (2003). MADS-box genes 
expressed during tomato seed and fruit 
development. Plant Molecular Biology, 52, 
801–815.

Cara, B., & Giovannoni, J. J. (2008). Molecular 

biology of ethylene during tomato fruit 
development and maturation. Plant Science, 
175, 106–113.

Carey, A. T., Smith, D. L., Harrison, E.,  

Bird, C. R., Gross, K. C., & Seymour, G. B.,  
et al. (2001). Down-regulation of a ripening-
related beta-galactosidase gene (TBG1) 
in transgenic tomato fruits. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 52, 663–668.

Carrari, F., Baxter, C., Usadel, B., Urbanczyk-
Wochniak, E., Zanor, M. -I., & Nunes-Nesi, 
A., et al. (2006). Integrated analysis of 
metabolite and transcript levels reveals 
the metabolic shifts that underlie tomato 
fruit development and highlight regulatory 
aspects of metabolic network behavior. Plant 
Physiology, 142, 1380–1396.

Cevik, V., Ryder, C. D., Popovich, A., Manning, 

K., King, G. J., & Seymour, G. B. (2010). 
A FRUITFULL-like gene is associated with 
genetic variation for fruit flesh firmness 
in apple (Malus domestica Borkh.). Tree 
Genetics Genomes, 6, 271–279.

Chen, G., Alexander, L., & Grierson, D. 

(2004). Constitutive expression of EIL-
like transcription factor partially restores 
ripening in the ethyleneinsensitive Nr 
tomato mutant. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 55, 1491–1497.

Chen, Y. F., Randlett, M. D., Findell, J. L., & 
Schaller, G. E. (2002). Localization of the 
ethylene receptor ETR1 to the endoplasmic 
reticulum of Arabidopsis. Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, 277, 19861–19866.

Choi, D., Cho, H. T., & Lee, Y. (2006). 

Expansins: Expanding importance in plant 
growth and development. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 126, 511–518.

Chun, J. P., & Huber, D. J. (1998). 

Polygalacturonase-mediated solubilization 
and depolymerization of pectic polymers in 

419

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

tomato fruit cell walls—regulation by pH 
and ionic conditions. Plant Physiology, 117, 
1293–1299.

Chung, M.-Y., Vrebalov, J., Alba, R., Lee, J., 

McQuinn, R., Chung, J.-D., et al. (2010). A 
tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) APETALA2/
ERF gene, SlAP2a, is a negative regulator of 
fruit ripening. Plant J., 64(6), 936–947.

Clark, KL, Larsen, PB, Wang, X, & Chang, C. 

 (1998). Association of the Arabidopsis 
CTR1 Raf-like kinase with the ETR1 and 
ERS ethylene receptors. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 95, 5401–5406.

Cong, B., Barrero, L. S., & Tanksley, S. D. 
(2008). Regulatory change in YABBY-
like transcription factor led to evolution 
of extreme fruit size during tomato 
domestication. Nature Genetics, 40, 
800–804.

Cong, B., Liu, J., & Tanksley, S. D. (2002). 

Natural alleles at a tomato fruit size 
quantitative trait locus differ by 
heterochronic regulatory mutations. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 99, 
13606–13611.

Cong, B., & Tanksley, S. D. (2006). FW2.2 and 
cell cycle control in developing tomato fruit: 
A possible example of gene co-option in the 
evolution of a novel organ. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 62, 867–880.

Dahan, Y., Rosenfeld, R., Zadiranov, V., & 

Irihimovitch, V. (2010). A proposed 
conserved role for an avocado fw2.2-like 
gene as a negative regulator of fruit cell 
division. Planta, 232, 663–676.

Dandekar, A. M., Teo, G., Defilippi, B. G., 

Uratsu, S. L., Passey, A. J., & Kader, A. A., 
et al. (2004). Effect of down-regulation of 
ethylene biosynthesis on fruit flavor complex 
in apple fruit. Transgenic Research, 13, 
373–384.

Davuluri, G. R., van Tuinen, A., Fraser, P. 
D., Manfredonia, A., Newman, R., & 
Burgess, D., et al. (2005). Fruit specific 
RNAi-mediated suppression of DET1 
enhances carotenoid and flavonoid content 
in tomatoes. Nature Biotechnology, 23, 
890–895.

Davuluri, G. R., van Tuinen, A., Mustilli, 

A. C., Manfredonia, A., Newman, R., & 
Burgess, D., et al. (2004). Manipulation 
of DET1 expression in tomato results in 
photomorphogenic phenotypes caused by 
post-transcriptional gene silencing. Plant 
Journal, 40, 344–354.

de Silva, J., & Verhoeyen, M. E. (1998). 

Production and characterization of 
antisense-exogalactanase tomatoes. In H. A. 
Kuiper (Ed.), Report of the demonstration 
programme on food safety evaluation of 
genetically modified foods as a basis for 
market introduction (pp. 99–106). The 
Hague: The Netherlands Ministry of 
Economic Affairs.

Deikman, J., Xu, R. L., Kneissl, M. L., Ciardi, 

J. A., Kim, K. N., & Pelah, D. (1998). 
Separation of cis elements responsive  
to ethylene, fruit development, and  
ripening in the 50-flanking region of the 
ripening-related E8 gene. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 37, 1001–1011.

420

DellaPenna, D., Lincoln, J. E., Fischer, R. L., 
& Bennett, A. B. (1989). Transcriptional 
analysis of PG and other ripening associated 
genes in Rutgers, rin, nor, and Nr tomato 
fruit. Plant Physiology, 90, 1372–1377.
Elitzur, T., Vrebalov, J., Giovannoni, J. J., 

Goldschmidt, E. E., & Friedman, H. 
(2010). The regulation of MADS-box gene 
expression during ripening of banana and 
their regulatory interaction with ethylene. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 
1523–1535.

Errington, N., Tucker, G. A., & Mitchell, J. R. 

(1998). Effect of genetic down-regulation of 
PG and pectin esterase activity on rheology 
and composition of tomato juice. Journal 
of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 76, 
515–519.

Ezura, H., & Hiwasa-Tanase, K. (2010). Fruit 
Development. In E. C. Pua & M. R. Davey 
(Eds.), Plant developmental biology – 
Biotechnological perspectives (Vol. 1, pp. 
301–318). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.

Fatima, T., Rivera-Domínguez, M., Troncoso-

Rojas, R., Tiznado-Hernández, M. E., Handa, 
A. K., & Mattoo, A. K. (2008). Tomato. In 
C. Kole & T. C. Hall (Eds.), Compendium of 
transgenic crop plants: Transgenic vegetable 
crops (pp. 1–46). Oxford, UK: Blackwell 
Publishing.

Ferrándiz, C., Liljegren, S. J., & Yanofsky, 

M. F. (2000). Negative regulation of the 
SHATTERPROOF genes by FRUITFULL 
during Arabidopsis fruit development. 
Science, 289, 436–438.

Flores, F. B., Martínez-Madrid, M. C., Sánchez-

Hidalgo, F. J., & Romojaro, F. (2001). 
Differential rind and pulp ripening of 
transgenic antisense ACC oxidase melon. 
Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 39, 
37–43.

Fluhr, R., & Mattoo, A. K. (1996). Ethylene – 

Biosynthesis and perception. In B. V. (1996). 
Conger (Ed.), Critical reviews in plant 
sciences (Vol. 15, pp. 479–523). Boca Raton, 
Florida: CRC Press, Inc..

Frary, A., Fulton, T. M., Zamir, D., & Tanksley, 

S. D. (2004). Advanced backcross QTL 
analysis of a Lycopersicon esculentum 3 L. 
pennellii cross and identification of possible 
orthologs in the Solanaceae. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 108, 485–496.

Frary, A., Nesbitt, T. C., Frary, A., Grandillo, 

S., van der Knaap, E., & Cong, B., et al. 
(2000). Cloning and transgenic expression of 
fw2.2: A quantitative trait locus key to the 
evolution of tomato fruit size. Science, 289, 
85–88.

Fraser, P. D., Bramley, P., & Seymour, G. B. 
(2001). Effect of the Cnr mutation on 
carotenoid formation during tomato fruit 
ripening. Phytochemistry, 58, 75–79.

Gaffe, J., Tieman, D. M., & Handa, A. K. 
(1994). Pectin methyesterase isoforms 
in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) 
tissues: Effects of expression of a 
pectinmethylesterase antisense gene. Plant 
Physiology, 105, 199–203.

Gaffe, J., Tiznado, M. E., & Handa, A. K. 

(1997). Characterization and functional 
expression of a ubiquitously expressed 
tomato pectin methylesterase. Plant 
Physiology, 114, 1547–1556.

Gallie, D. R. (2010). Regulated ethylene 

insensitivity through the inducible 
expression of the Arabidopsis etr1-1 
mutant ethylene receptor in tomato. Plant 
Physiology, 152, 1928–1939.

Galpaz, N., Wang, Q., Menda, N., Zamir, 

D., & Hirschberg, J. (2008). Abscisic acid 
deficiency in the tomato mutant high-
pigment 3 leading to increased plastid 
number and higher fruit lycopene content. 
Plant Journal, 53, 717–730.

Gambetta, G. A., Matthews, M. A., Shaghasi, 
T. H., McElrone, A. J., & Castellarin, S. D. 
(2010). Sugar and abscisic acid signaling 
orthologs are activated at the onset of 
ripening in grape. Planta, 232, 219–234.

Gao, H., Zhu, H., Shao, Y., Chen, A., Lu, 
C., & Zhu, B., et al. (2008). Lycopene 
accumulation affects the biosynthesis of some 
carotenoid-related volatiles independent of 
ethylene in tomato. International Journal of 
Plant Biology, 50, 991–996.

Gao, M., Matsuta, N., Murayama, H., 

Toyomasu, T., Mitsuhashi, W., & Dandekar, 
A. M., et al. (2007). Gene expression and 
ethylene production in transgenic pear 
(Pyrus communis cv. ‘La France’) with sense 
or antisense cDNA encoding ACC oxidase. 
Plant Science, 173, 32–42.

Giliberto, L., Perrotta, G., Pallara, P., Weller, J. 

L., Fraser, P. D., & Bramley, P. M., et al. 
 (2005). Manipulation of the blue light 
photoreceptor cryptochrome 2 in tomato 
affects vegetative development, flowering 
time, and fruit antioxidant content. Plant 
Physiology, 137, 199–208.

Gillaspy, G., Ben-David, H., & Gruissem, W. 

(1993). Fruits: A developmental perspective. 
Plant Cell, 5, 1439–1451.

Giovannoni, J. (2007). Fruit ripening mutants 

yields insights into ripening control. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 10, 283–289.

Giovannoni, J. J. (2004). Genetic regulation of 
fruit development and ripening. Plant Cell, 
16, S170–S180.

Giovannoni, J. J., DellaPenna, D., Bennett, 

A. B., & Fischer, R. L. (1989). Expression 
of a chimeric polygalacturonase gene in 
transgenic rin (ripening inhibitor) tomato 
fruit results in polyuronide degradation but 
not fruit softening. Plant Cell, 1, 53–63.

Gonzalez, N., Gevaudant, F., Hernould, 

M., Chevalier, C., & Mouras, A. (2007). 
The cell cycle-associated protein kinase 
WEE1 regulates cell size in relation to 
endoreduplication in developing tomato 
fruit. Plant Journal, 54, 642–655.

Gonzalo, M. J., & van der Knaap, E. (2008).  

A comparative analysis into the genetic bases 
of morphology in tomato varieties exhibiting 
elongated fruit shape. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 116, 647–656.

Good, X., Kellogg, J. A., Wagoner, W., 

Langhoff, D., Matsumura, W., & Bestwick, 
R. K. (1994). Reduced ethylene synthesis 
by transgenic tomatoes expressing 
S-adenosylmethionine hydrolase. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 26, 781–790.

Grandillo, S., Ku, H. -M., & Tanksley, S. D. 
(1999). Identifying loci responsible for 
natural variation in fruit size and shape in 
tomato. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 
99, 978–987.

Fruit development and ripening: a molecular perspective

C H A P T E R   2 6

Gross, K. C., & Sams, C. E. (1984). Changes 

in cell wall neutral sugar composition 
during fruit ripening: A species survey. 
Phytochemistry, 23, 2457–2461.

Guo, H., & Ecker, J. (2003). Plant responses 
to ethylene gas are mediated by SCFEBF1/
EBF2-dependent proteolysis of EIN3 
transcription factor. Cell, 115, 667–677.

Guo, M., Rupe, M. A., Dieter, J. A., Zou, 

J., Spielbauer, D., & Duncan, K. E., et al. 
(2010). Cell Number Regulator1 affects 
plant and organ size in maize: Implications 
for crop yield enhancement and heterosis. 
Plant Cell, 22, 1057–1073.

Hamilton, A., Lycett, G., & Grierson, D. 

(1990). Antisense gene that inhibits 
synthesis of the hormone ethylene in 
transgenic plants. Nature, 346, 284–287.
Handa, A. K., Singh, N. K., & Biggs, M. S.  

(1985). Effect of tunicamycin on in 
vitro ripening of tomato pericarp tissue. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 63, 417–424.

Harpster, M. H., Brummell, D. A., & Dunsmuir, 

P. (2002). Suppression of a ripening-related 
endo-1,4-β-glucanase in transgenic pepper 
fruit does not prevent depolymerization of 
cell wall polysaccharides during ripening. 
Plant Molecular Biology, 50, 345–355.

Harpster, M. H., Dawson, D. M., Nevins, D. 

J., Dunsmuir, P., & Brummell, D. A. (2002). 
Constitutive overexpression of a ripening-
related pepper endo-1,4-β-glucanase in 
transgenic tomato fruit does not increase 
xyloglucan depolymerization or fruit 
softening. Plant Molecular Biology, 50, 
357–369.

Harriman, R. W., Tieman, D. M., & Handa, 

A. K. (1991). Molecular cloning of tomato 
pectin methylesterase gene and its expression 
in Rutgers, rin, nor and Nr tomato mutants. 
Plant Physiology, 97, 80–87.

Hua, J., & Meyerowitz, E. (1998). Ethylene 

responses are negatively regulated by 
a receptor gene family in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Cell, 94, 261–271.

Huberman, M., Riov, J., Goldschmidt, E. 
E., Apelbaum, A., & Goren, R. (2009). 
The antagonizing effect of a water soluble 
cyclopropene derivative 3-(cyclopropyl-
1-enyl-propanoic acid) sodium salt on 
ethylene-induced action in field crops. 
Thirty-seventh PGRSA Annual Meeting in 
Portland, Oregon, August 7–12, 2010.
Ito, Y., Kitagawa, M., Ihashi, N., Yabe, K., 
Kimbara, J., & Yasuda, J., et al. (2008). 
DNA-binding specificity, transcriptional 
activation potential, and the rin mutation 
effect for the tomato fruit-ripening regulator 
RIN. Plant Journal, 55, 212–223.

Jiménez-Bermúdez, S., Redondo-Nevado, J., 
Muñoz-Blanco, J., Caballero, J. L., López-
Aranda, J. M., & Valpuesta, V., et al. (2002). 
Manipulation of fruit softening by antisense 
expression of a pectate lyase gene. Plant 
Physiology, 128, 751–759.

Kalamaki, M. S., Harpster, M. H., Palys, 
J. M., Labavitch, J. M., Reid, D. S., & 
Brummell, D. A. (2003). Simultaneous 
transgenic suppression of LePG and LeExp1 
influences rheological properties of juice 
and concentrates from a processing tomato 
variety. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 51, 7456–7464.

Kendrick, R. E., Kerckhoffs, L. H. J., 

Pundsnes, A. S., Van Tuinen, A., Koornneef, 
M., & Nagatani, A., et al. (1994). 
Photomorphogenic mutants of tomato. 
Euphytica, 79, 227–234.

Kevany, B. M., Taylor, M. G., & Klee, H. J. 
(2008). Fruit-specific suppression of the 
ethylene receptor LeETR4 results in early-
ripening tomato fruit. Plant Biotechnology 
Journal, 6, 295–300.

Kevany, B. M., Tieman, D. M., Taylor, M. G., 
Cin, V. D., & Klee, H. J. (2007). Ethylene 
receptor degradation controls the timing of 
ripening in tomato fruit. Plant Journal, 51, 
458–467.

Kieber, J. J., Rothenberg, M., Roman, G., 
Feldman, K. A., & Ecker, J. R. (1993). 
CTR1, a negative regulator of the ethylene 
response pathway in Arabidopsis, encodes a 
member of the Raf family of protein kinases. 
Cell, 72, 427–441.

Klee, H., & Tieman, D. (2002). The tomato 
ethylene receptor gene family: Form and 
function. Physiologia Plantarum, 115, 
336–341.

Klee, H. J. (1993). Ripening physiology of 

fruit from transgenic tomato (Lycopersicon 
esculentum) plants with reduced ethylene 
synthesis. Plant Physiology, 102, 911–916.
Klee, H. J., Hayford, M. B., Kretzmer, K. A., 

Barry, G. F., & Kishore, G. M. (1991). 
Control of ethylene synthesis by expression 
of a bacterial enzyme in transgenic tomato 
plants. Plant Cell, 3, 1187–1193.
Klee, H. J. (2004). Ethylene signal 

transduction. Moving beyond Arabidopsis. 
Plant Physiology, 135, 660–667.

Kosma, D. K., Parsons, E. P., Isaacson, T., Lü, 

S., Rose, J. K., & Jenks, M. A. (2010). 
Fruit cuticle lipid composition during 
development in tomato ripening mutants. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 139, 107–117.
Kramer, M. G., & Redenbaugh, K. (1994). 
Commercialization of a tomato with an 
antisense polygalacturonase gene: The 
FLAVR SAVR™ tomato story. Euphytica, 79, 
293–297.

Ku, H. -M., Doganlar, S., Chen, K. Y., & 

Tanksley, S. D. (1999). The genetic basis of 
pear shaped tomato fruit. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 99, 844–850.

Ku, H. -M., Grandillo, S., & Tanksley, S. D. 

(2000). fs8.1, a major QTL, sets the pattern 
of tomato carpel shape well before anthesis. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 101, 
873–878.

Kuzemenskii, A. V. (2007). Effects of 

interaction of alc (alcobaca) keeping-life 
gene with elevated fruit pigmentation genes. 
Cytology and Genetics, 41, 357–364.

Lanahan, M. B., Yen, H. C., Giovannoni, J. J., & 
Klee, H. J. (1994). The never ripe mutation 
blocks ethylene perception in tomato. Plant 
Cell, 6, 521–530.

Lashbrook, C. C., Giovannoni, J. J., Hall, B. D., 
& Bennett, A. B. (1998). Transgenic analysis 
of tomato endo-ß-1,4-glucanase gene 
function. Role of cel1 in floral abscission. 
Plant Journal, 13, 303–310.

Lavi, N., Tadmor, Y., Meir, A., Bechar, A., 
Oren-Shamir, M., & Ovadia, R., et al. 
(2009). Characterization of the INTENSE 

PIGMENT tomato genotype emphasizing 
targeted fruit metabolites and chloroplast 
biogenesis. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 57, 4818–4826.

Levin, I., De Vos, C. H. R., Tadmor, Y., Bovy, A., 

Lieberman, M., & Oren-Shamir, M., et al. 
(2006). High pigment tomato mutants—more 
than just lycopene (a review). Israel Journal of 
Plant Sciences, 54, 179–190.

Levin, I., Frankel, P., Gilboa, N., Tanny, S., & 
Lalazar, A. (2003). The tomato dark green 
mutation is a novel allele of the tomato 
homolog of the DEETIOLATED1 gene. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 106, 
454–460.

Li, W., Kabbage, M., & Dickman, M. B. (2010). 
Transgenic expression of an insect inhibitor 
of apoptosis gene, Sf-IAP, confers abiotic 
and biotic stress tolerance and delays tomato 
fruit ripening. Physiological and Molecular 
Plant Pathology, 74, 363–375.

Lieberman, M., Kunishi, A., Mapson, L. W., 
& Wardale, D. A. (1966). Stimulation of 
ethylene production in apple tissue slices by 
methionine. Plant Physiology, 41, 376–382.
Lieberman, M., Segev, O., Gilboa, N., Lalazar, 
A., & Levin, I. (2004). The tomato homolog 
of the gene encoding UV-damaged DNA 
binding protein 1 (DDB1) underlined as 
the gene that causes the high pigment-1 
mutant phenotype. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 108, 1574–1581.

Liebhard, R., Kellerhals, M., Pfammatter, W., 

Jertmini, M., & Gessler, C. (2003). Mapping 
quantitative physiological traits in apple 
(Malus 3 domestica Borkh). Plant Molecular 
Biology, 52, 511–526.

Lin, S. -H., & Do, Y. -Y. (2008). Studies on 
delaying fruit ripening by transforming 
sense ACC synthase gene into Momordica 
charantia L. Journal of Taiwan Society for 
Horticultural Science, 54, 115–125.

Lin, Z., Alexander, L., Hackett, R., & Grierson, 

D. (2008). LeCTR2, a CTR1-like protein 
kinase from tomato, plays a role in ethylene 
signaling, development and defense. Plant 
Journal, 54, 1083–1093.

Lin, Z., Zhong, S., & Grierson, D. (2009). 
Recent advances in ethylene research. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 60, 
3311–3336.

Litz, R. E., Raharjo, S. H. T., Efendi, D., 

Witjaksono, M., & Gómez-Lim, M. 
A. (2007). Plant recovery following 
transformation of avocado with anti-fungal 
protein and SAM hydrolase genes. Acta 
Horticulturae, 738, 447–450.

Liu, J., Van Eck, J., Cong, B., & Tanksley, S. D.  

(2002). A new class of regulatory genes 
underlying the cause of pear-shaped tomato 
fruit. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
99, 13302–13306.

Liu, J., Xu, B., Hu, L., Li, M., Su, W., & Wu, J.,  

et al. (2009). Involvement of a banana 
MADS-box transcription factor gene in 
ethylene-induced fruit ripening. Plant Cell 
Reports, 28, 103–111.

Liu, Y., Roof, S., Ye, Z., Barry, C., van 

Tuinen, A., & Vrebalov, J., et al. (2004). 
Manipulation of light signal transduction as a 
means of modifying fruit nutritional quality 
in tomato. Proceedings of the National 

421

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 26, 9897–9902.

López-Gómez, R., Cabrera-Ponce, J. L., 

Saucedo-Arias, L. J., Carreto-Montoya, L., 
Villanueva-Arce, R., & Díaz-Perez, J. C.,  
et al. (2009). Ripening in papaya fruit is 
altered by ACC oxidase cosuppression. 
Transgenic Research, 1, 89–97.

Manning, R., Tor, K., Poole, M., Hong, M., 

Thompson, Y., & King, A., et al. (2006). A 
naturally occurring epigenetic mutation in 
a gene encoding an SPB-box transcription 
factor inhibits tomato fruit ripening. Nature 
Genetics, 38, 949–952.

Martienssen, R. A., & Colot, V. (2001). DNA 
methylation and epigenetic inheritance in 
plants and filamentous fungi. Science, 293, 
1070–1074.

Martínez-Romero, D., Bailén, G., Serrano, M., 

Guillén, F., Valverde, J. M., & Zapata, P., 
et al. (2007). Tools to maintain postharvest 
fruit and vegetable quality through the 
inhibition of ethylene action: A review. 
Critical Reviews in Food Science and 
Nutrition, 47, 543–560.

Mattoo, A. K., & Suttle,  J. C. (Eds.). (1991). 

The plant hormone ethylene. Boca Raton, 
Florida, USA: CRC Press Inc..

Mattoo, A. K., & Handa, A. K. (2004). Ethylene 

signaling in plant cell death. In L. Nooden 
(Ed.), Plant cell death processes (pp. 125–
142). New York: Academic Press.

Mattoo, A. K., & Teasdale, J. R. (2010). 

Ecological and genetic systems underlying 
sustainable horticulture. Horticultural 
Reviews, 37, 331–362.

Mehta, R. A., Cassol, T., Li, N., Ali, N., Handa, 
A. K., & Mattoo, A. K. (2002). Engineered 
polyamine accumulation in tomato enhances 
phytonutrient content, juice quality and vine 
life. Nature Biotechnology, 20, 613–618.

Meli, V. S., Ghosh, S., Prabha, T. N., 

Chakraborty, N., Chakraborty, S., & Datta, 
A. (2010). Enhancement of fruit shelf life 
by suppressing N-glycan processing enzymes. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
107, 2413–2418.

Mercado, J. A., Trainotti, L., Jiménez-

Bermúdez, L., Santiago-Doménech, N., 
Posé, S., & Donolli, R., et al. (2010). 
Evaluation of the role of the endo-β-(1,4)-
glucanase gene FaEG3 in strawberry 
fruit softening. Postharvest Biology and 
Technology, 55, 8–14.

Miedes, E., Herbers, K., Sonnewald, U., & 
Lorences, E. P. (2010). Overexpression 
of a cell wall enzyme reduces xyloglucan 
depolymerization and softening of transgenic 
tomato fruits. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry, 58, 5708–5713.

Montgomery, J., Goldman, S., Deikman, J., 
Margossian, L., & Fischer, R. L. (1993). 
Identification of an ethylene-responsive 
region in the promoter of a fruit ripening 
gene. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
90, 5939–5943.

Mounet, F., Moing, A., Garcia, V., Petit, 

J., Maucourt, M., & Deborde, C., et al. 
(2009). Gene and metabolite regulatory 
network analysis of early developing fruit 
tissues highlights new candidate genes for 

422

the control of tomato fruit composition 
and development. Plant Physiology, 149, 
1505–1528.

Moussatche, P., & Klee, H. (2004). 

Autophosphorylation activity of the 
Arabidopsis ethylene receptor multigene 
family. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 279, 
48734–48741.

Mustilli, A. C., Fenzi, F., Ciliento, R., Alfano, 
F., & Bowler, C. (1999). Phenotype of the 
tomato high pigment-2 mutant is caused 
by a mutation in the tomato homolog of 
DEETIOLATED1. Plant Cell, 11, 145–157.
Nambeesan, S., Datsenka, T., Ferruzzi, M. G., 
Malladi, A., Mattoo, A. K., & Handa, A. K. 
(2010). Overexpression of yeast spermidine 
synthase impacts ripening, senescence and 
decay symptoms in tomato. Plant Journal, 
63, 836–847.

Nambeesan, S., Handa, A. K., & Mattoo, A. 
K. (2008). Polyamines and regulation of 
ripening and senescence. In G. Paliyath, 
D. P. Murr, A. K. Handa & S. Lurie (Eds.), 
Postharvest biology and technology of fruits, 
vegetables and flowers (pp. 319–340). 
Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.

Neelam, A., Cassol, T., Mehta, R. A., Abdul-
Baki, A. A., Sobolev, A., & Goyal, R. K.,  
et al. (2008). A field-grown transgenic tomato 
line expressing higher levels of polyamines 
reveals legume cover crop mulch-specific 
perturbations in fruit phenotype at the 
levels of metabolite profiles, gene expression 
and agronomic characteristics. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 59, 2337–2346.

Negi, P. S., & Handa, A. K. (2008). Structural 

deterioration of the produce—The 
breakdown of cell wall components. In G. 
Paliyath, D. P. Murr, A. K. Handa & S. Lurie 
(Eds.), Postharvest biology and technology of 
fruits, vegetables and flowers (pp. 162–194). 
Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.

Nesbitt, C. T., & Tanksley, S. D. (2002). 
Comparative sequencing in the genus 
Lycopersicon: Implications for the evolution 
of fruit size in the domestication of 
cultivated tomatoes. Genetics, 162, 365–379.

Oeller, P. W., Wong, L. M., Taylor, L. P., Pike, 
D. A., & Theologis, A. (1991). Reversible 
inhibition of tomato fruit senescence 
by antisense 1-aminocyclopropane-1-
carboxylate synthase. Science, 254, 427–439.

Orfila, C., Seymour, G. B., Willats, W. G. T., 
Huxham, I. M., Jarvis, M. C., & Dover, C. 
J., et al. (2001). Altered middle lamella 
homogalacturonan and disrupted deposition 
of (1-  5)-α-L-arabinan in the pericarp 
of Cnr, a ripening mutant of tomato. Plant 
Physiology, 126, 210–221.

Pepper, A., Delaney, T., Washburn, T., Poole, 
D., & Chory, J. (1994). DET1, a negative 
regulator of light-mediated development 
and gene expression in Arabidopsis, encodes 
a novel nuclear-localized protein. Cell, 78, 
109–116.

Phan, T. D., Bo, W., West, G., Lycett, G. W., & 
Tucker, G. A. (2007). Silencing of the major 
salt-dependent isoform of pectinesterase 
in tomato alters fruit softening. Plant 
Physiology, 144, 1960–1967.

Pnueli, L., Hareven, D., Rounsley, S. D., 

Yanofsky, M. F., & Lifschitz, E. (1994). 
Isolation of the tomato AGAMOUS gene 

TAG1 and analysis of its homeotic role in 
transgenic plants. Plant Cell, 6, 163–173.
Powell, A. L. T., Kalamaki, M. S., Kurien, P. 
A., Gurrieri, S., & Bennett, A. B. (2003). 
Simultaneous transgenic suppression of 
LePG and LeExp1 influences fruit texture 
and juice viscosity in a fresh market tomato 
variety. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 51, 7450–7455.

Priem, B., & Gross, K. (1992). Mannosyl 

and Xylosyl-containing glycans promote 
tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) fruit 
ripening. Plant Physiology, 98, 399–401.
Qiao, H., Chang, K. N., Yazaki, J., & Ecker, 

J. R. (2009). Interplay between ethylene, 
ETP1/ETP2 F-box proteins, and degradation 
of EIN2 triggers ethylene responses in 
Arabidopsis. Genes and Development, 23, 
512–521.

Quesada, M. A., Blanco-Portales, R., Posé, S., 

García-Gago, J. A., Jiménez-Bermúdez, 
S., & Muñoz-Serrano, A., et al. (2009). 
Antisense down-regulation of the FaPG1 
gene reveals an unexpected central role for 
polygalacturonase in strawberry  
fruit softening. Plant Physiology, 150, 
1022–1032.

Razdan, M. K., & Mattoo, A. K. (2007). Genetic 
improvement of solanaceous crops: Volume 2:  
Tomato. (p. 637) Enfield: Science Publishers, 
Inc. 

Reynard, G. B. (1956). Origin of Webb special 

(Black Queen) in tomato. Report of the 
Tomato Genetics Cooperative, 6, 22.

Rick, C. M., & Butler, L. (1956). Phytogenetics 

of the tomato. Advances in Genetics, 8, 
267–382.

Rigola, D., Pe, M. E., Fabrizio, C., Me, G., & 

Sari Gorla, M. (1998). CaMADS1, a MADS 
box gene expressed in the carpel of hazelnut. 
Plant Molecular Biology, 38, 1147–1160.

Rodriguez, F. I., Esch, J. J., Hall, A. E., Binder, 

B. M., Schaller, G. E., & Bleecker, A. B. 
(1999). A copper cofactor for the ethylene 
receptor ETR1 from Arabidopsis. Science, 
283, 996–998.

Roman, G., Lubarsky, B., Kieber, J. J., 

Rothenberg, M., & Ecker, J. R. (1995). 
Genetic analysis of ethylene signal 
transduction in Arabidopsis thaliana: Five 
novel mutant loci integrated into a stress 
response pathway. Genetics, 139, 1393–1409.

Rose, J. K. C., Lee, H. H., & Bennett, A. B. 

(1997). Expression of a divergent expansin 
gene is fruit-specific and ripening-regulated. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 94, 
5955–5960.

Saladié, M., Matas, A. J., Isaacson, T., Jenks, 
M. A., Goodwin, S. M., & Niklas, K. J., et 
al. (2007). A reevaluation of the key factors 
that influence tomato fruit softening and 
integrity. Plant Physiology, 144, 1012–1028.

Santiago-Doménech, N., Jiménez-Bemúdez, 

S., Matas, A. J., Rose, J. K. C., Muñoz-
Blanco, J., & Mercado, J. A., et al. (2008). 
Antisense inhibition of a pectate lyase gene 
supports a role for pectin depolymerization 
in strawberry fruit softening. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 59, 2769–2779.

Sato, T., & Theologis, A. (1989). Cloning the 

mRNA encoding 1-aminocyclopropane- 
1-carboxylate synthase, the key enzyme for 

Fruit development and ripening: a molecular perspective

C H A P T E R   2 6

ethylene biosynthesis in plants. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 86, 6621–6625.

Schäfer, E., & Bowler, C. (2002). Phytochrome-

mediated photoperception and signal 
transduction in higher plants. EMBO 
Reports, 3, 1042–1048.

Schaller, G. E., Kieber, J. J., & Shiu, S. H. 

(2008). Two-component signaling elements 
and histidyl-aspartyl phosphorelays. The 
Arabidopsis book. Rockville, MD: American 
Society of Plant Biologists. (Online: 
http://www.aspb.org/publications/
arabidopsis/)

Schroeder, D. F., Gahrtz, M., Maxwell, B. B., 
Cook, R. K., Kan, J. M., & Alonso, J. M., 
et al. (2002). De-etiolated 1 and damaged 
DNA binding protein 1 interact to regulate 
Arabidopsis photomorphogenesis. Current 
Biology, 12, 1462–1472.

Schuch, W., Kanczler, J, Robertson, D., 

Hobson, G., Tucker, G., & Grierson, D., 
et al. (1991). Fruit quality characteristics 
of transgenic tomato fruit with altered 
polygalacturonase activity. HortScience, 26, 
1517–1520.

Seymour, G., Poole, M., Manning, K., & King, 

G. J (2008). Genetics and epigenetics of 
fruit development and ripening. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 11, 58–63.

Seymour, G. B., Manning, K., Eriksson, E. 

M., Popovich, A. H., & King, G. J. (2002). 
Genetic identification and genomic 
organization of factors affecting fruit 
texture. Journal of Experimental Botany, 53, 
2065–2071.

Smartt, J., & Simmonds, N. W. (1995). 

Evolution of crop plants (2nd ed.). (531 pp.) 
Essex, UK: Longman Scientific & Technical. 

Smith, D. L., Abbott, J. A., & Gross, K. 

C. (2002). Down-regulation of tomato 
ß-galactosidase 4 results in decreased fruit 
softening. Plant Physiology, 129, 1755–1762.

Smith, D. L., & Gross, K. C. (2000). A family 

of a least seven β-galactosidase genes is 
expressed during tomato fruit development. 
Plant Physiology, 123, 1173–1183.

Solano, R., Stepanova, A., Chao, Q., & Ecker, 

J. R. (1998). Nuclear events in ethylene 
signaling: A transcriptional cascade mediated 
by ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 and 
ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1. Genes 
and Development, 12, 3703–3714.

Soressi, G. P. (1975). New spontaneous or 

chemically-induced fruit ripening tomato 
mutants. Report of the Tomato Genetics 
Cooperative, 25, 21–22.

Spjut, R. W. (1994). A systematic treatment 

of fruit types. Memoirs of the New York 
Botanical Garden, 70, 1–182.

Srivastava, A., Gupta, A. K., Datsenka, 

T., Mattoo, A. K., & Handa, A. K. 
(2010). Maturity and ripening-stage 
specific modulation of tomato (Solanum 
lycopersicum) fruit transcriptome. GM 
Crops, 1, 1–13.

Srivastava, A., & Handa, A. K. (2005). 

Hormonal regulation of fruit development: 
A molecular perspective. Journal of Plant 
Growth Regulation, 24, 67–82.

Stuppy, W., & Kesseler, R. (2008). Fruit. Edible, 

inedible, incredible. (pp. 264) London: 
Papadakis. 

Sung, S. K., Moon, Y. H., Chung, J. E., Lee, 

S. Y., Park, H. G., & An, G. (2001). 
Characterization of MADS box genes from 
hot pepper. Molecules Cells, 11, 352–359.

Tadiello, A., Pavanello, A., Zanin, D., Caporali, 

E., Colombo, L., & Rotino, G. L., et al. 
(2009). A PLENA-like gene of peach is 
involved in carpel formation and subsequent 
transformation into a fleshy fruit. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 60, 651–661.

Tang, D., Christiansen, K. M., & Innes, R. 
W. (2005). Regulation of plant disease 
resistance, stress responses, cell death, and 
ethylene signaling in Arabidopsis by the 
EDR1 protein kinase. Plant Physiology, 138, 
1018–1026.

Tanksley, S. D. (2004). The genetic, 

developmental, and molecular bases of fruit 
size and shape variation in tomato. Plant 
Cell, 16, S181–S189.

Thakur, B. R., Singh, R. K., & Handa, A. K. 

(1996). Effects of an antisense pectin 
methylesterase gene on the chemistry of 
pectins in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) 
fruit juice. Journal of the Science of Food and 
Agriculture, 44, 628–630.

Thakur, B. R., Singh, R. K., & Handa, A. K. 

(1997). Chemistry and uses of pectin—A 
review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and 
Nutrition, 37, 47–73.

Thakur, B. R., Singh, R. K., Tieman, D. M., & 
Handa, A. K. (1996). Quality of processed 
tomato products from transgenic tomato 
fruits with reduced levels of pectin 
methylesterase activity. Journal of Food 
Science, 61, 245–248.

Thompson, A., Barry, C., Jarvis, M., Vrebalov, 

J., Giovannoni, J., & Grierson, D., 
et al. (1999). Molecular and genetic 
characterization of a novel pleiotropic 
tomato-ripening mutant. Plant Physiology, 
120, 383–389.

Tieman, D. M., Ciardi, J. A., Taylor, M. G., 

& Klee, H. J. (2001). Members of the 
tomato LeEIL (EIN3-like) gene family are 
functionally redundant and regulate ethylene 
responses throughout plant development. 
Plant Journal, 26, 47–58.

Tieman, D. M., & Handa, A. K. (1994). 

Reduction in pectin methylesterase activity 
modifies tissue integrity and cation levels in 
ripening tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum 
Mill.) fruits. Plant Physiology, 106, 429–436.
Tieman, D. M., Harriman, R. W., Ramamohan, 

G., & Handa, A. K. (1992). An antisense 
pectin methylesterase gene alters pectin 
chemistry and soluble solids in tomato fruit. 
Plant Cell, 4, 667–679.

Tieman, D. M., Taylor, M. G., Ciardi, J. A., & 

Klee, H. J. (2000). The tomato ethylene 
receptors NR and LeETR4 are negative 
regulators of ethylene response and exhibit 
functional compensation within a multigene 
family. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 
97, 5663–5668.

Tigchelaar, E. C., McGlasson, W. B., & 

Buescher, R. W. (1978). Genetic regulation 
of tomato fruit ripening. HortScience, 13, 
508–513.

Trusov, Y., & Botella, J. R. (2006). Delayed 
flowering in pineapples (Ananas comosus 
(L.) Merr.) caused by co-suppression of the 

AcACS2 gene. Acta Horticulturae, 702, 
29–36.

van der Knaap, E., Lippman, Z. B., & Tanksley, 
S. D. (2002). Extremely elongated tomato 
fruit controlled by four quantitative trait loci 
with epistatic interactions. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 104, 241–247.

van der Knaap, E., & Tanksley, S. D. (2003). 

The making of a bell pepper-shaped tomato 
fruit: Identification of loci controlling fruit 
morphology in Yellow Stuffer tomato. 
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 107, 
139–147.

Vicente, A. R., Saladié, M., Rose, J. K. C., 
& Labavitch, J. M. (2007). The linkage 
between cell wall metabolism and fruit 
softening: Looking to the future. Journal 
of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 87, 
1435–1448.

Vrebalov, J., Pan, I., Matas Arroyo, A. J., 

McQuinn, R., Chung, M., & Poole, M., 
et al. (2009). Fleshy fruit expansion and 
ripening are regulated by the tomato 
SHATTERPROOF gene TAGL1. Plant Cell, 
21, 3041–3062.

Vrebalov, J., Ruezinsky, D., Padmanabhan, V., 

White, R., Medrano, D., & Drake, R.,  
et al. (2002). A MADS-box gene necessary 
for fruit ripening at the tomato ripening-
inhibitor (rin) locus. Science, 296, 343–346.

Wang, A., Li, J., Zhang, B., Xu, X., & Bewley, 

J. D. (2009). Expression and location of 
endo-β-mannanase during the ripening of 
tomato fruit, and the relationship between 
its activity and softening. Journal of Plant 
Physiology, 166, 1672–1684.

Wang, H., Nussbaum-Wagler, T., Li, B., Zhao, 

Q., Vigouroux, Y., & Faller, M., et al. (2005). 
The origin of the naked grains of maize. 
Nature, 436, 714–719.

Wang, S., Chang, Y., Guo, J., & Chen, J. G. 

(2007). Arabidopsis Ovate Family Protein 1 
is a transcriptional repressor that suppresses 
cell elongation. Plant Journal, 50, 858–872.

Wang, W., Hall, A., O’Malley, R., & Bleecker, A. 
B. (2003). Canonical histidine kinase activity 
of the transmitter domain of the ETR1 
ethylene receptor from Arabidopsis is not 
required for signal transmission. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 100, 352–357.
Watson, C. F., Zheng, L. S., & DellaPenna, 

D. (1994). Reduction of tomato 
polygalacturonase beta-subunit expression 
affects pectin solubilization and degradation 
during fuit ripening. Plant Cell, 6, 
1623–1634.

Weigel, D., & Meyerowitz, E. M. (1994). The 

ABCs of floral homeotic genes. Cell, 78, 
203–209.

White, P. J. (2002). Recent advances in fruit 
development and ripening: An overview. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 53, 
1995–2000.

Whitelaw, C. A., Lyssenko, N. N., Chen, L., 
Zhou, D., Mattoo, A. K., & Tucker, M. L. 
(2002). Delayed abscission and shorter 
internodes correlate with a reduction in 
the ethylene receptor LeETR1 transcript in 
transgenic tomato. Plant Physiology, 128, 
978–987.

Wilkinson, J. Q., Lanahan, M., Yen, H., 

Giovannoni, J., & Klee, H. (1995). An 

423

treatments. Postharvest Biology and 
Technology, 56, 131–137.

Zhong, S. L., Lin, Z. F., & Grierson, D. (2008). 
Tomato ethylene receptor-CTR interactions, 
visualization of NEVER-RIPE interactions 
with multiple CTRs at the endoplasmic 
reticulum. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
59, 965–972.

Zhou, D., Kalaitzis, P., Mattoo, A. K., & Tucker, 

M. L. (1996). The mRNA for an ETR1 
homologue in tomato is constitutively 
expressed in vegetative and reproductive 
tissues. Plant Molecular Biology, 30, 
1331–1338.

Zhu, H., Zhu, B., Shao, Y., Wang, X., Lin, 

X., & Xie, Y., et al. (2006). Tomato fruit 
development and ripening are altered by 
the silencing of LeEIN2 gene. Journal of 
Integrative Plant Biology, 48, 1478–1485.
Zygier, S., Chaim, A. B., Efrati, A., Kaluzky, 

G., Borovsky, Y., & Paran, I. (2005). 
QTLs mapping for fruit size and shape 
in chromosomes 2 and 4 in pepper and a 
comparison of the pepper QTL map with 
that of tomato. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 111, 437–445.

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 
1306–1311.

Yao, J. -L., Dong, Y. H., Kvarnheden, A., & 

Morris, B. A. M. (1999). Seven MADS-box 
genes in apple are expressed in different 
parts of the fruit. Journal of the American 
Society for Horticultural Science, 124, 8–13.
Yokotani, N., Nakano, R., Imanishi, S., Nagata, 
M., Inaba, A., & Kubo, Y. (2009). Ripening-
associated ethylene biosynthesis in tomato 
fruit is autocatalytically and developmentally 
regulated. Journal of Experimental Botany, 
60, 3433–3442.

Yoo, S. -D., Cho, Y., & Sheen, J. (2009). 
Emerging connections in the ethylene 
signalling network. Trends in Plant Science, 
14, 270–279.

Zhang, S. G., Jiang, Z. R., Xing, Y. P., & Li, C. 

L. (2008). Genetic analysis of fruit traits 
based on a double haploid population from 
a hybrid of pepper (Capsicum annuum L.). 
Acta Horticulturae Sinica, 35, 515–520.
Zhang, Z., Huber, D. J., & Rao, J. (2010). 

Short-term hypoxic hypobaria transiently 
decreases internal ethylene levels and 
increases sensitivity of tomato fruit 
to subsequent 1-methylcyclopropene 

ethylene-inducible component of signal 
transduction encoded by Never-ripe. Science, 
270, 1807–1809.

Xiao, H., Jiang, N., Schaffner, E., Stockinger, 

E. J., & van der Knaap, E. (2008). A 
retrotransposon-mediated gene duplication 
underlies morphological variation of tomato 
fruit. Science, 319, 1527–1530.

Xiao, H., Radovich, C., Welty, N., Hsu, J., Li, 
D., & Meulia, T., et al. (2009). Integration 
of tomato reproductive developmental 
landmarks and expression profiles, and the 
effect of SUN on fruit shape. BMC Plant 
Biology, 9, 49.

Xiong, A. S., Yao, Q. H., Peng, R. H., Li, X., 
Han, P. L., & Fan, H. Q. (2005). Different 
effects on ACC oxidase gene silencing 
triggered by RNA interference in transgenic 
tomato. Plant Cell Reports, 23, 639–646.
Yamamoto, T., Shimada, T., Imai, T., Yaegaki, 
H., Haji, T., & Matsuta, N., et al. (2001). 
Characterization of morphological traits 
based on a genetic linkage map of peach. 
Breeding Science, 51, 271–278.

Yao, J., Dong, Y., & Morris, B. (2001). 

Parthenocarpic apple fruit production 
conferred by transposon insertion mutations 
in a MADSbox transcription factor. 

424

Containing and mitigating transgene flow 
from crops to weeds, to wild species, and 
to crops

32

Jonathan Gressel
Plant Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction: Does Transgene Flow Matter?  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 509
Transgene flow: To what ecosystem?  . . . . . . . . . . . . .510
Thresholds matter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .511
Gene containment and/or mitigation  
is often necessary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .511
Methods of Containment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 511

Containment by targeting genes  
to a cytoplasmic genome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .512
Male sterility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .512
Rendering crops asexual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .513
Genetic use restriction technologies: 
Alias “terminators” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .513
Chemically induced promoters for containment . . . . .513
Recoverable block of function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .514
Repressible seed-lethal technologies  . . . . . . . . . . . . .514
Trans-splicing to prevent movement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .514
A genetic chaperon to prevent  
promiscuous transgene flow from  
wheat to its wild and weedy relatives  . . . . . . . . . . . . .515
Transiently transgenic crops  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .515
Mitigating Transgene Flow  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 516
Demonstration of transgenic mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . .516
Will transgenic mitigation traits adversely  
affect wild relatives of the crop? 
Models that suggest that mitigation  
is deleterious  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .517

Traits that can be Used in  
Tandem Transgenic Mitigation Constructs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 518
Morphological traits and genes for mitigation . . . . . . .518
Chemical mitigation of transgene flow . . . . . . . . . . . . .519
Special cases where transgenic  
mitigation is needed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .520
Concluding Remarks  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 521

Introduction: Does Transgene Flow 
Matter?

Genes have been moving among species for time immemorial, 
most  often  between  closely  related  species  where  there  are 
few  genetic  barriers  (vertical  gene  flow).  More  rarely,  genes 
flow between genera within a family where barriers exist and 
the  vast  majority  of  the  rare  offspring  are  sterile,  but  a  few 
produce  pollen  and  a  gene  can  eventually  establish  (diagonal 
gene flow). Far rarer, especially in eukaryotic organisms, genes 
can move from one unrelated species to another, often asexu-
ally carried by a vector such as a virus or a plasmid (horizontal 
gene flow). In eukaryotic organisms horizontal gene flow is so 
rare that it is considered to occur more in evolutionary than 
in human time. The genetic barriers to all types of gene flow 
seem  to  be  lower  when  an  organism  is  under  stress,  result-
ing  in  promiscuous  intergeneric  crosses.  This  issue  has  been 
ignored in most discussions of gene flow.

Because  gene  flow  is  a  matter  of  nature,  there  are  some 
that state that we should no more worry about transgene flow 
than  we  worry  about  normal  gene  flow.  This  cavalier  argu-
ment  ignores  the  fact  that  some  transgenes  confer  traits  that 
are not found in the related species and could not have easily 
arrived there had there not been a transgene. Thus, one must 
ask more specific questions: What trait does the transgene con-
fer? Will the trait confer an advantage on the recipient? If the 
trait  confers  a  disadvantage,  are  there  enough  other  normal 
offspring that the gene movement will have an inconsequential 
effect? In the case of crop-to-crop transgene flow, we can ask 
whether the disadvantage conferred is economic; for example, 
is the transgenic trait a pharmaceutical trait that would render 
a recipient crop unfit to enter the food chain? Indeed, can the 
transgene even get to a potential recipient; distance may make 
the heart grow fonder, but it is an impediment to procreation. 
There is much literature on the distances transgenic pollen can 
flow,  usually  using  male  sterile  recipients  at  various  distances 
in  fields  where  there  is  no  wild-type  of  the  crop.  The  longer 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00032-8

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

roadsides. The misuse of the word “wild” for such transgenic 
populations implies that they are in natural ecosystems, con-
ferring  a  problem  on  conservationists.  Such  populations  do 
present  a  problem,  but  it  is  not  to  the  protectors  of  natural 
ecosystems; it is to farmers and road authorities, despite the 
headlines implying consequences to natural biodiversity.

It  is  thus  necessary  to  carefully  distinguish  between  a  crop 
and  its  weedy  relative,  and  a  crop  and  its  wild  relative.  The 
ecosystems  in  which  each  resides  are  different  (Figure  32.1; 
Warwick  and  Stewart,  2005).  The  weeds  are  evolutionar-
ily  adapted  to  live  in  agroecosystems  and  ruderal  ecosystems 
where humans cultivate or otherwise “disturb” the ecosystems. 
Wild  species  live  in  pristine  natural  ecosystems  largely  unim-
pacted  by  humans.  The  vast  majority  of  wild  species  cannot 
cope with the conditions of cultivated fields (agroecosystems), 
cultivated field margins, or roadsides (ruderal ecosystems), and 
weeds  cannot  compete  with  wild  species  in  the  wild.  Weeds, 
crops, and wild species each have a syndrome of traits that dif-
ferentiate between them. Wild species obviously were the pro-
genitors of crops, as well as weeds, in the distant past. A recent 
example is a Amaranthus rudis (A. tuberculatus), which literally 
emerged from the swamp and became a major weed, presum-
ably by crossing with a weedy Amaranthus species and changing 
its wild syndrome toward weediness (Trucco et al., 2009).

Why  is  it  so  important  to  distinguish  between  crop,  wild, 
and weedy ecosystems and their inhabitants? The movement 
of  a  given  transgenic  trait  will  have  different  implications 
depending on the recipient. A transgene for an oral vaccine or 
an industrial feedstock moving into another variety of a crop 
will clearly be undesirable, but would have little consequence 
in a wild relative. If it were to move into a related weed, the 
question would arise as to whether the weed could be a reser-
voir from which the trait could cross back into other varieties 
of the related crop. A transgene conferring resistance to a dis-
ease or a pest might be good for a wild species if the related 
species  is  not  already  resistant  to  it.  If  the  insect  or  disease 
exerted  a  frequent,  strong  pressure  on  the  wild  or  weedy 
relative, the selective advantage conferred by the trait might 
affect  ecological  balances,  but  if  the  infestation  is  only  spo-
radic, the advantage may hardly affect such balances. Should 
a  transgene  for  herbicide  resistance  move  to  a  wild  relative, 
it would be of no advantage, as herbicides are not used in the 
wild,  but  it  would  be  very  beneficial  to  weeds,  thus  making 
weed control far more problematic.

It  is  not  surprising  that  most  cases  of  reported  gene  flow 
are of movement of herbicide resistance for two reasons: most 
of  the  transgenic  crops  are  those  with  herbicide  resistance 
transgenes,  and  herbicide  resistance  is  the  easiest  to  find  in 
the field due to treatment of fields and ruderal areas with her-
bicides, decimating all but the resistant individuals.

Much of our information on the dire implications of herbi-
cide  resistance  movement  from  crop  to  weed  does  not  come 
from a transgenic crop; it derives from a mutant acetolactate 
synthase gene used in rice to confer resistance to imidazolinone 
herbicides (Clearfield™ rice), and more recently in transgenic 
glufosinate-resistant  rice  (Song  et  al.,  2011).  Its  release  was 
much heralded as the herbicides excellently controlled weeds, 
and  especially  the  previously  intractable  weedy  rice  (often 
called red or feral rice). As it is the same species as rice it is 

Figure 32.1 l The present relationship between related crops, 
weeds, and wild species l  The thickness of arrows denotes the 
average relative likelihood of gene flow between them — there can 
be differences depending on biology and geography. When crops 
were domesticated by the sparse human population living in the wild 
thousands of years ago, the arrows would have been at near equal 
width. Based on concepts developed in Warwick and Stewart (2005) 
and this author’s interpretation.

pollen flies, whether by wind or by insect, the weaker it gets. 
When it has to compete with indigenous healthy pollen, it is 
at a disadvantage, but when it is the only compatible pollen it 
has a much greater likelihood of success. There is thus a strong 
dependence on where the potential recipient may reside.

Transgene flow: To what ecosystem?

There  is  considerable  confusion  in  the  literature  about  gene 
flow due to the use of exceedingly loose terminology, and arti-
cles  abound  about  transgene  flow  from  crops  to  “wild”  spe-
cies, when actually the gene flow was to weeds (Figure 32.1). 
This  is  good  for  obtaining  headlines  in  the  popular  press 
and  publishing  in  prestigious  journals  and  books  (Ellstrand, 
2003; Hooftman et al., 2008). A close perusal of the articles 
revealed  that  natural  ecosystems  have  rarely  been  affected 
(a rare case is with oilseed rape and other Brassica species in 
Europe; Allainguillaume et al., 2009), as the gene flow was to 
agricultural or ruderal weeds (Hooftman et al., 2008; Zapiola 
et  al.,  2008).  Many  transgenic  ruderal  populations  found  are 
most often due to seeds falling from conveyances bringing the 
crop to market, or from port to processor (von der Lippe and 
Kowarik, 2007). Some populations are first-generation “volun-
teers”; more rarely do they persist and cross with indigenous 
weeds  or  establish  themselves  as  feral  (partially  de-domesti-
cated) weeds. There are consequences from such occurrences, 
as  feral  populations  can  become  weedier  by  selection  or  by 
hybridization  with  related  weeds,  and  they  do  have  a  selec-
tive advantage, as herbicides are often used to control ruderal 
weeds where they live on the field borders and roadsides. The 
feral  transgenic  glyphosate-  and  glufosinate-resistant  oilseed 
rape  populations  (some  containing  both  transgenes  due  to 
hybridization)  have  extreme  advantages  when  those  her-
bicides  are  used,  and  can  later  move  back  into  the  fields  as 
weeds that can reintroduce the transgenes into other varieties 
of  the  crop.  These  volunteer  cum  feral  ruderal  weeds  are  at 
a  loss,  and  are  lost  when  2,4-D  or  atrazine  are  used  on  the 

510

Containing and mitigating transgene flow from crops to weeds, to wild species, and to crops

C H A P T E R   3 2

naturally  resistant  and  susceptible  to  the  same  herbicides  as 
rice,  meaning  that  there  could  be  no  selective  control  before 
this mutant resistance was used. Weedy rice had been partially 
controlled by hand-transplanting rice from nurseries, a proce-
dure being supplanted by direct seeding. The ability to control 
the  weedy  rice  was  quickly  lost  as  the  resistance  gene  intro-
gressed by crossing and backcrossing into the weedy rice, ren-
dering  the  technology  useless  (Gressel  and  Valverde,  2009b). 
This  demonstrates  the  need  for  mechanisms  to  prevent  gene 
flow  from  crops  to  their  related  weeds.  In  such  cases,  the 
planting  distances  that  prevent  crop-to-crop  gene  movement 
are not applicable; the weed lives within and next to the crop. 
Many other crops have feral, conspecific weeds living in their 
midst,  including  sorghum,  sunflowers,  sugar  beets,  carrots, 
and  radish,  allowing  similar  “vertical”  gene  flow.  Other  crops 
have closely related weeds partially sharing a genome (wheat, 
oilseed rape, sorghum) or similar enough genomes to cross and 
have  some  partially  fertile  offspring  to  allow  “diagonal”  gene 
flow. Other crops only have wild or weedy relatives near their 
centers  of  origin  (e.g.,  maize,  potatoes).  In  the  case  of  soy-
beans,  it  is  questioned  whether  there  are  any  remaining  wild 
populations at the center of origin in China, or only weedy soy-
bean in agroecosystems that seem quite crop-like (Lu, 2005).

Because  crop–wild  gene  flow  seem  to  be  inconsequential, 
and  there  are  some  (but  hardly  all)  transgenic  crops  where 
crop–crop and crop–weed gene flow is an issue, the focus of this 
chapter  will  deal  only  with  these  consequential  issues.  It  will 
do so not by decrying the issues, but by constructively dealing 
with methods to inherently prevent such crop–crop and crop–
weed gene flow from happening (transgene containment), or if 
it eventually happens, to prevent the transgene from establish-
ing and spreading within the population (transgene mitigation).

Thresholds matter

There is a desire by some that there should be a zero thresh-
old  for  transgenic  material  in  non-transgenic  material.  Such 
proponents expose their political inclinations by using termi-
nology  last  used  by  the  Third  Reich.  They  demand  “genetic 
purity,”  eschewing  “genetic  contamination,”  and  so  forth. 
It  is  the  task  of  toxicologists  together  with  regulators  to  set 
the  threshold  levels  of  allowable  admixtures,  and  they  usu-
ally do so at order(s) of magnitude above known danger lev-
els.  Thus,  most  milk  is  pasteurized  with  some  live  bacteria 
remaining  and  not  sterilized.  Wheat  ground  into  bread  flour 
has (surprisingly high) thresholds for weed seeds, dirt, rodent 
hairs,  stones,  and  fecal  material.  We  live  with  such  thresh-
olds. Analytical methods such as PCR easily detect transgenic 
DNA  from  infinitesimal  amounts  of  admixture  to  wild-type, 
for example, DNA from a speck of maize leaf from a neigh-
boring  field  in  a  container  of  soybeans.  Is  this  dangerous?  It 
seems  to  be  considered  as  such,  as  immense  resources  have 
been expended in training and setting up laboratories world-
wide to make such DNA determinations, while little effort is 
made to assay for carcinogenic mycotoxins at above regulatory 

thresholds  in  the  same  commodities.  Are  all  those  who  sup-
port this ultrasensitive DNA testing for transgenes performing 
a service to humanity?

Gene containment and/or mitigation is 
often necessary

From  the  previous  section  it  is  obvious  that  that  there  are 
many cases where gene flow is of little consequence, yet there 
are  some  cases  where  it  is  undesirable.  Clearly  any  technol-
ogy  used  to  physically,  genetically,  or  transgenically  contain 
or mitigate transgene flow cannot be 100% perfect. Logically 
there  should  be  toxicologically  and  scientifically  determined 
thresholds,  not  those  determined  by  the  sensitivity  of  PCR. 
If  the  reader  is  looking  for  absolute  zero  levels  of  transgene 
introgression, there is no reason to read on.

The  goal  of  gene  containment  is  to  keep  the  transgene  of 
choice  within  the  crop  and  thus  prevent  it  from  introgress-
ing into related weeds, crop varieties, and wild species. It will 
soon be apparent that all containers “leak”; the transgene will 
eventually get out, and a second level of protection is needed 
to prevent the transgene from establishing and then spreading. 
The transgene will spread if it has a selective advantage, and 
the  task  of  mitigation  is  to  suppressively  maintain  the  trans-
gene  at  frequencies  beneath  the  regulatory  thresholds  where 
they do not belong.

Dealing with transgene flow is the sole subject of a recent 
book by Oliver and Li (2011), as well as an excellent review 
by Warwick et al. (2009), which is referred to those wanting 
more in-depth coverage of the topic.
Methods of Containment1

It  has  often  been  suggested  that  choosing  the  traits  that 
genetically  exist  within  a  crop  can  be  used  to  prevent  gene 
flow,  such  as  choosing  varieties  with  a  flowering  time  that 
does  not  overlap  with  that  of  the  related  weed/wild  spe-
cies. Unfortunately there are usually tails of one and leading 
edges  of  the  timing  of  the  other  that  overlap.  Besides,  that 
may limit when a crop may be cultivated. Before experiments 
were  performed,  it  was  suggested  that  gene  flow  would  not 
be an issue in rice, as it is a cleistogamous species; the anthers 
incestuously pollinate the pistil before the flower even opens. 
When  good  marker  genes  appeared  it  became  apparent  that 
a  few  percent  of  the  seeds  derived  from  cross-pollination. 
Besides,  breeders  have  been  selecting  for  non-cleistogamous 
rice strains for use to breed hybrid rice varieties. Cleistogamy 
has also been proposed for oilseed rape, but at best it is only 
able  to  “significantly  reduce  pollen  mediated  gene  flow” 
(Gruber and Hüsken, 2011), which is hardly enough.

Several  transgenic  molecular  mechanisms  that  have  been 
suggested  for  containing  genes  and  especially  transgenes 
within the crop (i.e., to prevent inflow from and/or outflow to 
related species) are described in the following section. As will 
be presented, each has its benefits and limitations.

1 The text in the following sections of this chapter is condensed and updated from Sections 4.8–4.9 of Chapter 4, “Biosafety Considerations with Further 
Domesticated Crops” in Genetic Glass Ceiling: Transgenics for Crop Biodiversity (Gressel, 2008) with permission of the publisher.

511

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

Containment by targeting genes to a 
cytoplasmic genome

The most widely discussed containment possibility is to inte-
grate  the  transgene  of  choice  in  the  plastid  or  mitochondrial 
genomes  (Maliga,  2004).  The  opportunity  for  gene  outflow 
is  limited  due  to  the  predominantly  maternal  inheritance  of 
these  genomes  in  many,  but  far  from  all,  species.  This  pres-
ently  arduous  technology  of  transforming  genes  into  chlo-
roplasts,  which  so  far  is  limited  to  a  few  crops,  does  not 
preclude  the  wild  or  weedy  relative  from  pollinating  the 
crop, giving rise to the same F1 hybrid that would have been 
obtained  if  the  crop  had  been  pollinated  by  the  weedy/wild 
species. Instead it bears the plastomic or mitochondrial trait. 
Then, if the wild or weedy species acts as the recurrent pollen 
parent, the plastid or mitochondrial trait can be fixed by back-
crossing  the  wild/weedy  relative.  Even  though  the  hybrids 
into  the  crop  and  into  the  wild-type  may  be  the  same,  the 
likelihood of a crop–wild hybrid of any of the major crops dis-
cussed  surviving  in  the  wild  is  minimal  but  finite,  especially 
over  long  periods.  Thus,  problems  ensue  when  the  crop  and 
its relative inhabit the same ecosystem in close proximity.

The  claim  of  strict  maternal  inheritance  of  plastome-
encoded  traits  in  many  species  (Daniell,  2002;  Maliga, 
2004;  Ruf  et  al.,  2007)  has  not  been  substantiated,  and  has 
even  later  been  repudiated  by  some  of  its  initial  proponents 
(Maliga, 2004; Svab and Maliga, 2007). Experiments initially 
performed by proponents to demonstrate that the frequency 
is  below  a  low  number  were  not  large  enough,  for  example, 
less  than  the  frequency  of  typical  mutations.  Tobacco  (Avni 
and  Edelman,  1991)  and  other  species  (Darmency,  1994) 
have  between  a  one  in  one  thousand  and  one  in  ten  thou-
sand frequency of pollen transfer of plastid inherited traits in 
the laboratory. Tobacco seems to be the species of choice for 
chloroplast  production  of  pharmaceuticals  (e.g.,  Lentz  et  al., 
2010), so this rate of gene flow would be far too high.

Pollen transmission of plastome-encoded traits can best be 
detected using large samples, together with nuclear as well as 
plastomic selectable genetic markers. Such a large-scale field 
experiment  was  set  out  using  a  Setaria  italica  (foxtail  mil-
let)  with  chloroplast-inherited  atrazine  resistance,  with  the 
resistant plants also bearing a nuclear dominant red leaf-base 
marker (Wang et al., 2004). These were allowed to naturally 
cross in the field with male sterile herbicide susceptible lines, 
and  the  results  of  cross-pollination  were  easy  to  distinguish 
due  to  the  nuclear  markers.  Chloroplast-inherited  resistance 
was pollen-transmitted at a frequency of 3 in 10,000 hybrids 
among  the  78,000  offspring  (Wang  et  al.,  2004).  More 
recently  it  was  shown  that  chloroplasts  from  oilseed  rape  
(B. napus) easily integrate into and establish in weedy B. rapa 
without the oilseed rape nuclear chromosomes (Haider et al., 
2009).

The  probability  of  transgene  movement  via  plastomic 
gene flow is orders of magnitude greater than by spontaneous 
dominant nuclear genome mutations. This renders chloroplast 
transformation unacceptable for preventing transgene outflow 
to related weeds, unless stacked with additional mechanisms. 
The  technology  may  be  sufficient  to  preclude  substantial 

transgene flow to neighboring varieties of the same crop, espe-
cially when coupled with standard separation distances.

There is a possibility of selectively turning on plastid trans-
genes, discussed in a later section, which will greatly enhance 
the biosafety of plastomic transgenes; a gene that is not being 
expressed cannot be making a product dangerous.

Male sterility

Male sterility has been tested as a specific mechanism to con-
tain  gene  outflow  in  various  crops;  the  transgene  of  choice 
is  transformed  into  the  male  sterile  (female)  inbred  to  form 
a  hybrid,  and  is  much  discussed  as  a  containment  method 
(Moon  et  al.,  2010).  A  great  deal  of  male  sterility  is  cyto-
plasmic  and  inherited  on  the  chondriome  (mitochondrial 
genome).  This  will  be  difficult  to  perform  as  chondriome 
engineering  is  yet  unknown.  The  ability  of  cytoplasmic  male 
sterility  to  preclude  sorghum  transgene  flow  through  pol-
len  (using  non-transgenic  pollinators)  to  decrease  the  risk  of 
viable pollen flow was tested under field conditions and four 
male fertile individuals from a population of a thousand con-
tained the marker (Pedersen et al., 2003). This severe restric-
tion of gene flow through pollen would be helpful, but a trait 
that increases fitness of related weeds would establish, albeit 
slowly, because male sterility slows gene flow, but transgenes 
would  quickly  spread  once  they  appeared  in  sexually  cross-
ing material. Such male sterility only prevents the outflow of 
genes. The male sterile variety could be pollinated by a related 
weed, and the same F1 forms as would have with pollen flow.

A simple fail-safe mechanism may be possible with nuclear 
sterility in hybrid crops. If a dominant transgene of choice is 
placed in the male sterile line in close linkage with the male 
sterility  gene,  there  will  be  little  possibility  of  introgression 
into  wild  or  weedy  relatives  in  crop-production  areas.  Care 
will have to be taken in the seed production areas when the 
male sterile line is restored. Such areas must be kept free of 
related  weeds,  a  typical  precaution  in  seed  production  that 
was generally practiced well before the advent of transgenics.

Instead  of  using  indigenous  genes,  if  one  is  engineering 
male  sterility  into  the  crop  by  one  of  the  newer  technolo-
gies for nuclear male sterility (Williams, 1995), chromosome 
position-specific  transformation  using  sequence  homology  is 
chosen.  This  has  recently  been  done  in  eggplant,  and  could 
prevent  pollination  of  non-transgenic  eggplant  varieties  (Cao 
et al., 2010).

Utilizing  male  sterility  stacked  with  transplastomic  traits 
considerably lowers the risk of plastome gene outflow within a 
field (but not gene influx from related strains or species). This 
would vastly reduce the risk of transgene flow, except in the 
small isolated areas required for line maintenance, and might 
be  considered  sufficient  where  there  are  highly  stringent 
requirements  for  preventing  gene  outflow  to  other  varieties 
(e.g.,  to  organically  cultivated  ones)  or  where  pharmaceuti-
cal or industrial traits are engineered into a species. Plastome-
encoded  transgenes  for  non-selectable  traits  (e.g.,  for 
pharmaceutical  production)  have  been  transformed  into  the 
chloroplasts together with a trait such as tentoxin or atrazine 
resistance as a selectable plastome marker (Darmency, 1994). 

512

Containing and mitigating transgene flow from crops to weeds, to wild species, and to crops

C H A P T E R   3 2

When they are coupled with the recently reported transplas-
tomic  engineered  male  sterility  (Ruiz  and  Daniell,  2005)  to 
further reduce out-crossing risk, plastome transformation can 
possibly  meet  the  initial  expectations.  This  stacked  technol-
ogy will still not overcome having a wild or weedy species as 
a recurrent pollen parent with selection for the plastid traits, 
and this is a risk that must be further evaluated.

Many  other  aspects  of  engineering  sterility  have  been 
recently reviewed at length (Liu and Singer, 2011), especially 
RNA silencing technologies that have been used for purposes 
other than engineering sterility for prevention of gene flow.

Rendering crops asexual

Some  vegetatively  propagated  crops  such  as  potato  and  elite 
tissue  culture  propagated  forestry  material  also  flower.  In 
forestry,  this  is  especially  problematic,  as  the  long-term 
implications of gene movement may take longer than human 
lifetimes  to  measure.  The  introgression  of  traits  from  these 
species  to  wild  populations  has  been  discussed  (Gressel, 
2002).  Some  landscaping  trees  such  as  decorative  plant-
ings  of  olives  create  an  urban  problem  of  allergies  from  pol-
len  (Chapter  23  in  Gressel,  2008).  Such  ornamental  trees 
could be vegetatively propagated if there was a way to prevent 
allergy-causing  pollen  clouds  and  messy  fruits.  There  is  also 
the  possibility  that  preventing  allocation  of  resources  to  sex 
will increase the growth of the vegetative tissue, which could 
be advantageous in many ornamentals and in forestry, that is, 
whereever  vegetative  propagation  is  possible.  Thus,  a  trans-
genic mitigation (TM) trait that prevents pollen formation or 
fruit set could be coupled to herbicide resistance or other pri-
mary traits. An ideal gene for doing this is barnase under the 
T29  tapetum-specific  promoter  (Mariani  et  al.,  1990). 
The  ribonuclease  is  only  produced  in  the  tapetum  tissue  in 
the  flower  and  prevents  pollen  formation  with  no  other  ill 
effects.  There  is  a  good  chance  that  the  shelf  life  of  many 
flower species (e.g., roses and carnations) could be enhanced 
as well by preventing pollen production; fertilization starts the 
process of floral degeneration and fruit set.

A flower-specific promoter from poplar coupled to a cyto-
toxin  gene  caused  flower  ablation  (Skinner  et  al.,  2003), 
requiring vegetative propagation of the trees. Another way to 
achieve total sterility is to transform barnase under a gamete- 
specific  promoter  that  kills  both  male  and  female  gametes 
(Kobayashi  et  al.,  2006).  If  one  has  an  important  crop  in 
which  transgenics  are  exceedingly  worthwhile,  yet  the  risks 
of gene flow are too great, one could envisage using a pollen 
sterility system coupled with flower drop, as described earlier. 
The crop could then be propagated by artificial seed, such as 
artificially encased somatic embryos produced in mechanized 
tissue culture systems.

Had  the  glyphosate  herbicide-resistant  creeping  bentgrass 
(Agrostis  stolonifera)  that  spread  100 km  by  wind  from  one 
site in Oregon (Zapiola et al., 2008) been rendered male ster-
ile,  or  totally  sterile  by  these  techniques,  and  cultivated  by 
stolons (as is often done), then the problem would not have 
occurred. The public would have benefited by not having hay 
fever from its allergenic pollen.

Genetic use restriction technologies: Alias 
“terminators”

Other  molecular  approaches  suggested  for  crop  transgene 
containment include seed sterility utilizing genetic use restric-
tion  technologies  (GURT),  or  the  “terminator  genes,”  as 
they are referred to in the popular press (Oliver et al., 1998; 
2004;  Crouch,  1998;  Oliver  and  Hake,  2011).  In  these  pro-
posed  systems,  the  transgenes  of  choice  are  inserted  behind 
an  inducible  promoter  that  causes  the  inactivation  or  physi-
cal excision of the genes of choice in the flowers. The inducer 
was to be turned on in the seed stage, for example, before sale 
to  the  farmer.  The  plants  would  grow  normally  after  induc-
tion,  expressing  the  transgene  throughout  vegetative  growth, 
but neither the seed nor the pollen carry the transgenic trait 
to further generations. In the excision version of GURT tech-
nologies,  the  pollen  and  seed  are  viable  (in  contrast  to  press 
reports),  but  they  do  not  carry  the  proprietary  or  patented 
transgene.  It  does  not  prevent  farmers  from  saving  seed  (as 
intimated in the press), but the saved seed does not bear the 
transgenic trait. The GURT systems were originally developed 
to  protect  intellectual  property,  not  to  prevent  gene  flow. 
There  has  not  been  enough  documented  experimentation 
with these systems to know whether the transgenes would be 
excised from all offspring after induction, that is, whether the 
induction  is  incomplete.  This  is  immaterial  for  the  first  pro-
posed use of the technology, which requires purchase of seed 
every  generation;  for  this  purpose  90%  effectiveness  is  suffi-
cient.  Near  100%  efficiency  is  required  to  prevent  transgene 
flow, and the leakage rate is currently unknown. Theoretically, 
if  the  inducible  controlling  (“terminating”)  element  of  the 
transgene  is  silenced  by  mutation,  then  expression  would 
occur, which is a potential defect in principle and possibly in 
practice.  The  frequency  of  loss  of  such  controlling  elements 
is yet unclear, as there have been no large-scale field trials to 
test this.

About 0.5% of the crop area sown is planted with seed for 
future planting, that is, seed that is not “terminator” induced. 
This area would have to be contained by other means to pre-
vent transgene flow, and if the transgenes do escape, there is 
no way to “terminate” them once out.

Chemically induced promoters for 
containment

If  a  transgene  encoding  the  desired  trait  is  placed  behind  a 
strong  chemically  induced  promoter,  the  desired  trait  will  be 
expressed when the chemical inducer is used. Such a promoter 
system was patented for use with a glyphosate-resistant  EPSP 
synthase  gene  (Jepson  et  al.,  1998).  The  chemical  inducer 
can  be  treated  together  with  glyphosate,  as  glyphosate  kills 
slowly,  and  inducers  supply  products  within  hours.  The  her-
bicide  can  be  used  the  following  season  without  the  inducer 
as  a  treatment  just  before  planting  the  rotational  crop,  or 
in  a  naturally  resistant  crop  to  control  the  transgenic  volun-
teer weed. If the crop introgressed the gene into a weed, the 
weed could be controlled by the herbicide (without inducer).  

513

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

If  the  herbicide-resistant  gene  was  to  introgress  into  a  wild 
species that does not inhabit agroecosystems where herbicides 
are  not  used,  it  would  be  of  little  value  and  would  probably 
have  enough  of  a  fitness  penalty  not  to  establish.  Similarly, 
other  transgenes  of  choice  would  have  no  benefit  (selective 
advantage)  to  wild  or  weedy  relatives  if  the  inducible  pro-
moter does not turn on the transgenes.

A system that turns on transgenes such as this may be prefer-
able to one that turns them off, such as GURT. Theoretically, if 
the GURT gene is silenced, there is a possibility for introgression. 
If the inducer gene is silenced, then those individuals possessing 
the mutant are killed and the germline is non-transferable. Still, 
there is the remote possibility of an inducible promoter mutating 
to become a constitutive promoter.

There is no inexpensive foolproof inducible promoter sys-
tem  presently  available  for  plants.  The  copper  and  alcohol 
inducible  promoters  that  have  been  developed  do  not  work 
in  the  field,  there  is  enough  copper  in  most  soils  to  trip  the 
former,  and  environmental  conditions  are  often  sufficient  to 
cause enough alcohol to be naturally present in a crop to trig-
ger the latter (Zuo and Chua, 2000). There is also an estro-
gen inducible promoter that can be used (Curtis et al., 2005), 
but  the  inducer  is  expensive  and  is  a  hormone.  The  auxins 
of the plant hormones can also be used with a new inducible 
promoter  (Cazzonelli  et  al.,  2005),  but  the  auxins  may  have 
side effects on the plants. Antibiotic inducible promoters are 
known,  but  widespread  use  of  antibiotics  in  the  field  would 
not be allowed. For certain resistance traits, it might be advis-
able to use pathogen- (Zhu et al., 2004) or wound-inducible 
(Breitler  et  al.,  2004)  promoters,  but  these  will  not  be  fail-
safe  mechanisms,  as  the  same  disease  or  insect  that  induces 
the gene in the crop will do so in the related species.

A synthetic modification of a bacterial riboswitch activated 
by theophylline is an effective tightly regulated promoter that 
can be used to turn on plastid-targeted transgenes (Verhounig 
et  al.,  2010).  Much  remains  to  be  elucidated  about  the  sys-
tem. What plant secondary metabolites other than theophyl-
line  will  activate  the  riboswitch?  One  would  not  want  to 
discover  that  a  stressed  plant  turns  on  secondary  metabolite 
biosynthesis, which in turn activates the riboswitch. Still, it is 
an interesting concept.

Recoverable block of function

Various technologies have been developed using the barnase/
barstar gene system. Barnase encodes a potent ribonuclease, 
which  when  expressed,  kills  a  cell  because  it  chews  up  the 
whole  protein  manufacturing  system.  The  action  of  barnase 
is held in check by barstar, a strong repressor gene that pre-
vents  barnase  action.  It  is  only  when  barstar  is  not  present 
that  barnase  can  exert  its  lethal  effect.  In  the  recoverable 
block of function strategy to prevent transgene flow, barnase 
is inserted in a large synthetic intron inserted in the midst of 
the gene of choice in such a way that transcription of the two 
genes is in opposite directions (Kuvshinov et al., 2001, 2004). 
Both genes are thus genetically linked, in what the developers 
refer  to  as  a  “blocking  construct”;  when  one  is  inherited,  so 
is the other. This is in the same manner as proposed for TM 

(see the section Mitigating Transgene Flow) and is a derivative 
of  this  technology.  To  prevent  this  lethality,  they  propose  a 
“recovering construct” containing barstar, but under an induc-
ible  promoter.  They  demonstrate  the  efficacy  of  this  with  a 
heat shock promoter. Both constructs are inserted (randomly) 
on  different  chromosomes.  In  crosses  with  a  wild/weedy 
species,  or  another  variety,  all  F1  progeny  of  the  parents  of 
homozygous progeny will live if barstar is induced, all will die 
if not. Heat shock promoters are unlikely to be efficacious in 
most  agroecosystems,  as  there  are  enough  hot  days  in  most 
areas to trigger the promoter. They also developed the same 
system  using  a  tetracycline  antibiotic  inducible  promoter  for 
barstar (Kuvshinov et al., 2004).

If  the  crop  is  a  heterozygous  hybrid  containing  barnase 
and  barstar,  then  half  of  the  progeny  will  die  and  half  will 
have uninduced barstar. This would not be an effective fail-
safe  if  it  were  not  for  the  inducibility  of  barstar.  The  trans-
gene  cannot  be  expressed  in  the  progeny  containing  barnase 
and  barstar  without  the  promoter  action.  The  recoverable 
block  of  function  system  seems  like  a  complicated  way  to 
use an inducible promoter, especially when a simple one has 
already  been  proposed  (see  the  section  Chemically  Induced 
Promoters for Containment).

Repressible seed-lethal technologies

An  impractical  technology  has  been  proposed  to  use  a 
“repressible  seed-lethal  system”  (Schernthaner  et  al.,  2003). 
The seed-lethal trait and its repressor must be simultaneously 
inserted  at  the  same  locus  on  homologous  chromosomes  in 
the hybrid the farmer sows to prevent recombination (cross-
ing  over).  Such  site-specific  transformation  technologies  are 
not  yet  workable  in  plants.  The  hemizygote  transgenic  seed-
lethal  parent  of  the  hybrid  cannot  reproduce  by  itself,  as  its 
seeds  are  not  viable.  If  the  hybrid  could  be  made,  then  half 
the progeny would not carry the seed-lethal trait (or the trait 
of  interest  linked  to  it)  and  they  would  have  to  be  culled, 
which would not be easy without a marker gene. A contain-
ment  technology  should  leave  no  viable  volunteers  with  the 
transgene,  but  this  complex  technology  would  kill  only  a 
quarter of the hybrid progeny, half would be like the hybrid 
parents, and a quarter would contain just the repressor. Thus, 
the repressor can cross from the volunteers to related weeds 
as can the trait of choice linked with the lethal trait, and via-
ble  hybrid  weeds  could  form.  The  death  of  a  quarter  of  the 
seeds in all future weed generations is inconsequential to most 
weedy and wild species that copiously produce seed, as long 
as the transgenic trait provides some selective advantage.

Trans-splicing to prevent movement

A  system  has  been  proposed  and  partly  demonstrated  (Sun 
et  al.,  2001)  that  was  designed  for  the  generation  of  trans-
genic  hybrids,  where  only  part  of  the  segregating  F2  genera-
tion would bear the transgenic trait. Enzyme splicing in trans 
was demonstrated using the DnaE intein, which reconstituted 
to a functional DnaE protein. The gene for herbicide-resistant 
ALSII was fused in frame to DnaE intein segments capable of 

514

Containing and mitigating transgene flow from crops to weeds, to wild species, and to crops

C H A P T E R   3 2

promoting protein splicing in trans and was expressed as two 
unlinked fragments. Co-transformation with the two plasmids 
led  to  production  of  a  functional  enzyme  by  protein  splic-
ing  in  trans,  which  then  conferred  herbicide  resistance  (Sun 
et al., 2001). If each plasmid integrates into a different chro-
mosome, introgressing into a readily crossing weed will render 
25% of the weeds resistant, which is hardly a fail-safe. If one 
of the genes is on a nuclear chromosome and the other in the 
plastome, the rate of introgression will be half that of a whole 
gene being on the plastome. The rate of introgression will be 
near zero if one half of the genes are on the plastome and the 
other half on the chondriome, but chondriome engineering is 
still closer to science fiction than reality.

A genetic chaperon to prevent 
promiscuous transgene flow from wheat to 
its wild and weedy relatives

Some Aegilops species are closely related to wheat and inter-
breed  with  it,  especially  at  the  center  of  origin.  Some  spe-
cies  such  as  Aegilops  cylindrica  have  spread  with  wheat  and 
have become uncontrollable weeds in wheat. There is ample 
evidence  that  inserting  transgenes  into  allopolyploid  crop 
chromosomes  that  are  homoeologous  (similar  to  but  not 
homologous) to related weed/wild species does not preclude 
transfer  (Weissmann  et  al.,  2005).  Still,  wheat  needs  trans-
genes  for  herbicide  resistance  to  control  resistant  weeds, 
newly  evolved  diseases,  and  quality  traits.  Thus  a  specific 
method  was  conceived  for  wheat,  based  on  the  presence  of 
a specific gene in wheat, and the possibility of gene insertion 
in  specific  chromosomal  locations  (Weissmann  et  al.,  2008). 
Wheat bears the gene Ph1 that specifically prevents the pro-
miscuous  pairing  of  homoeologous  chromosomes,  prevent-
ing recombination within the three genomes of wheat (in the 
absence  of  homologous  chromosomes)  and  with  related  spe-
cies  (Sears,  1976).  Reduction  in  homoeologous  pairing  may 
also be due to the rapid elimination of many sequences from 
homoeologous  chromosomes  of  progenitor  species  after  allo-
polyploidization (Ozkan and Feldman, 2001), which increases 
the differences between the homoeologous chromosomes.

Using  targeted  introgression  (also  called,  confusingly  to 
geneticists, homologous recombination; Puchta, 2002; Shaked 
et  al.,  2005),  it  should  be  possible  to  insert  the  transgenes 
of  choice  in  close  proximity  to  Ph1  on  chromosome  5BL 
(Weissmann et al., 2008). Thus, the transgene of choice will 
remain  genetically  linked  with  the  ever-watchful  Ph1,  and 
will segregate with it in the hybrid and backcrosses, thus not 
introgressing  into  the  chromosomes  of  wild/weedy  relatives 
(Weissmann et al., 2008). During backcrosses with the wild/
weedy species, the excess wheat chromosomes are selectively 
eliminated due to lagging during anaphase. Chromosome 5BL 
with  the  Ph1  gene  and  the  linked  transgene  will  be  retained 
in  a  small  proportion  of  offspring  only  as  long  as  the  trans-
gene  confers  a  selective  advantage,  for  example,  when  the 
transgene  is  for  disease  or  herbicide  resistance  and  the  par-
ticular  disease  or  herbicide  is  present  (Shaked  et  al.,  2005). 
In  seasons  where  other  herbicides  are  used  or  the  disease  is 
not  active,  the  selective  disadvantage  will  eliminate  5BL  and 

its  linked  transgene.  Such  a  solution,  especially  if  coupled 
with  other  solutions,  such  as  mitigating  genes  (see  the  sec-
tion  Mitigating  Transgene  Flow),  could  considerably  lower 
the risk of gene flow between wheat and its relatives. Ph1 was 
recently  localized  to  a  2.5 megabase  region  of  chromosome 
5BL  containing  a  structure  consisting  of  a  segment  of  subte-
lomeric heterochromatin that inserted into a cluster of cdc2-
related genes — genes that affect chromosome condensation 
(Griffiths et al., 2006). The correlation of the presence of this 
structure  with  Ph1  activity  makes  the  structure  a  candidate 
for  the  Ph1 locus  (Griffiths  et  al.,  2006).  When  Ph1  is  fully 
isolated and described, it might be possible to use it directly 
as a mitigator gene, no longer necessitating targeted insertion, 
randomly inserting it linked to the gene of choice.

An alternative way to curtail the movement of a transgene 
from  wheat  into  wild  relatives  is  by  inserting  the  transgene 
in tandem with a suicide gene on any chromosome arm other 
than  5BL,  and  inserting  a  gene  encoding  a  suppressor  of  the 
suicide gene product on chromosome arm 5BL adjacent to Ph1 
(Weissmann  et  al.,  2008).  The  linkage  between  the  suicide-
suppressor  gene  and  Ph1  on  5BL  will  prevent  the  transfer  of 
the  suppressor  to  a  wild  chromosome  and,  consequently,  the 
establishment  of  this  gene  in  the  wild  population.  The  sui-
cide  gene  can  encode  any  heterologous  protein  that  is  toxic 
to  plants  possessing  it  (Weissmann  et  al.,  2008).  Barnase  is 
such  a  gene  (see  section  Male  Sterility),  and  another  suicide 
gene encodes a ribosome-inhibitor protein (RIP) that destroys 
ribosomes (Jach et al., 1995). The suicide-suppressor gene can 
be  any  gene  that  encodes  a  heterologous  protein  that  inacti-
vates either the suicide gene or the toxic protein encoded by 
the  suicide  gene,  such  as  a  barstar.  Any  backcross  progeny 
having  the  tandem  transgene-suicide  gene,  but  without  the 
suppressor of the suicide gene, will die. Chromosome arm 5BL 
will  be  eliminated  during  the  continuous  backcrossing  to  the 
wild  parent  because  it  cannot  recombine  with  homoeologous 
material, due to the presence of Ph1 (Weissmann et al., 2008).
This  concept  might  be  less  efficient  at  preventing  gene 
flow if the recipient wild/weedy species contains a gene that 
suppresses  the  Ph1  gene.  There  is  evidence  that  several  dip-
loid relatives of wheat — Ae. speltoides, Amplyopyrum muti-
cum  (Riley  et  al.,  1966),  and  several  diploid  and  tetraploid 
Agropyron  species  —  have  such  a  suppressor  (Chen  et  al., 
1993).  Thus,  this  might  necessitate  ascertaining  that  trans-
genic  wheat  will  not  transfer  genes  to  the  indigenous  wild/
weedy  diploid  relatives  in  each  locality  where  transgenic 
wheat is to be cultivated to ascertain the value of this chaper-
oning system. Clearly either mechanism using the Ph1 chap-
eron can be effective in preventing gene flow from wheat to 
Ae.  cylindrica  in  North  America  where  it  stably  introgresses 
genes from wheat (Weissmann et al., 2008).

Transiently transgenic crops

Various pathogens that are not transmissible via meiosis have 
been  tested  as  single-generation  vectors  of  transgenes  such 
that  the  transgenes  cannot  spread  sexually.  Endophytic  fungi 
and bacteria that normally grow inside plant tissues have been 
used to carry useful genes into plants (e.g., Bt genes) causing 

515

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

a  yield  reduction,  probably  due  to  an  overload  of  the  endo-
phytes. One could also introduce the transgene of choice into 
a disarmed (non-disease producing) strain of a pathogen such 
as  Clavibacter  that  also  dwarfs  the  infected  crop  (Carlson 
et al., 1992).

Systemic RNA viruses that are not carried through meiosis 
into  reproductive  cells  have  also  been  used  as  single-genera-
tion  vectors  of  transgenes.  Arabidopsis  plants  infected  with 
Tobacco Etch virus (Whitham et al., 1999) and cucurbits arti-
ficially  infected  with  an  attenuated  Zucchini  Yellow  Mosaic 
potyvirus  (Shiboleth  et  al.,  2001)  each  carry  the  bar  gene 
that renders the plants resistant to the herbicide glufosinate. 
The  attenuated  Zucchini  Yellow  Mosaic  potyvirus  was  also 
used to produce an antitumor protein (Arazi et al., 2002). A 
wheat streak mosaic virus carrying an NTPII antibiotic resist-
ance gene was used to infect various grain leaves (Choi et al., 
2000), but the plants were antibiotic resistant. The virus car-
rying  the  genes  was  expressed  in  wheat  roots  following  leaf 
infection, although not in all tissues (Choi et al., 2000). The 
technology  has  been  used  to  simultaneously  introduce  three 
chimeric genes into a tobacco, using potyvirus Potato virus A 
(Kelloniemi et al., 2008).

Hopefully,  such  infection  procedures  could  be  used  to 
introduce  useful  genes  into  crop  seeds,  perhaps  using  pres-
sure infiltration systems (Marillonet et al., 2005). An alterna-
tive  to  seed  inoculation  is  to  infect  standing  forage  crops  by 
modified  commercial  sandblasting  equipment  (Chapter  8  in 
Gressel,  2008).  So  far  this  has  been  performed  in  the  field 
with gold particles instead of sand (Sikorskaite et al., 2010). 
Considerable  technological  obstacles  to  efficient  infection 
will have to be worked out. There are safety issues about the 
mode of disarming the virus that must be considered. There 
must  be  a  total  lack  of  gene  introgression  from  the  virus  to 
the plant chromosome, and near total non-transmission of the 
virus  through  ovules  or  pollen.  Still,  there  are  many  crops, 
especially  those  with  related,  introgressing  weeds  (e.g.,  sor-
ghum,  barley,  rice,  sunflowers),  where  such  a  technology 
could be very worthwhile in safely solving problems without 
the fear of gene flow.

Mitigating Transgene Flow

All  of  the  above  containment  mechanisms  that  can  be  sexu-
ally propagated are leaky, and once gene  transfer occurs, the 
new  bearer  of  the  transgene  could  disperse  throughout  the 
population if the transgene confers just a small fitness advan-
tage. Thus it is necessary to also utilize technologies that will 
prevent the establishment and/or spread of transgenes in the 
population, such as mitigation strategies.

When  a  transgene  confers  even  a  small  fitness  disadvan-
tage, the progeny should only be able to exist as a very small 
proportion of the population. Therefore, it should be possible 
to  mitigate  progeny  establishment  by  lowering  the  fitness  of 
transgene recipients below the fitness of competitors so that 
the  reproduction  of  volunteer  or  hybrid  offspring  will  be 
severely  inhibited.  The  concept  of  TM  was  proposed  where 
mitigation  genes  are  linked  or  fused  to  the  desired  primary 
transgene (Gressel, 1999).

This  TM  approach  is  based  on  the  premises  that:  (1) 
tandem  constructs  act  as  tightly  linked  genes,  and  their 
segregation from each other is exceedingly rare; (2) the gain-
of-function dominant or semi-dominant TM traits chosen are 
neutral  or  favorable  to  crops,  but  deleterious  to  volunteer 
weed  progeny  and  their  hybrids  due  to  a  negative  selection 
pressure; and (3) individuals bearing even mildly harmful TM 
traits will be kept at very low frequencies in volunteer/hybrid 
populations. The strong competition with their own wild-type 
or with other species should mostly eliminate even marginally 
unfit individuals and prevent them from persisting in the field 
at anything above a very low frequency (Gressel, 1999).

Thus, it was predicted that the primary gene of agronomic 
advantage  engineered  into  a  crop  will  not  persist  in  future 
generations if it is flanked by one or more TM gene(s), such as 
genes encoding dwarfing, strong apical dominance to prevent 
tillering (in grains) or multi-heading (in crops such as sunflow-
ers),  determinate  growth,  non-bolting  (premature  flowering) 
genes,  uniform  seed  ripening,  non-shattering,  anti-secondary 
dormancy, and so forth. When such a TM gene or genes is in 
a tandem construct with the transgene of choice, the overall 
effect  would  be  deleterious  to  the  volunteer  progeny  and  to 
hybrids.  Indeed,  a  TM  gene  such  as  anti-seed  shattering  will 
lower the number of initial volunteers (Gressel, 1999, 2002).

Many but not all of the mitigation traits described next are 
specifically  useful  for  mitigating  against  transgene  establish-
ment in wild or weedy relatives of a crop, and may not always 
be  useful  in  preventing  establishment  of  transgenes  in  other 
varieties of the crop. Still, a mechanism for specifically miti-
gating  against  transgenes  encoding  pharmaceuticals  in  maize 
from surviving as volunteers or establishing in other varieties 
is  described,  as  are  mitigation  methods  of  controlling  volun-
teer transgenic rice in other rice varieties.

Demonstration of transgenic mitigation

Tobacco  and  oilseed  rape  were  used  as  model  crops  to  test 
the TM concept: a tandem construct was made containing an 
ahasR (acetohydroxy acid synthase) gene for herbicide resist-
ance as the primary desirable gene of choice, and the dwarfing 
Δgai (gibberellic-acid-insensitive) mutant gene as a TM miti-
gator (Al-Ahmad et al., 2004). Dwarfing would be disadvan-
tageous to the rare weeds introgressing the TM construct, as 
they could no longer compete with other crops or with fellow 
weeds,  but  it  is  desirable  in  many  crops,  preventing  lodging 
and producing more grain yield at the expense of stem tissue. 
The  dwarf-  and  herbicide-resistant  TM  heterozygous  hybrid 
plants  were  more  productive  than  the  wild-type  when  culti-
vated  alone  (without  herbicide).  They  formed  many  more 
flowers  and  seeds  than  the  wild-type  when  cultivated  by 
themselves, which is an indication of a higher harvest index. 
Conversely,  the  TM  transgenic  hybrids  were  weak  competi-
tors and highly unfit when co-cultivated with the wild-type in 
experiments  simulating  ecological  competition.  The  inability 
to  achieve  flowering  on  the  transgenically  mitigated  tobacco 
plants in the competitive situation resulted in zero reproduc-
tive fitness of the transgenically mitigated plants grown in an 
equal mixture (Al-Ahmad et al., 2004), or at different ratios 

516

Containing and mitigating transgene flow from crops to weeds, to wild species, and to crops

C H A P T E R   3 2

(Al-Ahmad  et  al.,  2005)  in  a  replacement  series  with  the 
wild-type  at  a  spacing  representative  of  weed  spacing  in  the 
field.  The  TM  oilseed  rape  could  neither  compete  well  with 
its wild-type (Al-Ahmad et al., 2006) nor could hybrids with 
a  related  weed  compete  with  either  parent  (Al-Ahmad  and 
Gressel, 2006) in greenhouse experiments. Similarly, in a field 
experiment  where  the  TM  oilseed  rape  hybrids  competed 
with wild-type in a wheat field, establishment was well miti-
gated,  which  was  not  the  case  when  the  desirable  transgene 
was not in tandem with a mitigating gene (Rose et al., 2009).

From the previous data it is clear that TM should be advan-
tageous to a crop growing alone and disastrous to a crop–weed 
hybrid  living  in  a  competitive  environment.  If  a  rare  pollen 
grain  bearing  tandem  transgenic  traits  bypasses  containment, 
it must compete with multitudes of wild-type pollen to pro-
duce a hybrid. Its rare progeny must then compete with fit-
ter  wild-type  cohorts  during  self-thinning  when  hundreds  of 
plants are thinned to a single plant that establishes, replacing 
a parent. Even a small degree of unfitness encoded in the TM 
construct would bring about the elimination of the vast major-
ity of progeny in all future generations, as long as the primary 
gene provides no selective advantage that counterbalances the 
unfitness  of  the  linked  TM  gene.  The  rare  hybrid  offspring 
from escaped pollen bearing transgenic mitigator genes would 
not pose a dire threat, especially to wild species outside fields, 
as  the  amount  of  pollen  reaching  the  pristine  wild  environ-
ment would only be a minuscule fraction of the pollen from 
the wild-type.

In cases where the greatest biosafety is required, it is prob-
ably  wisest  to  flank  the  gene  of  choice  with  two  mitigator 
genes, such as dwarfing and non-shattering, so that seeds from 
the  few  surviving  dwarf  plants  are  harvested  and  discarded. 
The  use  of  two  flanking  mitigator  genes  will  mathemati-
cally  compound  (the  yet  unknown)  infrequency  of  mutation 
to  loss-of-function  of  TM.  Large-scale  field  studies  will  be 
needed with crop/weed pairs to continue to evaluate the posi-
tive implications of TM to risk mitigation.

Will transgenic mitigation traits adversely 
affect wild relatives of the crop? Models 
that suggest that mitigation is deleterious

One  model  claims  that  “demographic  swamping”  by  crop 
transgenes  would  cause  “migrational  meltdown”  of  wild  spe-
cies  related  to  the  crop,  especially  if  the  introgressed  genes 
confer  unfitness  (Haygood  et  al.,  2003).  Untested  modi-
fications  of  the  untested  model  arrive  at  similar  conclusions 
(Meirmans  et  al.,  2009).  This  proposition  that  recurrent 
gene flow from crops, even unfit gene flow, could affect wild 
relatives  deserves  some  discussion,  as  it  flies  in  the  face  of 
Darwinian concepts of survival of the fittest (Gressel, 2005a). 
If the model was correct, it would reduce the utility of TM.

Data  with  conventional  crops  already  belie  the  possibility 
that  recurrent  gene  flow  from  transgenic  crops  with  less  fit 
genes  will  cause  wild  populations  to  shrink.  Major  domesti-
cated crops are not fit to compete in wild ecosystems, so their 
normal  genes  confer  a  modicum  of  unfitness.  Crop    wild 
hybrids  continually  form  at  a  low  frequency,  yet  there  is  no 

published evidence that demographic swamping has occurred 
from recurrent gene flow from conventional crops to wild spe-
cies  in  natural  ecosystems,  or  to  suggest  concrete  situations 
where  the  model  may  apply.  No  data  or  examples  are  sup-
plied to support their model simulations. Indeed, considerable 
evidence  has  appeared  that  many  crops  exist  near  their  wild 
or  weedy  progenitors,  without  causing  the  extinction  of  the 
progenitors,  despite  continuous  gene  flow  of  crop  genes  that 
are unfit naturally in the wild (Gressel, 2005b). As an exam-
ple, some grass biotypes have lived for 2000 years on Roman 
mine  tailings  in  Wales,  evolving  heavy  metal  resistance,  and 
are unfit compared to the wild-type on normal soil. Their pol-
len has continuously blown to their sensitive cohorts centim-
eters away without the modeled swamping (Bradshaw, 1982). 
Maize  and  teosinte  grow  in  close  proximity,  and  F1  hybrids 
form,  but  the  teosinte  has  not  been  “swamped”  by  mas-
sive maize cultivation in close proximity (Doebley, 1992), as 
would be predicted by such models. At worst, hybrid swarms 
often appear at the boundary between crop and wild species, 
but they remain contained.

Three  problematic  issues  seem  to  invalidate  such  models 
for  the  vast  majority  of  conceivable  crop/wild  species  sys-
tems, and they are discussed in the following list:

1. To get the level of swamping discussed (Gressel, 2005a; 

Meirmans et al., 2009), the wild relative and the crop 
would have to live in the same ecosystem, which by 
definition is not the case. Pollen flow from crops decreases 
exponentially with distance, usually to a low asymptote 
due to wind currents or insects, not fully obeying 
simple physics. There would be far more wild pollen 
produced in the wild ecosystems than pollen inflow 
from agroecosystems, so hybridization events in the wild 
from crop pollen will be rare. Indeed, even assuming an 
enormous 10% hybridization with the wild each generation 
from crop pollen, according to their model it will take 
about 20 generations of recurrent pollination for the unfit 
crop allele to become fixed in half the population, and 50 
generations to asymptotically reach 80% of the population. 
This model is also contradicted by data from a replacement 
series with a transgenic crop bearing an unfitness gene 
competitively intermingled with the wild-type (Al-Ahmad 
et al., 2005). When nine times more unfit individuals 
swamped fit individuals, the result was much less than 90% 
unfit progeny (Al-Ahmad et al., 2005).

2. The models assume that the crop and the theoretical 

wild species growing in its midst will have synchronous 
flowering, no self-fertilization, and no genetic or other 
barriers to cross-fertilization negating the concept of 
speciation. It is exceedingly rare for crop pollen to fertilize 
another species such as a wild relative without any genetic 
barriers. No cases were discussed where this might happen. 
Even conspecific wild sunflowers have genomic deterrents 
to introgression (reviewed in Stewart et al., 2003). Weedy 
sunflowers, growing in or near domestic sunflowers, have 
often introgressed advantageous crop genes and have not 
been wiped out by unfit crop genes. Truly wild sunflowers 
growing on a native prairie are far less affected by crops 
than weedy sunflowers.

517

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

3. The model (Haygood et al., 2003) assumes animal-type 
replacement rates where just a few progeny per mating 
is typical, allowing lower fitness to indeed become fixed. 
Most wild relatives of crops produce copious amounts of 
seed to replace parents. Self-thinning, except by sperm 
during fertilization, is far less an important factor in 
animals than plants due to the low progeny number. Most 
animals are “perennial” perpetuating unfitness for several 
breeding cycles. Most wild relatives of crops produce a 
single generation in their adult life.
The  conclusion  that  “the  most  striking  implication  of  this 
model is the possibility of thresholds and hysteresis, such that 
a  small  increase  in  (unfit  gene)  immigration  can  lead  to  fixa-
tion of a disfavored crop allele.…” (Haygood et al., 2003) con-
tradicts classic and contemporary field data showing that only 
near-neutral  genes  exist  in  pockets  of  the  evolutionary  land-
scape  of  plants.  Blatantly  unfit  plant  genes  only  exist  at  fre-
quencies below the mutation frequency to the unfitness trait.
Such  models  seem  invalid  in  referring  to  transgene  estab-
lishment  in  the  wild,  but  may  have  some  validity  for  a  few 
weeds (not wild species) related to crops in agroecosystems or 
ruderal ecosystems. When flowering weeds are at a low den-
sity in an agricultural ecosystem (and perhaps close by in rud-
eral systems) the model might be predictive, but would it be 
bad for a weed to go extinct? Weeds are (inadvertently) man-
made domesticated species (Warwick et al., 2005). Shouldn’t 
people  also  have  the  right  to  eliminate  them?  The  nature  of 
weeds  is  such  that  they  do  not  become  extinct,  as  much  as 
the farmer would desire. It is far more likely that such evolu-
tionarily threatened weeds would evolve exclusionary mecha-
nisms  that  would  block  evolutionarily  threatening  gene  flow. 
For  example,  they  could  evolve  a  shift  from  out-crossing  to 
predominant  self-fertilization  that  would  protect  them  from 
crop pollen bearing unfit genes.

Traits that can be Used in Tandem 
Transgenic Mitigation Constructs

Mitigation  can  be  achieved  by  suppressing  weedy  traits  in 
hybrids or by rendering the hybrids hypersensitive to chemicals.

Morphological traits and genes for 
mitigation

Not all TM traits have known sequenced genes that are imme-
diately  available  for  insertion  in  tandem  constructs,  but  it 
is  assumed  that  many  of  the  needed  TM  genes  will  soon  be 
found due to the spate of whole genome sequencing and reli-
able annotation.

Secondary dormancy
Unfortunately,  Arabidopsis,  the  typical  source  of  genes, 
has  already  been  sufficiently  domesticated  so  that  it  is 
unlike  related  weeds;  the  laboratory  strains  no  longer  have 
strong  secondary  dormancy  (van  der  Schaar  et  al.,  1997).  A 
mutant that is insensitive to abscisic acid and lacks secondary 

dormancy  was  found  in  a  wild,  undomesticated  Arabidopsis 
strain (Steber et al., 1998). Such a gene might be useful.

Seed shattering
Physiologically, one way to avoid premature seed shattering is 
to have uniform ripening. Early maturing seeds of oilseed rape 
on  indeterminate,  continuously  flowering  varieties  typically 
shatter. Determinacy, with its single uniform flush of flower-
ing, is one method to prevent shattering, but this often short-
ens  the  season  and  reduces  yield.  The  hormonology  of  the 
abscission zone controls whether shattering will occur, and it 
is possible that if cytokinins are overproduced then shattering 
will  be  delayed.  The  cytokinin  pathway  is  well  documented 
and there are genes that could be put in constructs for cytoki-
nin overproduction (Kusaba et al., 1998).

Various  genes  have  been  isolated  from  Arabidopsis  that 
prevent seed shatter by delaying valve opening on the silique 
(Liljegren  et  al.,  2000,  2004).  Some  of  these  genes  may  be 
useful for closely related oilseed rape, and one was tested in 
a  related  mustard  (Ostergaard  et  al.,  2006).  None  of  these 
genes  may  necessarily  be  appropriate  for  grass  crops  where 
the stem breaking mode of shattering is quite different from 
Arabidopsis  silique  or  legume  pod  opening.  Grasses  have 
multiple pathways for seed shattering, even in the same spe-
cies (Li and Gill, 2006). As shattering is typically dominant, 
and  the  non-shattering  of  domesticated  species  is  recessive, 
our  ancestors  had  to  select  for  a  number  of  recessive  traits 
to obtain what we now cultivate. In wheat, Aegilops complex 
shattering can be due to (Feldman, 2001):
l  Spike disarticulation (breakage): Rachis is brittle at the 
base, and the whole spike shatters as a unit. This occurs 
only in Aegilops species at present.

l  Barrel type spikelet disarticulation in some wheat strains: 

Shattering occurs at the lower side of the junction between 
the rachis and the spikelet base.

l  Wedge-shaped spikelet disarticulation: The rachis breaks at 

the upper side of the attachment with the spikelet base.
The  first  cultivated  wheats  were  selected  for  non-shatter-
ing  at  these  loci.  When  wheat  de-domesticated  and  became 
feral, as it had in Tibet (Sun et al., 1998), different accessions 
had different shattering types.

Rice  has  a  cloned  shattering  gene  qSH-1  (Konishi 
et al., 2005), which has a high degree of homology with bar-
ley  gene  JuBel2  that  does  not  seem  to  control  shattering  on 
that species (Li et al., 2006). Maize shattering genes are not 
orthologous to any of these (Li et al., 2006). Because multi-
ple genetic pathways seem to control shattering, it is unlikely 
that  there  will  be  a  “one  gene  fits  all”  single  anti-shattering 
mitigation  gene  for  all  grain  crops.  Antisense  or  RNAi-based 
anti-shattering  mitigators  should  be  based  on  the  shattering 
mechanism in the related weed, not the crop.

Dwarfing
Many  of  the  genes  controlling  dwarfism  seem  to  have  an 
unknown  function.  Still  many  other  genes  are  known  that 
control height.

518

Containing and mitigating transgene flow from crops to weeds, to wild species, and to crops

C H A P T E R   3 2

Preventing the biosyntheses of gibberellins reduces height, 
which  is  the  basis  of  many  chemical  dwarfing  agents  used 
commercially  on  wheat.  The  three  enzymes  and  genes  con-
trolling  steps  in  gibberellin  biosyntheses  have  been  cloned 
(Helliwell  et  al.,  1998;  Lange,  1998;  Yamaguchi,  2008). 
Additionally,  a  defective  GA  receptor  gene  confers  gibberel-
lin  insensitivity  when  transformed  into  crops  (ΔGAI)  by 
competing with the native receptor, inducing dwarfing (Peng 
et  al.,  1999).  Interestingly,  despite  dwarfing  oilseed  rape  at 
the  early  rosette  stage,  plants  transformed  with  the  ΔGAI 
gene do have flowers on long stalks (Al-Ahmad et al., 2006). 
This  is  despite  a  requirement  for  gibberellin  activity  to  bolt. 
Presumably  either  less  ΔGAI  is  produced  in  the  stalk,  or 
more native receptor or a different gibberellin receptor is pro-
duced  when  it  is  time  to  flower.  Gibberellins  GA1  and  GA4 
are  specifically  responsible  for  flower  stalk  bolting  in  radish 
(Nishijima et al., 1998). This might suggest that oilseed rape 
has different receptors in the stalk controlling bolting. Known 
and cloned genes coding for the monooxygenases and dioxyge-
nases are responsible for these later steps of GA biosynthesis 
(Kusaba et al., 1998).

Another  anti-bolting  gene  has  recently  been  reported  in 
Chinese  cabbage,  BrpFLC,  which  encodes  a  MADS-domain 
transcription  factor  (Li  et  al.,  2005).  Its  level  was  higher  in 
varieties that required longer vernalization, suggesting that its 
transgenic modulation could be utilized to prevent premature 
bolting in climatic conditions where this is a problem. It is yet 
unclear which genes this transcription factor controls.

Brassinosteroids  also  control  stem  elongation  in  many 
plant species, and their absence results in dwarf plants. A 22 
d-hydroxylase cytochrome P450 controls a series of these steps 
in brassinosteroid biosynthesis, and plants lacking the enzyme 
are  dwarfed  (Azpiroz  et  al.,  1998).  Plants  are  also  dwarfed 
when they produce normal levels of these growth regulators but 
are mutated in the bri1 gene coding for the receptor (Noguchi 
et  al.,  1999).  Additionally,  suppressive  over-expression  of  a 
sterol  C24-methyl  transferase  in  the  pathway  also  causes 
dwarfing (Schaller et al., 1998).

Shade avoidance
Shade  avoidance  is  controlled  by  various  forms  of  the  pig-
ment  phytochrome  that  interact  and  detect  whether  a  plant 
is  being  shaded  (Devlin  et  al.,  1998).  It  is  advantageous 
for  a  crop  plant  to  grow  taller  when  shaded  by  a  weed,  but  
not when shaded by cohorts, as less grain is produced on the 
taller  stalks.  The  engineering  of  suppressive  over-expression 
constructs  of  one  of  these  phytochromes  led  to  plants  
that  did  not  elongate  in  response  to  shading  (Robson  et  al., 
1996) .

Chemical mitigation of transgene flow

Mitigation can also be achieved chemically by using TM genes 
that are either activated by chemicals, or by conferring super-
susceptibility  to  chemicals  such  as  herbicides  used  in  crop 
rotations.

Activatable genes for susceptibility to chemicals
A  bacterial  P450  that  activates  an  experimental  sulfonylurea 
pro-herbicide  has  been  used  under  a  tapetum-specific  pro-
moter  to  prevent  pollen  formation  (O’Keefe  et  al.,  1994). 
The  same  gene  could  be  used  under  an  inducible  promoter 
that  can  be  generally  expressed,  which  would  allow  the 
use  of  the  pro-herbicide  to  cull  crop–weed  hybrids  as  well 
as  volunteer  crop  weeds.  Other  such  pro-herbicides  with  
exogenous  activating  genes  could  also  be  envisaged  
for  use  as  mitigating  fail-safes,  should  the  primary  transgene 
escape.

Hypersensitivity to herbicides as transgenic 
mitigation
A TM construct with a gene conferring glyphosate resistance 
and  a  TM  gene  conferring  herbicide  hypersensitivity  to  the 
herbicide  bentazon,  which  is  used  in  rice.  It  was  then  pos-
sible  to  selectively  cull  transgenic  volunteers  and  hybrids  in 
rotations  when  the  wild-type  crops  are  cultivated,  because  
the  wild-type  crop  naturally  degrades  bentazon  (Lin  et  al., 
2008).

A  multi-chemical  approach  was  then  devised  for  mono-
culture crops such as rice and sorghum, proposing a rotation 
of  chemicals  and  transgenic  varieties  (Gressel  and  Valverde, 
2009a). It could provide cost-effective and sustainable control 
of weedy relatives of crops while preventing transgene estab-
lishment  in  the  weedy  relatives,  as  well  as  confounding  the 
evolution of herbicide resistance in other weeds. The concept 
requires  rotating  different  metabolically  herbicide-resistant 
crop varieties with other varieties or lines of the crop that are 
resistant to other herbicides, but are hypersensitive to the first 
herbicide, such that the herbicide used with the second vari-
ety  will  preferentially  kill  hybrids  with  the  first  variety.  For 
example,  one  variety  has  a  gene  conferring  metabolic  resist-
ance  to  glyphosate  in  tandem  with  a  TM  antisense  or  RNAi 
gene  suppressing  a  glufosinate  resistance  transgene.  The  first 
variety  would  be  used  in  crop  rotations  in  conjunction  with 
the herbicide glyphosate. The second variety has a gene con-
ferring  metabolic  resistance  to  glufosinate  in  tandem  with  a 
TM  antisense  or  RNAi  gene  suppressing  a  glyphosate  resist-
ance  transgene.  The  second  variety  would  be  used  in  crop 
rotations  in  conjunction  with  the  herbicide  glufosinate  and 
would selectively control volunteers and weed  crop hybrids 
from  the  first  variety.  Using  glyphosate  with  the  first  variety 
will  selectively  control  volunteers  and  weed    crop  hybrids 
from the second variety (Gressel and Valverde, 2009a).

Similar  constructs  could  be  made  to  ensure  long-term 
sustainability  with  other  crops  having  pernicious  interbreed-
ing  weeds.  These  could  be  made  with  metabolic  resistance/
hypersensitivities  to  other  herbicides  as  well,  using  the  
morphological  mitigation  genes  such  as  anti-shattering  and 
dwarfing. An important gene to further ensure long-term sus-
tainability will be an anti-secondary dormancy gene, when it is 
found  (Gressel  and  Al-Ahmad,  2011).  It  will  guarantee  that 
hybrids with weedy rice will germinate the following season, 
because they will be controlled by the reciprocal herbicide in 
rotation.

519

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

Special cases where transgenic mitigation 
is needed

There are some special cases where other genes can be envis-
aged to confer an unfitness upon volunteers or on feral forms 
coming from the crop. The TM genes are typically still neutral 
or positive to the crop but give unfit offspring.

Mitigation for biennial and annual “root” crops
Mitigating  genes  should  easily  prevent  both  the  premature 
and  volunteer  flowering  in  sugar  beets,  carrots,  onions,  cel-
ery,  and  radishes  as  well  as  in  other  biennial  or  two-phase 
crops  where  the  vegetative  material  is  marketed,  and  pre-
mature  flowering  (bolting)  is  detrimental.  This  could  eas-
ily  be  affected  by  preventing  gibberellic  acid  biosynthesis 
(Yamaguchi, 2008) in a TM construct. Suppression of kaurene 
oxidase, a key enzyme in gibberellic acid biosynthesis, would 
require the use of gibberellic acid to “force” flowering for seed 
production. There should be a concomitant biosafety require-
ment  that  seed  production  areas  are  far  removed  from  areas 
where weedy or other feral or wild relatives grow to prevent 
pollen  transfer.  If,  despite  all  isolation  distances,  a  TM  con-
struct or a mutant in a seed production area introgresses with 
a wild species, the progeny will be biennial or be too delayed, 
such  that  the  transgenic  hybrid  would  be  non-competitive 
with cohorts that reproduce in a single year and do not need 
to overwinter.

Delaying of bolting and flowering by using other transgenes 
was  achieved  using  an  antisense  engineered  fragment  of  the 
GIGANTEA gene into radish, encoding a protein that is part 
of the photoperiod recognition system. Bolting was considera-
bly delayed, but seed production came about without reversal 
mechanisms by waiting (Curtis et al., 2005). Flowering Locus 
C  gene  also  controls  bolting  in  Chinese  cabbage  with  higher 
transcript levels resulting in the less bolting (Li et al., 2005).

Other transgenes can be considered for mitigating the risks 
of introgression with root crops, such as genes promoting par-
titioning to roots, which would be advantageous to cultivated 
root crops, but detrimental to feral forms.

Transgenically mitigated genes for crop-
produced pharmaceuticals and industrial 
products
Pharmaceuticals  and  industrial  proteins,  especially  enzymes 
and  antibodies,  can  be  inexpensively  produced  in  plants 
without  the  need  for  animal  tissue  culture  cells  grown  in  a 
medium of expensive serum albumin that is all too easily con-
taminated  with  pathogenic  mycoplasms,  prions,  and  viruses. 
Whereas  there  are  compelling  economic  and  biosafety  con-
siderations  propelling  the  production  of  pharmaceuticals  in 
crops,  there  are  also  reasons  to  exclude  the  pharmaceutical 
and  industrial  transgenes  from  introgressing  into  other  varie-
ties of the crop, related species, or to remain in viable volun-
teers in the field (e.g., Breyer et al., 2009).

The  containment  of  pharmaceutical  transgenes  has  been 
physical as evidenced by human error that reportedly allowed 

temporary  volunteer  escape  of  “Prodigene”  maize  containing 
such  genes.  The  biological  containment  strategies  previously 
described may be preferable to a dependence on physical con-
tainment  by  humans,  and  the  TM  strategies  should  work  as 
well, especially as a secondary fail-safe.

Pharmaceutical  transgenes  in  maize  are  expressed  in 
embryo  tissues,  and  a  potential  tandem  mitigating  gene 
could be any RNAi type suppression of genes that affect the 
endosperm,  such  as  the  various  “shrunken  seed”  loci,  espe-
cially those where sugar transformation to starch is inhibited 
(Chourey et al., 1998). Such shrunken seeds, with their high 
sugar content, are harder to store than normal maize, and are 
extremely  unfit  in  the  field  and  unlikely  to  overwinter  and 
produce volunteers. Hybrids with other varieties would have 
shrunken  seeds  that  would  be  culled  during  seed  cleaning. 
Their  volunteers  would  be  unfit  and  also  could  not  overwin-
ter  as  volunteers  in  the  field.  Should  such  pollen  fertilize  a 
few seeds in adjacent fields, they will be shrunken and will be 
sorted out during processing. Thus, such a technology would 
mitigate against both outflow and influx of pollen.

Mitigation in species used for phytoremediation
Plants have been used to correct human error over the ages. A 
few  species  are  capable  of  revegetating  Roman  lead  and  zinc 
mine tailing in Wales (Smith and Bradshaw, 1979). Of these, 
plants  that  can  withstand  toxic  wastes  after  they  have  been 
taken  up  are  of  interest  for  phytoremediation.  Two  types  of 
multi-cut  species  are  usually  considered  for  phytoremedia-
tion, with the cut material burnt to extract the heavy metals 
or to oxidize the organic wastes: herbaceous species such as B. 
juncea and Spartina spp. (cord grasses), which are most effi-
cient at dealing with surface wastes and trees such as Populus 
spp.,  for  dealing  with  deeper  wastes  (Pilon-Smits  and  Pilon, 
2002)

Heavy  metal  tolerance  has  been  brought  into  B.  juncea 
(Indian  mustard)  from  slow-growing  Thlaspi  by  protoplast 
fusion (along with many other genes; Dushenkov et al., 2002). 
It  was  better  yet  to  transgenically  transfer  genes  leading  to 
enhanced glutathione content (Bennett et al., 2003) to make 
the  necessary  phytochelatins  that  complex  the  heavy  met-
als.  A  single  cropping  of  B.  juncea  does  not  clean  up  a  toxic 
site.  Many  growth  cycles  are  required,  with  multiple  har-
vests  and  natural  reseeding.  B.  juncea,  even  more  than  its 
close  relative  B.  napus  (oilseed  rape),  is  not  fully  domes-
ticated,  and  the  multiple  cycles  of  cropping  would  allow 
the  possibility  of  selecting  for  ferality.  Thus,  mitigation 
seems  necessary  to  prevent  volunteers  from  becoming 
feral.  One  gene  that  might  specifically  fulfill  the  need  for  a 
mitigator  gene  is  over-expression  of  a  cytokinin  oxidase  
(Bilyeu  et  al.,  2001),  which  reduces  cytokinin  levels.  This 
in  turn  led  to  phenotypes  with  far  reduced  shoot  sys-
tems  (unfitness  to  compete)  but  with  faster  growing,  more  
extensive  root  systems  (Werner  et  al.,  2003),  all  the  bet-
ter  for  extracting  toxic  wastes.  Genes  that  delay  or  prevent  
flowering may also be useful with the Brassica species, allow-
ing  multiple  cuts  of  larger  vegetative  plants  and  preventing 
gene flow.

520

Containing and mitigating transgene flow from crops to weeds, to wild species, and to crops

C H A P T E R   3 2

Concluding Remarks

Systems  exist  that  can  theoretically  preclude  the  movement 
to  and  establishment  of  crop  transgenes  in  related  crops, 
weeds,  or  weedy  relatives,  whether  by  containing  gene  flow 

or  by  preventing  the  establishment  of  hybrid  plants  in  the 
field by mitigation. Thus, if a risk is discerned, it should not 
preclude developing transgenic crops, it should stimulate the 
imagination  to  devise  and  test  appropriate  systems  to  deal 
with the potential problems.

References

Al-Ahmad, H., & Gressel, J. (2006). Mitigation 

using a tandem construct containing a 
selectively unfit gene precludes establishment 
of Brassica napus transgenes in hybrids and 
backcrosses with weedy Brassica rapa. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 4, 23–33.

Al-Ahmad, H. I., Galili, S., & Gressel, J. 

(2004). Tandem constructs mitigate risks 
of transgene flow from crops: Tobacco as a 
model. Molecular Ecology, 13, 687–710.

Al-Ahmad, H., Dwyer, J., Moloney, M. 

M., & Gressel, J. (2006). Mitigation of 
establishment of Brassica napus transgenes 
in volunteers using a tandem construct 
containing a selectively unfit gene. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 4, 7–21.

Al-Ahmad, H., Galili, S., & Gressel, J. (2005). 

Poor competitive fitness of transgenically 
mitigated tobacco in competition with the 
wild type in a replacement series. Planta, 
272, 372–385.

Allainguillaume, J., Harwood, T., Ford, C. S., 
Cuccato, G., Norris, C., & Allender, C. J., 
et al. (2009). Rapeseed cytoplasm gives 
advantage in wild relatives and complicates 
genetically modified crop biocontainment. 
New Phytologist, 183, 1201–1211.

Arazi, T., Huang, P. L., Huang, P. L., Zhang, L., 

Shiboleth, Y. M., & Gal-On, A., et al.  
(2002). Production of antiviral and 
antitumor proteins MAP30 and GAP31 
in cucurbits using the plant virus vector 
ZYMV-AGII. Biochemical and Biophysical 
Research Communications, 292, 441–448.

Avni, A., & Edelman, M. (1991). Direct 
selection for paternal inheritance of 
chloroplasts in sexual progeny of Nicotiana. 
Molecular & General Genetics, 225, 
273–277.

Azpiroz, R., Wu, Y., LoCascio, J. C., & 

Feldmann, K. A. (1998). An Arabidopsis 
brassinosteroid-dependent mutant is blocked 
in cell elongation. Plant Cell, 10, 219–230.

Bennett, L. E., Burkhead, J. L., Hale, K. L., 
Terry, N., Pilon, M., & Pilon-Smits, E. A. 
H. (2003). Analysis of transgenic Indian 
mustard plants for phytoremediation of 
metal-contaminated mine tailings. Journal of 
Environmental Quality, 32, 432–440.
Bilyeu, K. D., Cole, J. L., Laskey, J. G., 

Riekhof, W. R., Esparza, T. J., & Kramer, M. 
D., et al. (2001). Molecular and biochemical 
characterization of a cytokinin oxidase from 
maize. Plant Physiology, 125, 378–386.
Bradshaw, A. D. (1982). Evolution of heavy 

metal resistance—an analogy for herbicide 
resistance? (pp. 293–307) New York: Wiley.

Breitler, J. C., Vassal, J. M., Catala, M. D., 

Meynard, D., Marfa, V., & Mele, E.,  
et al. (2004). Bt rice harbouring cry genes 

controlled by a constitutive or wound-
inducible promoter: Protection and 
transgene expression under Mediterranean 
field conditions. Plant Biotechnology Journal, 
2, 417–430.

Breyer, D., Goossens, M., Herman, P., & 

Sneyers, M. (2009). Biosafety considerations 
associated with molecular farming in 
genetically modified plants. Journal of 
Medicinal Plants Research, 3, 825–838.

Cao, B. H., Huang, Z. Y., Chen, G. J., & Lei, 

J. J. (2010). Restoring pollen fertility in 
transgenic male-sterile eggplant by Cre/
lox p-mediated site-specific recombination 
system. Genetics and Molecular Biology, 33, 
298–307.

Carlson, P. S., Fahey, J. W., & Flynn, J. L. 

(1992). Modified plant containing a bacterial 
inoculant. U.S. Patent, 5,157,207.

Cazzonelli, C. I., McCallum, E. J., Lee, R., & 
Botella, J. R. (2005). Characterization of 
a strong, constitutive mung bean (Vigna 
radiata L.) promoter with a complex mode 
of regulation in planta. Transgenic Research, 
14, 941–967.

Chen, Q., Jahier, J., & Cauderon, Y. 

(1993). The B-chromosome system of 
inner Mongolian Agropyron gaertn. 3. 
Cytogenetical evidence for B-A pairing at 
metaphase-I. Hereditas, 119, 53–58.

Choi, I.-R., Stander, D. C., Morris, T. J., & 
French, R. (2000). A plant virus vector 
for systemic expression of foreign genes in 
cereals. Plant Journal, 23, 547–555.

Chourey, P. S., Taliercio, E. W., Carlson, S. J., 

& Ruan, Y.-L. (1998). Genetic evidence 
that the two isozymes of sucrose synthase 
present in developing maize endosperm are 
critical, one for cell wall integrity and the 
other for starch biosynthesis. Molecular & 
General Genetics, 259, 88–96. 

Crouch, M. L. (1998). How the terminator 
terminates: An explanation for the non-
scientist of a remarkable patent for 
killing second generation seeds of crop 
plants   http://www.bio.indiana.edu/
people/terminator/html/  . The Edmonds 
Institute, Edmond WA, USA.

Curtis, I. S., Hanada, A., Yamaguchi, S., & 

Kamiya, Y. (2005). Modification of plant 
architecture through the expression of GA 
2-oxidase under the control of an estrogen 
inducible promoter in Arabidopsis thaliana 
L. Planta, 222, 957–967.

Daniell, H. (2002). Molecular strategies for 

gene containment in transgenic crops. 
Nature Biotechnology, 20, 581–586.

Darmency, H. (1994). Genetics of herbicide 

resistance in weeds and crops. In S. B. 
Powles & J. A. M. Holtum (Eds.), Herbicide 

resistance in plants: Biology and biochemistry 
(pp. 263–298). Boca-Raton: Lewis.

Devlin, P. F., Patel, S. R., & Whitelam, G. 
C. (1998). Phytochrome E influences 
internode elongation and flowering time in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 10, 1479–1487.

Doebley, J. (1992). Molecular systematics and 
crop evolution. In P. S. Soltis, D. E. Soltis & 
J. J. Doyle (Eds.), Molecular systematics of 
plants (pp. 202–222). New York: Chapman 
and Hall.

Dushenkov, S., Skarzhinskaya, M., Glimelius, 

K., Gleba, D., & Raskin, I. (2002). 
Bioengineering of a phytoremediation 
plant by means of somatic hybridization. 
International Journal of Phytoremediation, 4, 
117–126.

Ellstrand, N. C. (2003). Dangerous liaisons – 
when cultivated plants mate with their wild 
relatives. Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.

Feldman, M. (2001). The origin of cultivated 
wheat. In A. Bonjean & W. Angus (Eds.), 
The world wheat book (pp. 3–56). Paris: 
Lavousier Tech & Doc.

Gressel, J. (1999). Tandem constructs: 

Preventing the rise of superweeds. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 17, 361–366.

Gressel, J. (2002). Molecular biology of weed 

control. London: Taylor & Francis.

Gressel, J. (2005a). Problems in qualifying 

and quantifying assumptions in plant 
protection models: Resultant simulations 
can be mistaken by a factor of million. Crop 
Protection, 24, 1007–1015.

Gressel, J. (2005b). Crop ferality and 

volunteerism. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Gressel, J. (2008). Genetic glass ceilings: 

Transgenics for crop biodiversity. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press.

Gressel, J., & Al-Ahmad, H. (2011). Transgenic 
mitigation of gene flow. In M. J. Oliver & Y. 
Li (Eds.), Gene containment. Ames: Wiley.

Gressel, J., & Valverde, B. E. (2009a). A 

strategy to provide long-term control of 
weedy rice while mitigating herbicide 
resistance transgene flow, and its potential 
use for other crops with related weeds. Pest 
Management Science, 65, 723–731.

Gressel, J., & Valverde, B. E. (2009b). The 

other, ignored HIV – Highly invasive 
vegetation. Food Security, 1, 463–478.

Griffiths, S., Sharp, R., Foote, T. N., Bertin, 

I., Wanous, M., & Reader, S., et al. (2006). 
Molecular characterization of Ph1 as a major 
chromosome pairing locus in polyploid 
wheat. Nature, 439, 749–752.

Gruber, S., & Hüsken, A. (2011). Control 
of cleistogamy and seed dormancy for 

521

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

biological gene containment in oilseed rape 
(Brassica napus L). In M. J. Oliver & Y. Li 
(Eds.), Gene containment. Ames: Wiley.

Haider, N., Allainguillaume, J., & Wilkinson, M. 

J. (2009). Spontaneous capture of oilseed 
rape (Brassica napus) chloroplasts by wild B. 
rapa: Implications for the use of chloroplast 
transformation for biocontainment. Current 
Genetics, 55, 139–150.

Haygood, R., Ives, A. R., & Andow, D. A. 

(2003). Consequences of recurrent 
gene flow from crops to wild relatives. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 
Series B, 270, 1879–1886.

Helliwell, C. A., Sheldon, C. C., Olive, A. 
M., Walker, R. R., Zeevaart, J. A. D., & 
Peacock, W. J., et al. (1998). Cloning of the 
Arabidopsis ent-kaurene oxidase gene GA3. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Science, USA, 95, 9019–9024.

Hooftman, D. A. P., Gerard, J., Oostermeijer, 

B., Marquard, E., & den Nijs, H. C. M. 
(2008). Modelling the consequences of 
crop-wild relative gene flow: A sensitivity 
analysis of the effects of outcrossing rates 
and hybrid vigour breakdown in Lactuca. 
Journal of Applied Ecology, 45, 1094–1103.
Jach, G., Gornhardt, B., Mundy, J., Logemann, 

J., Pinsdorf, P., & Leah, R., et al. (1995). 
Enhanced quantitative resistance against 
fungal disease by combinatorial expression 
of different barley antifungal proteins in 
transgenic tobacco. Plant Journal, 8, 97–109.

Jepson, I., Martinez, A., & Sweetman, J. P. 

(1998). Chemical-inducible gene expression 
systems for plants—a review. Pesticide 
Science, 54, 360–367.

Kelloniemi, J., Makinen, K., & Valkonen, J. 

P. T. (2008). Three heterologous proteins 
simultaneously expressed from a chimeric 
potyvirus: Infectivity, stability and the 
correlation of genome and virion lengths. 
Virus Research, 135, 282–291.

Kobayashi, K., Munemura, I., Hinata, K., & 
Yamamura, S. (2006). Bisexual sterility 
conferred by the differential expression of 
Barnase and Barstar: A simple and efficient 
method of transgene containment. Plant 
Cell Reports, 25, 1347–1354.

Konishi, S., Lin, S. Y., Ebana, K., Fukuta, 

Y., Izawa, T., & Sasaki, T., et al. (2005). 
Molecular cloning of a major QTL, QSH-
1, controlling seed shattering habit in rice. 
Plant and Cell Physiology, 46, S198-S198.

Kusaba, S., Kano-Murakami, Y., Matsuoka, M., 
Tamaoki, M., Sakamoto, T., & Yamaguchi, I., 
et al. (1998). Alteration of hormone levels 
in transgenic tobacco plants overexpressing 
the rice homeobox gene OSH1. Plant 
Physiology, 116, 471–476.

Kuvshinov, V., Koivu, K., Kanerva, A., & Pehu, 
E. (2001). Molecular control of transgene 
escape from genetically modified plants. 
Plant Science, 160, 517–522.

Kuvshinov, V., Anissimov, A., & Yahya, B. M. 

(2004). Barnase gene inserted in the intron 
of GUS—a model for controlling transgene 
flow in host plants. Plant Science, 167, 
173–182.

Lange, T. (1998). Molecular biology of 

gibberellin synthesis. Planta, 204, 409–419.

Lentz, E. M., Segretin, M. E., Morgenfeld, 
M. M., Wirth, S. A., Santos, M. J. D., 

522

& Mozgovoj, M. V., et al. (2010). High 
expression level of a foot and mouth disease 
virus epitope in tobacco transplastomic 
plants. Planta, 231, 387–395.

Li, W., & Gill, B. S. (2006). Multiple genetic 

pathways for seed shattering in the grasses. 
Functional and Integrative Genomics, 6, 
300–330.

Li, Z., Zhao, L., Cui, C., Kai, G., Zhang, L., & 

Sun, X., et al. (2005). Molecular cloning and 
characterization of an anti-bolting related 
gene (BrpFLC) from Brassica rapa ssp. 
Pekinensis. Plant Science, 168, 407–413.

Li, C., Zhou, A., & Sang, T. (2006). Rice 
domestication by reduced shattering. 
Science, 311, 1936–2193.

Liljegren, S. J., Ditta, G. S., Eshed, Y., Savidge, 
B., Bowman, J. L., & Yanofsky, M. F. (2000). 
SHATTERPROOF MADS-box genes control 
seed dispersal in Arabidopsis. Nature, 404, 
766–770.

Liljegren, S. J., Roeder, A. H. K., Kempin, S. A., 

Gremski, K., Ostergaard, L., & Guimil, S., 
et al. (2004). Control of fruit patterning in 
Arabidopsis by INDEHISCENT. Cell, 116, 
843–853.

Lin, C., Jun, F., Xu, X., Te, Z., Cheng, J., & 

Tu, J., et al. (2008). A built-in strategy for 
containment of transgenic plants: Creation 
of selectively terminable transgenic rice. 
PLoS ONE, 3(3), e1818.

Liu, Z., & Singer, S. D. (2011). Tapping RNA 

silencing for transgene containment through 
the engineering of sterility in plants. In M. 
J. Oliver & Y. Li (Eds.), Gene containment. 
Ames: Wiley.

Lu, B. R. (2005). Multi-directional gene flow 

among wild, weedy and cultivated soybeans. 
In J. Gressel (Ed.), Crop ferality and 
volunteerism. Boca Raton: CRC Press.

Maliga, P. (2004). Plastid transformation in 

higher plants. Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 55, 289–313.

Mariani, C., Debeuckeleer, M., Truettner, J., 

Leemans, J., & Goldberg, R. B. (1990). 
Induction of male sterility in plants by a 
chimeric ribonuclease gene. Nature, 347, 
737–741.

Marillonet, S., Thoeringer, C., Kandzia, R., 

Klimyuk, V., & Gleba, Y. (2005). Systemic 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated 
transfection of viral replicons for efficient 
transient expression in plants. Nature 
Biotechnology, 25, 718–723.

Meirmans, P. G., Bousquet, J., & Isabel, N. 
(2009). A metapopulation model for the 
introgression from genetically modified 
plants into their wild relatives. Evolutionary 
Applications, 2, 160–171.

Moon, H. S., Li, Y., & Stewart, C. N. (2010). 
Keeping the genie in the bottle: Transgene 
biocontainment by excision in pollen. Trends 
in Biotechnology, 28, 3–8.

Nishijima, T., Katsura, N., Koshioka, M., 

Yamazaki, H., Nakayama, M., & Yamane, 
H., et al. (1998). Effects of gibberellins 
and gibberellin-biosynthesis inhibitors on 
stem elongation and flowering of Raphanus 
sativus L. Journal of the Japanese Society for 
Horticultural Science, 67, 325–330.

Noguchi, T., Fujioka, S., Choe, S., Takatsuto, 
S., Yoshida, S., & Yuan, H., et al. (1999). 

Brassinosteroid-insensitive dwarf mutants 
of Arabidopsis accumulate brassinosteroids. 
Plant Physiology, 121, 743–752.

O’Keefe, D. P., Tepperman, J. M., Dean, C., 

Leto, K. J., Erbes, D. L., & Odell, J. T. 
(1994). Plant expression of a bacterial 
cytochrome-P450 that catalyzes activation 
of a sulfonylurea pro-herbicide. Plant 
Physiology, 105, 473–482.

Oliver, M. J., & Hake, K. (2011). Seed based 
strategies for gene containment. In M. J. 
Oliver & Y. Li (Eds.), Gene containment. 
Ames: Wiley.

Oliver, M. J., & Li, Y. (2011). Gene 

containment. Ames: Wiley.

Oliver, M. J., Quisenberry, J. E., Trolinder, N. 

L. G., & Keim, D. L. (1998). Control of 
plant gene expression. US Patent 5,723,765.
Oliver, M. J., Luo, H., Kausch, A., & Collins, H. 

(2004). Seed-based strategies for transgene 
containment. In Eighth international 
symposium on the biosafety of genetically 
modified organisms, INRA, Montpellier, pp. 
154–161.

Ostergaard, L., Kempin, S. A., Bies, D., Klee, 

H. J., & Yanofsky, M. F. (2006). Pod shatter 
resistant Brassica fruit produced by ectopic 
expression of the FRUITFULL gene. Plant 
Biotechnology Journal, 4, 45–51.

Ozkan, H., & Feldman, M. (2001). Genotypic 

variation in tetraploid wheat affecting 
homoeologous pairing in hybrids with 
Aegilops peregrina. Genome, 44, 
1000–1006.

Pedersen, J. F., Marx, D. B., & Funnell, D. L. 
(2003). Use of A(3) cytoplasm to reduce 
risk of gene flow through sorghum pollen. 
Crop Science, 43, 1506–1509.

Peng, J., Richards, D. E., Hartley, N. M., 

Murphy, G. P., Devos, K. M., & Flintham, 
J. J., et al. (1999). “Green revolution” 
genes encode mutant gibberellin response 
modulators. Nature, 400, 25.

Pilon-Smits, E., & Pilon, M. (2002). 

Phytoremediation of metals using transgenic 
plants. Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences, 
21, 439–456.

Puchta, H. (2002). Gene replacement by 

homologous recombination in plants. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 48, 173–182.

Riley, R., Campbell, C. S., Young, R. M., & 

Belfield, A. M. (1966). Control of meiotic 
chromosome pairing by the chromosomes of 
homoeologous group 5 of Triticum aestivum. 
Nature, 212, 1475–1477.

Robson, P. R. H., McCormac, A. C., Irvine, A. 

S., & Smith, H. (1996). Genetic engineering 
of harvest index in tobacco through 
overexpression of a phytochrome gene. 
Nature Biotechnology, 14, 995–998.

Rose, C. W., Millwood, R. J., Moon, H. S., 

Rao, M. R., Halfhill, M. D., & Raymer, P. 
L. (2009). Genetic load and transgenic 
mitigating genes in transgenic Brassica 
rapa (field mustard) × Brassica napus 
(oilseed rape) hybrid populations. BMC 
Biotechnology, 9, 93.

Ruf, S., Karcher, D., & Bock, R. (2007). 

Determining the transgene containment 
level provided by chloroplast transformation. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA, 104, 6998–7002.

Containing and mitigating transgene flow from crops to weeds, to wild species, and to crops

C H A P T E R   3 2

Ruiz, O. N., & Daniell, H. (2005). Engineering 
cytoplasmic male sterility via the chloroplast 
genome by expression of beta-ketothiolase. 
Plant Physiology, 138, 1232–1246.

Schaller, H., Bouvier-Navé, P., & Benveniste, 

P. (1998). Overexpression of an 
Arabidopsis cDNA encoding a sterol-C24-
methyltransferase in tobacco modifies the 
ratio of 24-methyl cholesterol to sitosterol 
and is associated with growth reduction. 
Plant Physiology, 18, 461–469.

Schernthaner, J. P., Fabijanski, S. F., Arnison, 
P. G., Racicot, M., & Robert, L. S. (2003). 
Control of seed germination in transgenic 
plants based on the segregation of a two-
component genetic system. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 100, 6855–6859.

Sears, E. R. (1976). Genetic control of 

chromosome pairing in wheat. Annual 
Review of Genetics, 10, 31–51.

Shaked, H., Melamed-Bessudo, C., & Levy, A. 
A. (2005). High-frequency gene targeting 
in Arabidopsis plants expressing the yeast 
RAD54 gene. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science of the United States of 
America, 102, 12265–12269.

Shiboleth, Y. M., Arazi, T., Wang, Y., & Gal-On, 
A. (2001). A new approach for weed control 
in a cucurbit field employing an attenuated 
potyvirus-vector for herbicide resistance. 
Journal of Biotechnology, 92, 37–46.

Sikorskaite, S., Vuorinen, A. L., Rajamaki, M. 

L., Nieminen, A., Gaba, V., & Valkonen, 
J. P. T. (2010). HandyGun: An improved 
custom-designed, non-vacuum gene gun 
suitable for virus inoculation. Journal of 
Virological Methods, 165, 320–324.

Skinner, J. S., Meilan, R., Ma, C. P., & Strauss, 

S. H. (2003). The Populus PTD promoter 
imparts floral-predominant expression and 
enables high levels of floral-organ ablation 
in Populus, Nicotiana and Arabidopsis. 
Molecular Breeding, 12, 119–132.

Smith, R. A. H., & Bradshaw, A. D. (1979). 

Use of metal tolerant plant populations for 
the reclamation of metalliferous wastes. 
Journal of Applied Ecology, 16, 595–603.

Song, X., Wang, Z., & Qiang, S. (2011). 

Agronomic performance of F1, F2 and F3 
hybirds between weedy rice and transgenic 
glufosinate-resistant rice. Pest Management 
Science, 67, 921–931.

Steber, C. M., Cooney, S. E., & McCourt, 
P. (1998). Isolation of the GA-response 
mutant sly1 as a suppressor of ABI1-1 

in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics, 149, 
509–521.

Stewart, C. N., Halfhill, M. D., & Warwick, 
S. I. (2003). Transgene introgression from 
genetically modified crops to their wild 
relatives. Nature Reviews Genetics, 4, 
806–817.

Sun, Q. X., Ni, Z. F., Liu, Z. Y., Gao, J. W., & 
Huang, T. C. (1998). Genetic relationships 
and diversity among Tibetan wheat, common 
wheat, and European spelt wheat revealed 
by rapid markers. Euphytica, 99, 205–211.

Sun, L., Ghosh, I., Paulus, H., & Xu, M. Q. 
(2001). Protein trans-splicing to produce 
herbicide-resistant acetolactate synthase. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
67, 1025–1029.

Svab, Z., & Maliga, P. (2007). Exceptional 

transmission of plastids and mitochondria 
from the transplastomic pollen parent 
and its impact on transgene containment. 
Proceedings of The National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
104, 7003–7008.

Trucco, F., Tatum, T., Rayburn, A. L., & 

Tranel, P. J. (2009). Out of the swamp: 
Unidirectional hybridization with weedy 
species may explain the prevalence of 
Amaranthus tuberculatus as a weed. New 
Phytologist, 184, 819–827.

van der Schaar, W., Blanco, C. L. A., 

Kloosterziel, K. M., Jansen, R. C., Van 
Ooijen, J. W., & Koornneef, M. (1997). QTL 
analysis of seed dormancy in Arabidopsis 
using recombinant inbred lines and MQM 
mapping. Heredity, 79, 190–200.

Verhounig, A., Karcher, D., & Bock, R. 

(2010). Inducible gene expression from the 
plastid genome by a synthetic riboswitch. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 
107, 6204–6209.

von der Lippe, M., & Kowarik, I. (2007). 

Crop seed spillage along roads: A factor of 
uncertainty in the containment of GMO. 
Ecography, 30, 483–490.

Wang, T., Li, Y., Shi, Y., Reboud, X., Darmency, 

H., & Gressel, J. (2004). Low frequency 
transmission of a plastid encoded trait in 
Setaria italica. Theoretical and Applied 
Genetics, 108, 315–320.

Warwick, S. I., & Stewart, C. N., Jr. (2005). 

Crops come from wild plants: How 
domestication, transgenes, and linkage 
together shape ferality. In J. Gressel (Ed.), 

Crop ferality and volunteerism. Boca Raton: 
CRC Press.

Warwick, S. I., Beckie, H. J., & Hall, L. M. 

(2009). Gene flow, invasiveness, and 
ecological impact of genetically modified 
crops. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, 1168, 72–99.

Weissmann, S., Feldman, M., & Gressel, 

J. (2005). Sporadic inter–generic DNA 
introgression from wheat into wild Aegilops 
spp. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 22, 
2055–2062.

Weissmann, S., Feldman, M., & Gressel, 

J. (2008). Hypothesis: Transgene 
establishment in wild relatives of wheat 
can be prevented by utilizing the Ph1 
gene as a senso stricto chaperon to prevent 
homoeologous recombination. Plant Science, 
175, 410–414.

Werner, T., Motyka, V., Laucou, V., Smets, R., 

Van Onckelen, H., & Schmulling, T. (2003). 
Cytokinin-deficient transgenic Arabidopsis 
plants show multiple developmental 
alterations indicating opposite functions 
of cytokinins in the regulation of shoot 
and root meristem activity. Plant Cell, 15, 
2532–2550.

Whitham, S. A., Yamamoto, M. L., & 

Carrington, J. C. (1999). Selectable 
viruses and altered susceptibility mutants 
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 96, 772–777.

Williams, M. E. (1995). Genetic engineering for 
pollination control. Trends in Biotechnology, 
13, 344–349.

Yamaguchi, S. (2008). Gibberellin metabolism 
and its regulation. Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 59, 225–251.

Zapiola, M. L., Campbell, C. K., Butler, M. 

D., & Mallory-Smith, C. A. (2008). Escape 
and establishment of transgenic glyphosate-
resistant creeping bentgrass Agrostis 
stolonifera in Oregon, USA: A 4-year study. 
Journal of Applied Ecology, 45, 486–494.

Zhu, Y. J., Agbayani, R., Jackson, M. C., Tang, 
C. S., & Moore, P. H. (2004). Expression of 
the grapevine stilbene synthase gene VST1 
in papaya provides increased resistance 
against diseases caused by Phytophthora 
palmivora. Planta, 220, 241–250.

Zuo, J. R., & Chua, N. H. (2000). Chemical-
inducible systems for regulated expression 
of plant genes. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 11, 146–151.

523

Potential application of biotechnology to 
maintain fresh produce postharvest quality 
and reduce losses during storage

27

Amnon Lers
Department of Postharvest Science of Fresh Produce, Agricultural Research Organization, the 
Volcani Center, Bet-Dagan, Israel

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 425
Ethylene Biosynthesis or Perception and  
Its Relation to Postharvest Quality of Fresh Produce   .  .  . 426
Senescence in Postharvest of Leafy Vegetables  
and Flowers   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 427
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .427
Senescence regulatory genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .427
Senescence-associated hormone  
biosynthesis or perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .428
Oxidative stress involvement in senescence . . . . . . . .429
Chlorophyll degradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .429

Abscission of Fruits, Flowers,  
and Leaves During Postharvest  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 429
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .429
Development of the dedicated AZ tissue . . . . . . . . . . .430
Regulatory genes involved in abscission control  
or mediating hormonal signal transduction . . . . . . . . .430
Genes involved in actual execution of  
cell separation in the later stage of abscission  . . . . . .431
Ethylene and abscission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .431
Regulated manipulation of abscission . . . . . . . . . . . . .431
Reducing Postharvest Chilling Sensitivity .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 431
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .431
Membrane structure and chilling sensitivity . . . . . . . . .432
Oxidative stress and chilling sensitivity or tolerance . .433
Regulation of low-temperature responses . . . . . . . . . .433
Molecules with protective functions  
during cold stress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .434
Affecting Postharvest Texture and Appearance Qualities  435
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .435
Softening and cell wall hydrolysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .435
Softening and turgor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .435
Tissue lignifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .435
Implications for Plant and Agricultural Biotechnology    .  . 436

Introduction

A  sufficient  supply  of  food  is  anticipated  to  become  a  very 
serious  problem  for  humanity  in  the  near  future  (Hubert 
et al., 2010; Anon., 2010). Already today major parts of the 
world  population  suffer  from  hunger.  A  great  deal  of  effort 
is  invested  in  basic  and  applied  research  to  develop  new 
approaches  and  strategies  to  increase  the  supply  of  agricul-
ture-based fresh produce. Many of these efforts are directed 
toward improving biomass/yield production, as well as improv-
ing plants’ adaptation to environmental stress (Long and Ort, 
2010). Whereas efforts to increase yield are likely to improve 
the fresh produce food supply, a complementary effort must 
be  implemented  to  decrease  the  extremely  heavy  losses  in 
both  quality  and  quantity  of  the  agricultural  fresh  produce 
already  produced  that  occurs  during  the  postharvest  period 
(Kader, 2005).

During  the  time  between  harvest  and  consumption,  fresh 
produce  undergoes  changes  in  different  aspects  that  lead  to 
a major reduction in overall quality. These changes can result 
in  food  waste  and  major  economic  damage.  Quality  losses, 
besides affecting the edibility of the fresh produce, may have 
a major impact on the nutritional, taste, or caloric value, or the 
acceptability  of  the  produce  to  the  consumer  due  to  changes 
in  the  appearance  of  fruits,  vegetables,  or  flowers.  Worldwide 
losses  of  plant-origin  fresh  (non-processed)  produce  are  esti-
mated  to  be  around  33%  of  that  harvested  (Kantor  et  al., 
1997; Kader, 2005; Kitinoja and Cantwell, 2010). The degree 
of loss varies greatly and is dependent on the commodity and 
location of the produce. Accumulating losses between produc-
tion  and  retail  sites  are  estimated  to  be  in  the  range  of  2  to 
24% in developed countries and 5 to 50% in developing coun-
tries.  Further  losses  at  retail  and  consumer  sites  make  these 
losses  even  more  dramatic,  with  higher  percentages  in  the 
developed  countries.  Especially  in  the  developing  countries 
losses  are  due  to  insufficient  professional  knowledge,  lack  of 
resources, and industrial infrastructure including inaccessibil-
ity  of  advanced  applied  technologies  required  for  storage  of 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00027-4

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

the  fresh  produce  under  optimal  conditions.  Still,  losses  of 
both  quality  and  quantity  are  substantial  even  in  developed 
countries where advanced postharvest professional knowledge 
and resources are available.

An important and, in many cases, crucial factor determin-
ing postharvest qualities of fresh produce such as fruit, flower, 
tuber, bulb, or leaf, and the ability to maintain these posthar-
vest  qualities,  is  the  biology  of  the  parent  plant  from  which 
the produce is derived or harvested. Progress of different bio-
chemical,  physiological,  and  pathological  processes  that  take 
place during postharvest life and storage of the fresh produce 
can  eventually  lead  to  accumulated  losses  with  much  of  the 
fresh produce going to waste or, in the best case, being trans-
ferred to industrial use. The degree of postharvest losses var-
ies  depending  on  the  commodity  but  also  on  the  season  and 
production site, which may indirectly affect the biology of the 
fresh produce and its behavior during postharvest life.

Genetically  different  plants  have  different  physiological,  
biochemical,  and  molecular  characteristics.  These  differences 
affect  their  postharvest  behavior  and  the  ability  to  be  ade-
quately  stored  to  maintain  their  quality  until  consumed.  Two 
examples of physiological characteristics that have large impli-
cations for postharvest are respiration rate and cold sensitivity. 
Commodities  derived  from  plants  or  organs  that  have  higher 
rates  of  respiration  tend  to  have  a  more  limited  postharvest 
life  and  are  perishable  when  compared  with  those  that  have 
low rates of respiration. Respiration plays a major role in fresh 
produce postharvest life, because it reflects the metabolic activ-
ity of the tissue. Cold sensitivity of fruits or vegetables limits 
our  ability  to  apply  low-temperature  storage,  which  is  one  of 
the best and most efficient methods available for keeping fresh 
produce in long-term storage while maintaining its quality. The 
inherent  cold  sensitivity  of  plants  is  genetically  encoded  and 
dictates the lowest possible temperature for use without devel-
opment of chilling injuries.

Traditionally,  classical  breeding  has  been  used  for  domes-
tication of crop plants, but novel biotechnology-based breed-
ing offers important advantages in terms of both focusing on 
single traits or genes and the timescale required for progress 
in  the  development  of  new  varieties  with  improved  relevant 
agricultural  properties.  Detailed  knowledge  is  now  available 
regarding  the  relationship  between  the  biology  of  the  fresh 
produce  and  its  postharvest  characteristics.  This  knowledge 
has  great  potential  to  be  used  in  biotechnology-based  breed-
ing to improve specific postharvest-related traits. Some post-
harvest-related  physiological  or  biochemical  processes,  such 
as respiration, might be biologically too complex to be modi-
fied using biotechnology. However, in some other cases, such 
as cold sensitivity, strategies for biotechnological manipulation 
for  the  benefit  of  postharvest  quality  can  already  be  imple-
mented, since proof of concepts in model plants have already 
been demonstrated.

In  this  chapter  the  biological  processes  most  relevant  to 
postharvest  quality  are  discussed.  Furthermore,  some  poten-
tial  gene  targets  that  could  be  used  for  biotechnologically-
based improvements of postharvest quality are identified.

Although no full coverage of all, or even most, possibilities 
is claimed, we do claim that the time is right to successfully 
implement  our  insights  on  the  molecular  biology  of  plants 

and  our  knowledge  of  postharvest  biology  to  employ  bio-
technology  for  the  development  of  crop  plants  with  better  
postharvest-related qualities.

Some of the major biological processes relevant to the way 
a  given  fresh  produce  will  behave  during  its  postharvest  life, 
storage, and shelf life condition are discussed. It is very impor-
tant to determine in advance, for a given fruit, which of these 
biological processes is most relevant for its postharvest behav-
ior and the way quality is affected. Focus on the most relevant 
physiological aspects may result in high impact on postharvest 
qualities.  In  this  chapter  we  include  examples  of  genes  that 
were  found  to  be  involved  in  postharvest-relevant  processes. 
Some  of  these  genes  were  identified  in  model  plants  such  as 
Arabidopsis,  and  their  relevance  to  the  postharvest  of  crop 
plants  must  be  examined.  Still,  these  genes  constitute  great 
potential, and the current challenge is to forward and transform 
this knowledge for its application in the postharvest agricultural 
industry. This may result in very big increases in the availability 
of fresh food produce worldwide.

Ethylene Biosynthesis or Perception 
and Its Relation to Postharvest 
Quality of Fresh Produce

Ethylene  has  a  central  role  in  the  regulation  of  different  bio-
logical  processes  associated  with  the  postharvest  life  of  many 
different crops including fruits and vegetables, leafy vegetables, 
flowers, tubers, and bulbs. The progress of these processes dur-
ing postharvest life of the fresh produce determines its quality 
and the level of losses. Postharvest-related processes in which 
ethylene  action  is  well  documented  include  fruit  ripening, 
senescence, abscission, softening and texture changes, develop-
ment of physiological disorders, taste and aroma development, 
nutritional  value,  and  fruit–pathogen  interactions  (Saltveit, 
1999). The biology and molecular biology of fruit ripening and 
the role of ethylene in this process and its implications to post-
harvest issues, as well as biotechnological approaches to control 
postharvest  problems  by  manipulation  of  ethylene  biosynthe-
sis or perception, were subject to several reviews (Stearns and 
Glick,  2003;  Martinez-Romero  et  al.,  2007;  Cara  and 
Giovannoni,  2008;  Lin  et  al.,  2009;  Little  et  al.,  2009;  Matas 
et  al.,  2009;  Bapat  et  al.,  2010).  In  this  chapter  we  discuss 
additional  implications  of  manipulating  ethylene  function  to  
improve  postharvest  qualities.  The  reader  is  also  referred  to 
Chapter 26.

Many  of  the  manipulations  of  ethylene  biosynthesis  were 
achieved  by  inhibition  of  the  two  central  biosynthesis-related 
genes, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase (ACC) syn-
thase  (ACS)  or  ACC  oxidase  (ACO).  Hormone  perception 
was  manipulated  in  most  cases  by  introduction  of  a  mutated 
form  of  ethylene  receptor  genes  found  to  confer  insensitivity 
when  introduced  into  heterologous  plant  systems  (Wilkinson 
et al., 1997). Manipulating function or regulation of such eth-
ylene-related  genes  was  successful  in  many  different  plants, 
resulting in marked physiological consequences to plant devel-
opment and response to the environment (Stearns and Glick, 
2003;  Little  et  al.,  2009).  Although  ethylene  action  in  many 

426

Application of biotechnology to maintain postharvest quality and reduce losses during storage

C H A P T E R   2 7

postharvest-related contexts has negative implications and gen-
erally its inhibition has a postharvest advantage, in some cases 
ethylene action is required for maintaining or improving post-
harvest  qualities.  For  example,  downregulation  of  ethylene 
synthesis or perception aimed at extending the shelf life of cli-
macteric fruits often results in lower production of aroma com-
pounds  (Kader,  2008).  Excessive  inhibition  of  ethylene  likely 
results in non-attractive fresh produce. One of the main chal-
lenges  in  biotechnological  applications  for  modifying  ethylene 
biosynthesis or perception is the use of appropriate regulatory 
elements that will lead to the desired and appropriate effect in 
a given plant system for optimal postharvest benefit. Recently 
regulated  ethylene  insensitivity  was  obtained  through  the  use 
of inducible expression of the Arabidopsis etr1-1 mutant eth-
ylene  receptor  in  tomato  (Gallie,  2010).  This  study  demon-
strated the feasibility of this approach, which could be applied 
for  the  benefit  of  the  postharvest  quality  of  fresh  produce  in 
which ethylene action is required, but the ability to decrease it 
at some specific point during postharvest storage may be greatly 
beneficial.

Senescence in Postharvest of Leafy 
Vegetables and Flowers

Background

Postharvest  senescence  contributes  to  the  loss  of  qual-
ity  of  flowers,  foliage,  and  vegetables.  Visible  and  undesired  
yellowing of the tissue, as well as degradation of macromole-
cules  during  storage,  may  reduce  the  nutritive  value  of  the 
fresh  produce.  Another  undesirable  result  of  senescence  is 
an enhanced vulnerability to pathogens which, in the case of 
stored fresh produce, can lead to high losses.

Basic  research  of  the  senescence  process  in  plants  has 
resulted  in  significant  and  interesting  insights,  although  it 
is  far  from  finding  a  full  understanding  of  the  process  and 
its  regulatory  mechanisms.  Based  on  this  knowledge,  vari-
ous  approaches  for  successful  retardation  of  senescence  in  a 
transgenic  model  or  crop  plants  by  manipulation  of  the  rel-
evant  genes  were  applied  (Lim  et  al.,  2007;  Guo  and  Gan, 
2007). This knowledge can be further used for development 
and  application  of  biotechnological  strategies  designed  to 
control  postharvest  senescence  in  crop  plants  for  practical 
applications.

It  is  widely  accepted  that  the  genetic  regulatory  sys-
tem  involved  in  senescence  induction  and  progress  is  highly 
complex.  The  process  possibly  involves  a  network  of  senes-
cence-promoting  pathways  responsible  for  activation  of 
senescence-associated genes (SAGs) with the involvement of 
both  plant  internal  signals  and  environmental/stress  factors 
(Buchanan-Wollaston et al., 2005; Lim et al., 2007).

The  accelerated  senescence  observed  many  times  under 
postharvest storage conditions is possibly related to the accel-
eration of natural senescence under environmental stress con-
ditions  (Lers,  2007).  Storage  of  fresh  produce  is  frequently 
associated with abiotic stress such as darkness, extreme tem-
peratures,  wounding,  or  drought.  It  is  likely  that  the  same 

molecular  mechanisms  and  genes  associated  with  senescence 
induction  in  the  attached  organ  during  environmental  stress 
are  also  involved  in  postharvest-induced  senescence.  The 
examples included are of studies in which genetic manipula-
tions  were  shown  to  affect  artificial  senescence  of  detached 
plant, leaf, or flower relevant to postharvest senescence.

Senescence regulatory genes

The  complexity  of  the  senescence  regulatory  mechanism  is 
reflected  by  the  relatively  large  number  of  regulatory  genes, 
encoding  mainly  for  transcriptional  factors  suggested  to  be 
associated with senescence (Buchanan-Wollaston et al., 2005; 
Guo and Gan, 2005; Balazadeh et al., 2008). Manipulation of 
some of these regulatory genes has been found to also affect 
senescence induced under conditions relevant for postharvest. 
In  Arabidopsis,  AtNAP,  an  NAC  family  transcription  factor, 
was found to have an important role in the regulation of natu-
ral  leaf  senescence.  Although  AtNAP  is  not  readily  induced 
by darkness, dark-induced senescence of detached leaves was 
delayed in the atnap null mutant, suggesting that AtNAP may 
function in dark-induced senescence downstream of the dark-
responsive  signaling  pathway  (Guo  and  Gan,  2006).  In  rice 
a  nuclear-localized  CCCH-type  zinc  finger  protein  “Oryza 
sativa delay of the onset of senescence” (OsDOS) was found 
to  be  involved  in  the  regulation  of  leaf  senescence  (Kong  et 
al.,  2006).  RNAi  knockdown  of  OsDOS  caused  acceler-
ated  leaf  senescence,  whereas  its  over-expression  resulted 
in a marked delay of the process, suggesting that it acts as a 
negative  regulator  of  leaf  senescence.  Manipulation  of  the 
Arabidopsis mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade, MKK9-
MPK6,  was  shown  to  have  a  role  in  leaf  senescence  (Zhou 
et  al.,  2009).  When  either  MKK9  or  MPK6  is  knocked  out, 
leaf  senescence  is  delayed.  This  signal  transduction  cascade 
might be involved in mediating the action of ethylene on leaf 
senescence.

Possible involvement of post-transcriptional regulatory fac-
tors  was  demonstrated  in  Arabidopsis  plants  suppressed  in 
expression of the deoxyhypusine synthase (DHS) gene. Delay 
of  postharvest  leaf  senescence  was  observed  in  these  plants 
(Wang  et  al.,  2003).  DHS  is  involved  in  the  conversion  of 
inactive  eukaryotic  translation  initiation  factor-5A  (eIF-5A) 
to  an  activated  form,  and  is  thought  to  facilitate  translation. 
These  observations  were  interpreted  as  indicating  that  DHS 
plays a central role in the initiation of senescence.

Protein  degradation  mechanisms  had  been  recognized  to 
have  important  regulatory  functions.  The  Arabidopsis  ore9 
and dls1 mutations affected the ubiquitin-dependent protein 
degradation pathways and revealed the consequences of both 
age-dependent and artificially induced senescence (Woo et al., 
2001; Yoshida et al., 2002).

When  manipulation  of  gene  expression  is  performed,  it 
is  highly  desirable  to  have  the  changes  confined  to  a  specific 
time  and  tissue  to  avoid  pleiotropic  or  side  effects  to  plant 
development.  This  can  be  achieved  by  the  activation  of  the 
transgene  by  an  appropriate  specific  promoter  that  regulates 
gene expression at the right time and tissue. Such an approach 
was applied by using a maize homeobox gene Knotted1 (kn1), 

427

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

known  to  affect  senescence,  under  the  control  of  the  poplar 
wound-inducible  promoter  win3.12.  The  resulting  transgenic 
tobacco  plants  were  morphologically  normal;  however,  artifi-
cial senescence was delayed by at least two weeks compared 
with  wild-type  leaves  (Luo  et  al.,  2006).  Thus,  expression 
of  the  kn1  gene  driven  by  the  wound-inducible  promoter 
win3.12  is  potentially  useful  to  delay  senescence  of  fresh 
produce  after  harvest.  A  similar  approach  was  utilized  for 
suppression  of  the  cysteine  protease,  aleurain,  demonstrated 
to  delay  floret  senescence  in  broccoli  (Eason  et  al.,  2005). 
Regulation  of  the  antisense  construct  was  achieved  by  the 
senescence-inducible  promoter  of  the  Asparagus  officinalis 
asparagine synthetase (AS) gene (Winichayakul et al., 2004). 
In some of the resulting transgenic broccoli lines, postharvest 
floret  senescence  was  delayed  compared  to  wild-type  plants 
during floret storage at 20°C (Eason et al., 2005).

Senescence-associated hormone 
biosynthesis or perception

Plant  senescence  is  regulated  by  a  coordinated  genetic  pro-
gram  mediated,  in  part,  by  changes  in  different  plant  hor-
mones  including  ethylene,  jasmonic  acid,  abscisic  acid,  and 
cytokinin  (Schippers  et  al.,  2007).  In  recent  years  much 
progress has been made in our understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms involved in hormone biosynthesis or perception, 
which  is  potentially  useful  for  modulation  of  the  senescence 
process.  Delayed  senescence  can  be  achieved  by  either  sup-
pressing  senescence-promoting  hormone  action,  such  as 
ethylene,  by  inhibition  of  their  synthesis  or  perception  or 
overproducing senescence-inhibiting hormones such as cytoki-
nin, or elevating sensitivity of their perception.

Cytokinin  has  been  long  recognized  to  have  a  senes-
cence  retarding  effect  in  different  plants  (Richmond  and 
Lang,  1957).  Accordingly  strategies  for  modulating  its  activ-
ity were subjected to a great deal of research when trying to 
develop biotechnological approaches for delaying senescence. 
Whereas  senescence  is  accompanied  by  a  decline  in  leaf 
cytokinin  content,  exogenous  application  of  cytokinins  or  an 
increase in their endogenous concentration delays senescence. 
Modification of cytokinin biosynthesis using genetic manipula-
tion in transgenic plants, and especially during the senescence 
phase, can significantly delay senescence. The Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens  IPT  gene,  encoding  for  isopentenyl  transferase 
(IPT),  a  key  enzyme  in  cytokinin  biosynthesis,  was  recog-
nized  to  be  a  good  target  for  manipulation.  The  use  of  the 
senescence-specific SAG12 promoter for activation of the IPT 
gene resulted in an efficient autoregulatory cytokinin produc-
tion system (Gan and Amasino, 1995, 1997). At the onset of 
leaf  senescence,  the  senescence-specific  promoter  activates 
the expression of IPT, resulting in increased cytokinin levels, 
which in turn prevent the leaf from senescing. The inhibition 
of  leaf  senescence  renders  the  senescence-specific  promoter 
inactive  to  prevent  cytokinins  from  accumulating  to  very 
high  levels,  since  overproduction  of  cytokinins  may  interfere 
with  other  aspects  of  plant  development.  Because  cytokinin 
production is targeted to senescing leaves, overproduction of 
cytokinins  before  senescence  should  be  avoided.  The  initial 

use  of  this  autoregulated  system  in  tobacco  plants  was  fol-
lowed  successfully  in  other  plants  as  well,  demonstrating  its 
wide application (Guo and Gan, 2007). Transformation of let-
tuce with the SAG12-IPT gene resulted in a significant delay 
of  developmental  and  postharvest  leaf  senescence  in  mature 
heads  of  transgenic  lettuce  (McCabe  et  al.,  2001).  Apart 
from  retardation  of  leaf  senescence,  mature  plants  exhibited 
normal  morphology  with  no  significant  differences  in  head 
diameter or fresh weight of leaves and roots. Also in broccoli, 
the  PSAG12-IPT  construct  was  used  successfully  for  retard-
ing  postharvest  yellowing  (Chen  et  al.,  2001).  The  ability  to 
use the PSAG12-IPT system for retardation of flower senes-
cence was also demonstrated in Petunia in which overproduc-
tion of cytokinins in transformed flowers resulted with a delay 
in corolla senescence and a decrease in sensitivity to ethylene 
(Chang et al., 2003).

In  addition  to  the  use  of  the  SAG12  promoter  for  feed-
back  control  and  specific  expression  of  the  IPT  gene,  the 
use  of  a  cold-inducible  promoter,  cor15a  from  Arabidopsis, 
was  successfully  applied  for  Petunia  and  chrysanthemum 
(Khodakovskaya  et  al.,  2005).  Excised  leaves  from  the  trans-
genic plants remained green and healthy during prolonged dark 
storage after an initial exposure to a brief cold-induction period 
that resulted in accumulation of cytokinin before storage.

Insights regarding cytokinin perception open up the possi-
bility  of  manipulating  perception  of  the  hormone  as  well.  A 
cytokinin signal is known to be perceived by histidine kinase 
receptors.  The  Arabidopsis  cytokinin  receptor  AHK3  was 
found  to  play  a  major  role  in  controlling  cytokinin-mediated 
leaf longevity through a specific phosphorylation of a response 
regulator,  ARR2  (Kim  et  al.,  2006).  A  gain-of-function 
Arabidopsis  mutant  was  identified  that  exhibits  delayed 
leaf  senescence  because  of  a  missense  mutation  in  AHK3. 
Consistently,  transgenic  over-expression  of  wild-type  ARR2 
led  to  delayed  senescence  of  leaves  (Kim  et  al.,  2006).  In 
addition,  the  activity  of  extracellular  invertase  was  found  to 
be  an  essential  component  of  cytokinin-mediated  delay  of 
senescence  (Lara  et  al.,  2004).  Expression  of  the  invertase 
gene  under  control  of  the  senescence-induced  SAG12  pro-
moter results in a delay of senescence.

Ethylene  has  long  been  recognized  to  have  a  senescence-
promoting effect in many different plant tissues (Burg, 1968; 
Grbic  and  Bleecker,  1995).  Knowledge  of  both  the  pathway 
of ethylene biosynthesis and the mechanism of its perception 
enabled the development of molecular approaches for nullify-
ing ethylene action by interfering in either its synthesis or its 
perception (Stearns and Glick, 2003; Lin et al., 2009). Both 
inhibition  of  ethylene  biosynthesis  and  perception  was  used 
in  biotechnology-based  applications  for  retardation  of  flower 
senescence and the relevant literature was recently reviewed 
(Czarny et al., 2006; Tanaka et al., 2005).

The observations that the mutant ethylene receptor exerts 
a  dominant  ethylene-insensitive  phenotype  were  utilized  for 
modulating ethylene sensitivity in different plants. For exam-
ple,  heterologous  expression  of  Arabidopsis  ERS1  resulted 
in  delayed  senescence  in  coriander  in  which  accelerated 
postharvest  senescence  otherwise  occurs  (Wang  and  Kumar, 
2004). In broccoli, a mutant ERS receptor gene was obtained 
through  site-directed  mutagenesis  to  manipulate  ethylene 

428

Application of biotechnology to maintain postharvest quality and reduce losses during storage

C H A P T E R   2 7

sensitivity  following  genetic  transformation  (Chen  et  al., 
2004). Transgenic lines showing delayed senescence in leaves 
and  floral  heads  were  obtained,  although  in  most  lines  the  
yellowing was only delayed by one to two days.

As  previously  mentioned,  for  cytokinin  biosynthesis  spe-
cific temporal and spatial regulation of the manipulated gene 
is generally required to eliminate any undesired consequences 
to plant development. This approach was used in inhibition of 
ethylene production in broccoli, mainly during the senescence 
process  (Gapper  et  al.,  2005).  The  senescence-associated 
AS  promoter  (Winichayakul  et  al.,  2004)  was  used  to  drive 
the  expression  of  an  antisense  ACO  cDNA  from  broccoli  to 
reduce  ethylene  production  following  harvest.  Physiological 
analyses  revealed  that  transgenic  broccoli  lines  displayed 
delayed senescence in detached leaves and heads.

Marker genes are an essential component of plant transfor-
mation systems but are considered undesirable in genetically 
modified  (GM)  products.  One  way  to  produce  marker-free 
transgenic  plants  is  by  co-transformation.  This  involves  the 
stable integration of at least two different T-DNA sequences 
into  the  plant  genome,  which  is  sometimes  achieved  with 
high  efficiency.  If  the  two  T-DNA  sequences  integrate  into 
the plant genome at physically unlinked loci, it is possible to 
segregate out the T-DNA with the selectable marker from the 
T-DNA  carrying  the  gene  in  the  following  generation  using 
sexual  crossing.  This  marker-free  approach  was  applied  suc-
cessfully for a generation of transgenic broccoli with increased 
shelf  life  due  to  manipulation  of  the  ACS  or  ACO  genes 
involved  in  ethylene  biosynthesis  (Higgins  et  al.,  2006).  The 
green fluorescent protein gene (GFP) marker used for initial 
identification  of  co-transformants  was  later  segregated  out. 
This  study  demonstrated  that  the  shelf  life  of  broccoli  may 
be increased by at least 2 days at 20°C by reducing posthar-
vest ethylene production following inhibition of the ethylene 
biosynthesis-related genes.

Manipulation of auxin responses was shown in Arabidopsis 
to  affect  dark-induced  senescence  of  detached  Arabidopsis 
leaves  (Ellis  et  al.,  2005).  Retardation  of  the  process  was 
observed  in  mutant  plants  lacking  the  auxin  response  factors 
(ARF) associated with responses to the plant hormone. Still, 
cytokinin maintained its senescence-retarding activity, suggest-
ing  that  manipulation  of  both  auxin  and  cytokinin  responses 
may have an additive effect for retardation of senescence.

Oxidative stress involvement in 
senescence

The  involvement  of  oxidative  stress  and  plant  tissue  antioxi-
dative  status  in  senescence  initiation  and  progress  has  been 
suggested  based  on  physiological  studies  (Zimmermann  and 
Zentgraf, 2005; Rosenvasser et al., 2006). Thus, biotechnolog-
ical  manipulations  aimed  at  improving  the  leaf  antioxidative 
potential during postharvest storage may result in retardation 
of senescence. Accordingly, deficiency in ascorbic acid in the 
Arabidopsis  mutant  vitamin  C-1  (vtc1)  resulted  in  acceler-
ated  dark-induced  senescence  (Barth  et  al.,  2004).  Thus, 
approaches aimed at elevating vitamin C may result in retar-
dation  of  postharvest  senescence.  Additional  support  for  the 

involvement  of  oxidative  stress  in  senescence  is  the  observa-
tion  that  the  process  is  inhibited  in  transgenic  tobacco  ndhF 
plastid  mutant  in  which  the  gene  is  knocked  out  (Zapata 
et  al.,  2005).  The  Ndh  complex  was  proposed  to  trigger 
senescence  by  increasing  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS).  An 
additional  component  relevant  to  the  involvement  of  oxida-
tive  stress  was  described  in  Arabidopsis  as  the  nitric  oxide 
synthase1 (NOS1), which was found to be targeted to mito-
chondria  and  thought  to  protect  it  against  oxidative  damage 
and  dark-induced  senescence  (Guo  and  Crawford,  2005). 
Dark-induced senescence of detached leaves and intact plants 
progressed more rapidly in NOS1 mutant compared with the 
wild-type,  suggesting  the  possibility  that  elevation  of  NOS1 
may result in senescence retardation. This study supports the 
notion  that  nitric  oxide  (NO)  acts  as  a  negative  regulator  of 
leaf senescence and, therefore, its manipulation using biotech-
nology may have the potential for retarding postharvest senes-
cence in different plant tissues.

Chlorophyll degradation

An important visual aspect of senescence is yellowing due to 
chlorophyll  degradation,  which  is  only  one  aspect  of  senes-
cence and in most cases its inhibition will not result in signifi-
cantly improved postharvest quality. However, in some cases, 
such as citrus or melon peel/skin, the change in color may be 
significant in determining postharvest quality. Recent advances 
were made in the identification of catabolic enzymes respon-
sible  for  chlorophyll  degradation  (Pruzinska  et  al.,  2005; 
Hortensteiner, 2009; Schelbert et al., 2009). This information 
opens the way to use chlorophyll catabolic enzyme encoding 
genes  for  manipulation  of  chlorophyll  content  when  it  has  a 
postharvest significance.

The ability to retard senescence by manipulating different 
genes involved in different senescence subprocesses was dem-
onstrated in broccoli (Chen et al., 2008). Using biotechnology 
to manipulate more than one gene simultaneously in one plant 
may have a more pronounced effect on the delay of posthar-
vest senescence due to the effect of different aspects of the 
senescence process, and will have an additive or even synergis-
tic effect.

Abscission of Fruits, Flowers, and 
Leaves During Postharvest

Background

The occurrence of abscission has a large agricultural implica-
tion both at the level of crop plant growth and yield produc-
tion,  as  well  as  during  postharvest  storage  of  fresh  produce. 
In different agricultural commodities it is necessary to either 
inhibit  or  induce  abscission.  The  premature  induction  of 
abscission  in  the  flowers  of  trees  and  very  young  fruits  as  a 
result  of  extreme  temperature  (Kondo  and  Takahashi,  1989; 
Zhao  et  al.,  2005)  has  a  significant  negative  implication  on 
yield.  Similarly,  acceleration  of  abscission  in  different  fresh 
produce  during  postharvest  storage  results  in  a  significant 

429

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

loss of quality; for example, abscission of cherry tomato from 
the  bunch  (Beno-Moualem  et  al.,  2004),  inflorescence  or 
leaves in ornamentals (van Doorn and Stead; 1997; Michaeli 
et  al.,  1999;  van  Doorn,  2002),  or  basil  leaves  during  low-
temperature  storage.  To  overcome  the  problem,  crops  are 
treated  after  harvest  with  plant  growth  regulators  to  delay 
abscission (van Doorn and Woltering, 1991). Dehiscence is a 
process responsible for the dispersal of mature seeds from the 
silique. Accumulating evidence suggests that the biochemical 
and molecular events involved in this process share similarities 
with those occurring during flower or leaf abscission (Roberts 
et  al.,  2002).  In  some  crops  (soybean,  canola)  delay  of  the 
seed  dispersal  form  of  the  dry  pods  is  required  to  decrease 
losses. In canola, for example, under certain conditions up to 
50%  of  the  yield  can  be  lost  due  to  seed  dispersal  (Moffat, 
2000).

In some agricultural commodities the acceleration of abscis-
sion  is  required  at  the  appropriate  time  to  allow  improved 
mechanization  and  labor  saving;  for  example,  defoliation  of 
cotton  leaves  before  boll  harvest  (Faircloth  et  al.,  2004)  or 
weakening  of  the  abscission  zone  (AZ)  of  fruit  tree  flowers 
or young fruitlets for thinning the fruit load (Link, 2000). In 
citrus, intensive research is aimed at developing methods for 
weakening the AZ tissue to allow mechanized harvest (Burns, 
2002), which is also important for olive harvest.

Currently  two  main  strategies  are  used  for  modifying  the 
abscission  process  in  crop  plants.  In  the  genetic  breeding 
approach  screening  of  new  lines  with  desirable  related  traits 
is performed, which is a relatively slow and unfocused proc-
ess.  The  second  approach  is  development  and  use  of  chemi-
cals or growth regulators to artificially manipulate the process 
(Whitney et al., 2000), such as in cotton or citrus.

Abscission is a natural phase of plant development in which 
leaves,  flowers,  or  fruits  separate  from  the  mother  plant. 
It  is  generally  similar  for  different  organs  and  among  differ-
ent  plants  (Bleecker  and  Patterson,  1997;  Roberts  et  al., 
2002;  Lewis  et  al.,  2006).  The  AZ  has  a  crucial  role  in  the 
process;  it  includes  a  few  layers  of  differentiated  cells  local-
ized between the organ to be detached (fruit, flower, or leaf) 
and  the  plant  body.  The  AZ  becomes  competent  enough  to 
respond to ethylene and auxin, which are known to induce or 
inhibit  abscission,  respectively.  The  central  role  of  ethylene 
is demonstrated by its ability to induce premature abscission 
(Taylor  and  Whitelaw,  2001).  In  many  cases  the  abscission 
process  is  induced  by  ethylene,  whereas  the  rate  and  degree 
of abscission depends upon the endogenous balance between 
auxin and ethylene levels in the tissue (Taylor and Whitelaw, 
2001;  Patterson,  2001;  Roberts  et  al.,  2002).  Actual  organ 
separation  is  mediated  by  activation  of  hydrolytic  enzymes 
within  the  AZ  that  hydrolyze  the  middle  lamella  (Jarvis 
et al., 2003). Based on their expression pattern and the con-
sequences  of  their  manipulation  in  transgenic  plants,  genes 
encoding  for  polygalacturonases  and  β-1,4-glucanases  (cel-
lulases) were thought to have a central role in executing cell 
separation (Roberts and Gonzalez-Carranza, 2009).

In  general,  three  different  stages  of  the  abscission  proc-
ess  could  be  targeted  for  biotechnological  manipulation  by 
focusing  on  different  genes  that  were  found  to  be  involved. 
The following section discusses some examples of the possible 

target  genes  that  have  been  identified  to  be  associated  with 
these different stages of abscission.

Development of the dedicated AZ tissue

Development  of  a  functional  AZ  is  a  prerequisite  for  abscis-
sion.  Thus,  genes  involved  in  the  proper  differentiation  and 
development  of  this  tissue  are  very  relevant  for  biotechnol-
ogy-based  approaches  aimed  at  inhibiting  abscission.  Among 
the  known  regulatory  genes  associated  with  AZ  develop-
ment  is  the  tomato  JOINTLESS  identified  as  a  MADS-box 
gene controlling tomato flower AZ development (Mao et al., 
2000).  The  presence  of  a  functional  JOINTLESS  is  essen-
tial  for  AZ  development.  The  jointless  mutation  has  great 
agronomic  value  and  is  widely  used  in  the  tomato  process-
ing  industry  where  lack  of  AZs  on  the  fruits’  pedicels  aids 
mechanical  harvesting  and  prevents  physical  wounding  dur-
ing  transportation.  The  BLADE-ON-PETIOLE  (bop)  genes 
are  essential  in  Arabidopsis  for  AZ  formation  and  histologi-
cal analysis; petal break strength measurements of bop1 bop2 
flowers  show  no  differentiation  in  the  floral  AZs  (McKim 
et al., 2008).

Regulatory genes involved in abscission 
control or mediating hormonal signal 
transduction

Recent  studies  indicated  that  before  the  AZ  can  become 
abscission  competent  various  subprocesses  should  take  place 
in which different regulatory proteins are involved; for exam-
ple, molecular mechanisms that lead to increased tissue sen-
sitivity to ethylene in response to IAA deficiency in the AZs. 
These  mechanisms  are  as  yet  unknown.  The  following  are  a 
few  examples  for  abscission-associated  genes  identified  in 
Arabidopsis  in  which  regulatory  function  was  shown  to  be 
required for normal progress of the process.

Mutation  in  the  hawaiian  skirt  F-Box  gene  was  found  to 
delay  flower  petal  abscission  and  is  thought  to  be  necessary 
for  cell  separation  to  proceed  at  the  normal  rate  (Gonzalez-
Carranza  et  al.,  2007).  An  ADP-ribosylation  factor  GTPase-
activating  protein,  NEVERSHED  (NEV),  that  regulates 
membrane  trafficking  is  essential  for  floral  organ  shedding 
in Arabidopsis (Liljegren et al., 2009). In a screen for muta-
tions  that  restore  organ  separation  in  nev  flowers,  a  leucine-
rich  repeat  receptor-like  kinase,  EVERSHED  (EVR),  was 
identified  to  function  as  an  inhibitor  of  abscission  (Leslie 
et  al.,  2010).  The  leucine-rich  repeat  receptor-like  kinase 
SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1 
(SERK1)  was  reported  to  act  as  a  negative  regulator  of 
flower  abscission  in  Arabidopsis.  Mutations  in  SERK1  res-
cue  abscission  without  functional  NEV  (Lewis  et  al.,  2010). 
Floral  organ  abscission  was  shown  to  be  regulated  by  the 
INFLORESCENCE  DEFICIENT  IN  ABSCISSION  (IDA) 
regulatory  protein.  ida  mutants  fail  to  abscise  floral  organs, 
and  plants  over-expressing  IDA  display  earlier  abscission 
(Butenko  et  al.,  2003).  HAESA  is  a  plasma  membrane  ser-
ine/threonine  protein  kinase,  and  inhibition  of  expression  of 

430

Application of biotechnology to maintain postharvest quality and reduce losses during storage

C H A P T E R   2 7

its  encoding  gene  was  shown  to  result  in  delayed  abscission 
of  floral  organs  (Jinn  et  al.,  2000).  Over-expression  of  the 
Arabidopsis  ZINC  FINGER  PROTEIN2  transcription  factor 
encoding gene, AtZFP2, resulted in enhanced retention of flo-
ral  organs,  indicating  its  regulatory  role  (Cai  and  Lashbrook, 
2008).  A  similar  effect  for  inhibition  of  floral  organ  abscis-
sion was demonstrated by over-expression of the Arabidopsis 
transcription factor AtDOF4.7, which was shown to interact 
with  the  ZINC  FINGER  PROTEIN2  (Lewis  et  al.,  2010). 
AtDOF4.7  was  thought  to  participate  in  the  regulation  of 
genes encoding for cell wall hydrolysis enzymes.

All  of  the  previously  mentioned  regulatory  functions 
involving  the  abscission  of  floral  organs  were  identified  in 
Arabidopsis. However, further research is needed to examine 
the  presence  and  function  of  related  proteins  in  the  abscis-
sion process of relevant crop plants. Once their existence and 
function is confirmed, they might be used for biotechnologi-
cally based genetic manipulations that affect abscission.

Genes involved in actual execution of cell 
separation in the later stage of abscission

Even  if  AZ  is  developed  and  its  functional  maturation  is 
achieved,  successful  completion  of  abscission  is  dependent 
on the functionality of the enzymatic system involved in the 
actual cell separation process. Functional studies of enzymes/
genes  involved  in  this  very  late  stage  of  abscission  demon-
strated the ability to affect its progress by manipulation of the 
expression of the relevant genes.

In Arabidopsis inhibition of expression of the genes encod-
ing  for  ADPG2  and  QRT2  polygalacturonases  resulted  in 
retardation  of  floral  organ  abscission  (Ogawa  et  al.,  2009). 
In  tomato,  inhibition  of  expression  of  the  polygalacturonase 
encoding  TAPG1  gene  or  that  of  the  endo-1,4-β-glucanase 
Cel2  resulted  in  a  marked  delay  of  abscission  (Brummell 
et  al.,  1999;  Jiang  et  al.,  2008).  On  the  other  hand,  over-
expression in transgenic apple of a polygalacturonase gene led 
to  premature  leaf  shedding  due  to  reduced  cell  adhesion  in 
leaf abscission zones (Atkinson et al., 2002). The suppression 
of another hydrolytic enzyme, the LX ribonuclease, which is 
not involved in cell wall metabolism, resulted in marked delay 
of  abscission  in  tomato  (Lers  et  al.,  2006).  It  was  hypothe-
sized that LX is involved in the programmed cell death proc-
ess (PCD) required for the normal progression of abscission, 
which occurs at the late stage of the process.

Ethylene and abscission

Due to the central role of ethylene in the induction of abscis-
sion  in  many,  but  not  all,  plants,  the  manipulation  of  either 
ethylene  biosynthesis  or  perception  may  be  targeted  for 
modulating  abscission  (Patterson  and  Bleecker,  2004;  Binder 
and Patterson, 2009). As previously mentioned, ethylene bio-
synthesis  or  perception  were  successfully  biotechnologically 
manipulated  in  many  different  plants  (Stearns  and  Glick, 
2003;  Little  et  al.,  2009).  Although  not  directed  originally 
for  manipulation  of  abscission,  in  some  studies  an  effect 
was  observed  on  abscission  as  well  when  ethylene  synthesis 

or  perception  was  manipulated  by  targeting  the  relevant 
genes.  In  antisense  ACO  melon,  abscission  was  delayed  and 
fruit did not drop, even at a very late stage of development, 
whereas  external  ethylene  application  led  to  activation  of 
abscission (Ayub et al., 1996). In a few reports an inhibitory 
effect  on  abscission  was  observed  following  the  introduc-
tion  of  a  mutated  form  of  the  ethylene  receptor  into  trans-
genic plants, or when its expression level was reduced (Ecker, 
1995;  Wilkinson  et  al.,  1997;  Bleecker  and  Patterson,  1997; 
Whitelaw et al., 2002; Yang et al., 2008).

Regulated manipulation of abscission

Care must be taken to avoid negative secondary effects when 
applying  biotechnology  to  manipulate  gene  expression  to 
affect  abscission  by  limiting  the  effect  to  the  AZ  tissue  at  
the appropriate time. For this, an appropriate promoter could 
be utilized to regulate expression for targeting the AZ tissue. 
Few  promoters  were  described  in  the  literature  to  be  active 
in  the  AZ  tissue.  These  include  in  Arabidopsis  the  promot-
ers  of  the  genes  encoding  for  polygalacturonases  (Ogawa 
et  al.,  2009;  Gonzalez-Carranza  et  al.,  2002),  promoters 
of  genes  encoding  for  the  ACC  oxidases  (Tsuchisaka  and 
Theologis, 2004), and the PECTATE LYASE-LIKE (PLL) gene 
promoter  (Sun  and  van  Nocker,  2010).  In  tomato  the  pro-
moters  of  the  polygalacturonase  genes  TAPG1  and  TAPG4 
(Hong et al., 2000) were shown to be active in AZs. Examples 
are available for promoters that exhibit AZ-specific expression 
in  heterologous  plant  systems  such  as  the  promoter  of  the 
Arabidopsis  BFN1  nuclease  gene,  which  is  active  in  tomato 
leaf and fruit AZs as well (Farage-Barhom et al., 2008), or the 
promoter of the bean abscission-related cellulase gene, BAC, 
which was found to be expressed in AZs of Arabidopsis and 
tomato as well as in bean (Koehler et al., 1996; Tucker et al., 
2002;  Patterson  and  Bleecker,  2004).  Thus,  such  promoters 
could be useful for the development of general biotechnologi-
cal  tools  for  the  manipulation  of  abscission  in  different  agri-
culturally important crop plants. Still, care must be taken as 
in most cases these promoters will not be absolutely specific 
for  AZ  tissue  and  are  likely  to  be  active  in  other  tissues  or 
times during development or in response to changing environ-
mental conditions.

Reducing Postharvest Chilling 
Sensitivity

Background

Low-temperature  storage  is  widely  used  because  it  is  con-
sidered  as  one  of  the  best  storage  methods  to  delay  differ-
ent  physiological,  biochemical,  and  pathological  processes 
associated  with  the  loss  of  postharvest  quality  (McGlasson 
et al., 1979). Low temperature slows down the cell metabo-
lism  rate  and  delays  senescence  and  ripening  processes  that 
are very important for postharvest storage. Low temperature 
also inhibits the rate of growth and level of pathogenicity of 
many  postharvest  pathogens.  However,  the  ability  to  use 

431

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

low-temperature  storage  is  limited  by  the  specific  inherited 
cold  sensitivity  of  the  fresh  produce.  Exposure  to  tempera-
tures  below  the  cold  tolerability  threshold  leads  to  various 
chilling-induced  physiological  disorders  termed  chilling  inju-
ries  (Lyons,  1973;  Sevillano  et  al.,  2009).  These  result  in 
quality  loss  and  accelerated  deterioration  due  to  secondary 
pathogen-mediated  decay  of  the  fresh  produce.  The  symp-
toms of chilling injuries in fruits or vegetables or other types 
of  fresh  produce  are  diverse  and  develop  as  a  result  of  the 
effects  of  low  temperatures  on  the  normal  progress  of  dif-
ferent  biological  processes.  Sometimes  chilling  injuries  are 
evident  as  developmental  or  metabolic  disorders  such  as 
incomplete or unbalanced ripening and lack of normal devel-
opment  of  some  aspects  of  normal  ripening  such  as  reduced 
development of flavor and aroma (Forney, 2001) or develop-
ment of a mealiness/wooliness texture due to an unbalanced 
softening process (Brummell et al., 2004). Frequently physi-
ological  chilling  injury  symptoms  are  apparent  by  ultrastruc-
tural  abnormalities.  On  the  microscopic  level  swelling  and 
disorganization of cell organelles can be observed, whereas on 
the  macroscopic  level  chilling  injuries  can  be  manifested  as 
skin  depression  or  pitting,  abnormal  skin  coloration,  internal 
or  surface  browning  (scald),  water-soaked  tissue,  and  lower 
resistance to mechanical injury and pathogen attack (Kratsch 
and  Wise,  2000;  Sevillano  et  al.,  2009).  The  different  mani-
festations  of  postharvest  chilling  injuries  observed  in  differ-
ent plants and different organs indicate that the mechanisms 
involved are likely to be diverse.

Low-temperature or chilling sensitivity is closely linked to 
the  environmental  adaptation  of  a  given  plant.  Plants  origi-
nating  from  temperate  or  cold  climates  are  genetically  more 
adapted to cope with chilling temperatures compared to trop-
ical and subtropical plants (Sung et al., 2003). Fruits and veg-
etables originating from low-temperature-sensitive plants have 
high  sensitivity  to  low  temperature  during  storage,  resulting 
in  physiological  disorders  that  can  have  an  enormous  impact 
on quality. Plants that are better adapted to low temperature 
have evolved systems for efficiently sensing low-temperature 
stress  and  biological  mechanisms  for  protection  against  low-
temperature stress. A great deal of progress has been achieved 
in recent years to understand these low-temperature-response 
mechanisms including signal transduction pathways mediating 
cold stress and specific pathways and genes involved in higher 
resistance to chilling temperature (Iba, 2002; Penfield, 2008; 
Hua,  2009;  Janska  et  al.,  2010).  It  is  clear  today  that  both 
cold temperature sensing and signaling and even more resist-
ance mechanisms are very complex and differ as a function of 
the  specific  crop.  Also,  there  are  various  types  of  symptoms 
that develop as a result of chilling injury that add to the com-
plexity  of  the  problem.  Different  postharvest  technologies 
were  developed  over  the  years  for  inhibiting  or  delaying  the 
development of chilling injuries (Sevillano et al., 2009). These 
include  pre-storage  exposure  of  fresh  produce  to  different 
physical treatments such as high temperature, conditioning at 
moderate  low  to  intermediate  low  temperatures,  and  differ-
ent storage conditions such as changes of humidity and use of 
a controlled or modified atmosphere (Sevillano et al., 2009). 
It  is  possible  that  these  treatments/conditions  induce  genes 
and biological mechanisms involved in chilling tolerance.

Careful consideration should be given when biotechnologi-
cal  strategies  are  planned  for  the  development  of  transgenic 
crops  in  which  sensitivity  to  chilling  temperatures  will  be 
reduced.  Targeting  genes  involved  in  the  biological  processes 
associated  with  the  primary  events  of  the  development  of 
chilling  injuries  or  activation  of  basic,  wide-range  resistance 
mechanisms should get high priority. Two possible major tar-
gets  for  genetic  manipulation  to  improve  postharvest  quality 
during  low-temperature  storage  are  cell  membrane  structure 
and oxidative stress response mechanisms. The use of genetic 
engineering  techniques  to  improve  the  adaptability  of  plants 
to temperature stress was already shown to be possible in dif-
ferent plant model systems (Iba, 2002).

Membrane structure and chilling sensitivity

The  cell  membrane  is  considered  to  be  the  site  of  initial 
events leading to chilling injuries that occur because of mem-
brane  structure  and  permeability  (Lyons,  1973;  Nishida  and 
Murata, 1996). Low temperature results in damage from bio-
physical  changes  in  the  membrane  properties  because  of  the 
lipid phase transition and chemical damage to the membrane 
lipids from ROS activity (Marangoni et al., 1996; Kratsch and 
Wise, 2000; Wolfe, 1978; Sharom et al., 1994). Consequently, 
the  properties  and  functionality  of  the  membrane  are  dam-
aged. Membrane lipids undergo enzymatic and non-enzymatic 
lipid  peroxidation  and  degradation.  The  resulting  defects 
could  be  ion  leakage  and  cellular  decompartmentalization 
and  reduced  or  loss  of  functionality  of  different  membrane 
proteins  such  as  enzymes  or  transporters  (Wolfe,  1978; 
Marangoni  et  al.,  1996).  In  general,  the  chemical  structure 
of  lipids  will  be  highly  significant  in  determining  low-tem-
perature sensitivity of the cell membrane with the degree of 
saturation having high significance (Nishida and Murata, 1996; 
Kratsch  and  Wise,  2000).  Adaptation  to  low  temperatures 
was  found  frequently  to  involve  an  increase  in  the  level  of 
unsaturated  fatty  acids  also  resulting  in  increased  membrane 
fluidity  during  postharvest  cold  storage  (Zhang  and  Tian, 
2009). The central role of the membrane in the development 
of  chilling  injuries  in  fresh  produce  during  cold  storage  was 
demonstrated  in  peach  fruit  (Wongsheree  et  al.,  2009)  and 
basil leaf (Zhang et al., 2010).

Over  the  years  many  studies  demonstrated  the  ability  to 
modify  and  reduce  plant  sensitivity  to  cold  temperatures  by 
manipulating  the  expression  of  single  genes  involved  in  lipid 
metabolism.  In  many  of  these  studies  model  plant  systems 
were  used  and  attenuation  of  cold  sensitivity  was  examined 
in the leaves of plants growing in the light. The relevance of 
these approaches and the specific genes used for manipulation 
will have to be examined for low-temperature sensitivity dur-
ing postharvest storage of fresh produce, which in many cases 
is a non-leafy organ such as a fruit or a flower.

The  following  are  a  few  examples  of  specific  genetic 
manipulation that resulted in a successful change in low-tem-
perature  sensitivity.  The  level  of  fatty  acid  unsaturation  and 
the degree of chilling sensitivity of tobacco were successfully 
manipulated  by  transformation  with  different  glycerol-3-
phosphate  acyltransferase  (GAPT)  encoding  genes  (Murata 

432

Application of biotechnology to maintain postharvest quality and reduce losses during storage

C H A P T E R   2 7

et  al.,  1992).  Different  genes  encode  for  different  isoforms 
of the enzyme, each having different preferences for the acyl-
ACP  substrate,  thus  leading  to  a  membrane  with  different 
fatty acid composition (Murata et al., 1992). Over-expression 
in  tomato  of  LeGPAT  increased  total  activity  of  LeGPAT 
and  cis-unsaturated  fatty  acids  in  the  membranes  (Sui 
et al., 2007). Chilling treatment induced less ion leakage from 
the  transgenic  plants  compared  to  wild-type.  The  enzyme 
encoded by the cyanobacterium Delta 9 desaturase gene has 
a  broad  specificity  and  introduces  a  cis-double  bond  at  the 
Delta  9  position  of  both  16  and  18  carbon  saturated  fatty 
acids linked in many kinds of membrane lipids. The Delta 9 
gene was introduced into tobacco, and in the resulting trans-
genic plants a highly reduced level of saturated fatty acid con-
tent  was  observed  in  most  membrane  lipids,  and  the  plants 
exhibited a significant increase in chilling resistance (Ishizaki-
Nishizawa  et  al.,  1996).  Chilling  tolerance  in  Arabidopsis 
was reported to involve ALA1, a putative aminophospholipid 
translocase  (Gomes  et  al.,  2000).  Downregulation  of  ALA1 
in  Arabidopsis  results  in  cold-sensitive  plants  that  are  much 
smaller than the wild-type. Transformation of tobacco with a 
gene  for  the  thermophilic  acyl-lipid  desaturase  was  found  to 
enhance  chilling  tolerance.  Lipid  content  and  the  extent  of 
fatty  acid  unsaturation  significantly  increased  in  leaves,  and 
the  chilling  tolerance  of  those  plants  also  increased  (Orlova 
et  al.,  2003).  Enhanced  cold  tolerance  was  demonstrated  in 
transgenic tobacco expressing a chloroplast omega-3 fatty acid 
desaturase gene (FAD7) under the control of a cold-inducible 
promoter  (Khodakovskaya  et  al.,  2006).  This  approach  of 
utilization  of  a  cold-responsive  regulatory  element  might  be 
adopted  for  postharvest  applications  when  precise  tempera-
ture conditions during storage are known or could be modu-
lated in a controlled way.

Oxidative stress and chilling sensitivity or 
tolerance

Low-temperature  stress  increases  the  level  of  ROS  in  the 
cells,  which  can  lead  to  several  different  and  major  destruc-
tive side effects if not neutralized (Suzuki and Mittler, 2006). 
The  production  of  these  toxic  species  is  accelerated  when 
homeostasis is unbalanced and their elevated level can result 
in  major  uncontrolled  damage  to  different  cellular  compo-
nents  (Scandalios,  1993;  Prasad,  1996).  In  plants  a  major 
cause  for  low-temperature-induced  ROS  generation  is  inef-
ficient  photosynthesis,  which  takes  place  in  the  light  (Foyer 
et al., 1994; Wise, 1995). However, cold storage of fresh pro-
duce in the dark frequently results in elevation of toxic ROS, 
which  leads  to  different  damage  within  the  cells,  including 
lipid  peroxidation  leading  to  membrane  disintegration,  pro-
tein  oxidation  leading  to  enzymatic  activity  inhibition,  and 
finally cell death (Sevillano et al., 2009). For example, post-
harvest chilling was found to induce oxidative stress in tomato 
fruit (Malacrida et al., 2006) and enhanced leaf abscission via 
increased oxidative processes (Michaeli et al., 2001).

The  involvement  of  oxidative  stress  in  different  environ-
mental  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses  was  demonstrated  in  dif-
ferent  plants.  Manipulation  of  different  genes  involved  in 

antioxidative  function  in  plants  was  reported  to  affect  the 
response  of  these  transgenic  plants  to  environmental  stress 
(Perl et al., 1993; Dat et al., 2001; Kim et al., 2010). These 
observations  demonstrate  the  potential  of  using  biotech-
nology  for  affecting  the  ability  of  crop  plants  to  grow  under 
extreme  conditions  (Mittler  and  Blumwald,  2010).  An  asso-
ciation  for  low-temperature  stress  was  also  found  to  exist 
between  the  degree  of  sensitivity  or  resistance  and  the  level 
of  different  components  of  the  plant  antioxidative  systems 
(Lukatkin, 2002; Sevillano et al., 2009). Direct evidence link-
ing  the  expressions  of  specific  genes  encoding  for  antioxida-
tive enzymes and the degree of chilling sensitivity supplies a 
basis for the possibility of targeting these or similar genes for 
modulating  chilling  sensitivity  during  postharvest  storage  of 
fresh produce. High sensitivity to cold storage limits storage, 
as is the case in basil (Aharoni et al., 2010).

Although  the  antioxidative  system  is  composed  of  a  few 
different enzymes and protective molecules with antioxidative 
activity,  the  ability  to  affect  sensitivity  to  cold  temperature 
by  modulation  of  a  single  component  or  gene  was  demon-
strated.  Inhibition  of  a  catalase  gene  increases  susceptibil-
ity to oxidative stress and chilling injury in transgenic tomato 
plants (Kerdnaimongkol and Woodson, 1999). Overproduction 
of  maize  or  potato  superoxic  dismutase  (SOD)  and  tomato 
cytosolic  ascorbate  peroxidase  increased  tolerance  to  chill-
ing  (van  Breusegem  et  al.,  1999;  Wang  et  al.,  2005;  Waterer 
et  al.,  2010).  Along  with  the  manipulation  of  genes  encod-
ing  for  enzymes  known  to  be  part  of  the  enzymatic  system 
responsible for detoxification of ROS, there are other compo-
nents  for  which  manipulation  may  contribute  to  elimination 
of  chilling-induced  oxidative  stress.  Galactinol  and  raffinose 
constitute  a  novel  function  to  protect  plants  from  oxida-
tive  damage.  Arabidopsis  plants  that  had  increased  levels  of 
galactinol  and  raffinose  in  the  leaves  due  to  over-expression 
of the relevant biosynthetic genes had an increased tolerance 
to  chilling  stress  and  other  stresses.  Genetic  manipulation, 
which  indirectly  affects  the  levels  of  chilling-induced  ROS, 
may  also  result  in  enhanced  resistance  to  postharvest  chill-
ing stress. Such an indirect effect was observed in Charentais 
cantaloupe  melons  in  which  ethylene  biosynthesis  was  inhib-
ited  due  to  suppression  of  the  ACO  gene  (Ben-Amor  et  al., 
1999).  In  contrast  to  wild-type  fruit,  antisense  ACO  melons 
did not develop the characteristic chilling injury of pitting and 
browning of the rind when stored at low temperature or upon 
re-warming.  The  tolerance  to  chilling  was  associated  with 
reduced  membrane  deterioration  and  higher  capacity  of  the 
fruit to remove active oxygen species.

Regulation of low-temperature responses

When  planning  to  use  biotechnology  for  manipulation  of 
genes  for  improving  major  aspects  of  plant  development  or 
in  response  to  the  environment,  it  could  be  generally  more 
efficient  to  target  a  regulatory  gene  that  has  a  more  central 
role in a given process compared to a gene that is involved in 
a  very  specific  and  limited  function  (Century  et  al.,  2008). 
Thus, targeting a regulatory gene that controls a wide aspect 
of  the  plant  low-temperature  response  can  be  very  efficient 

433

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

for  improving  fresh  produce  resistance  to  chilling  tempera-
ture. In recent years new and detailed information was accu-
mulated regarding the networks involved in cold temperature 
perception  and  signal  transduction,  and  later  activation  and 
regulation  of  the  expression  of  sets  of  genes  involved  with 
the  designated  resistance  mechanisms  (Sung  et  al.,  2003; 
Yamaguchi-Shinozaki and Shinozaki, 2006; Chinnusamy et al., 
2007;  Zhu  et  al.,  2007;  Hua,  2009).  The  reader  is  referred 
to  Chapter  19  of  this  book  in  which  regulation  of  the  cold 
response  in  plants  and  how  the  cold  signal  cross-talks  with 
other internal and external cues is discussed.

The  plant  hormone  ABA,  known  to  mediate  the  signal 
transduction of different abiotic stresses, has a central role in 
increasing plant cold tolerance (S.Y. Kim, 2007). A great deal 
of information is available regarding the cold-tolerance-related 
signaling networks ABA activates. Specific genes were identi-
fied  that  control  major  pathways  involved  in  ABA-regulated 
cold tolerance. Manipulation of the expression of these genes 
can  be  targeted  for  biotechnologically  improving  plant  cold 
tolerance (Xue-Xuan et al., 2010).

The  CBF  (DREB)  genes  act  as  major  transcription  regula-
tors of Arabidopsis response to cold stress, which are conserved 
in  other  plants  as  well  (Gilmour  et  al.,  1998;  Jaglo-Ottosen 
et  al.,  1998;  Owens  et  al.,  2002;  Dubouzet  et  al.,  2003;  van 
Buskirk  and  Thomashow,  2006;  Pino  et  al.,  2008).  CBF  acti-
vates  multiple  components  of  the  cold  acclimation  response 
(Gilmour  et  al.,  2000).  Plant  tolerance  to  low  temperatures 
can  be  improved  by  over-expression  of  CBF/DREB  genes, 
which  in  turn  results  in  enhancement  of  pathways  associated 
with resistance to low-temperature stress (Sung et al., 2003; J. 
Kim, 2007; Sevillano et al., 2009). Heterologous expression of 
the Arabidopsis CBF/DREB genes was shown to improve toler-
ance to cold stress in crop plants such as grape and potato (Pino 
et  al.,  2008;  Jin  et  al.,  2009).  Since  the  CBF/DREB  system 
controls  a  wide  array  of  genes  affecting  different  subproc-
esses, the constitutive over-expression of these genes can result 
in  deleterious  effects  to  plant  growth  or  development.  This 
can  be  limited  by  the  use  of  a  regulated  promoter  (Kasuga 
et  al.,  1999).  In  tomato  fruit  the  LeCBF1  expression  level 
was  reported  to  positively  correlate  with  cold  tolerance  and 
showed a high correlation to chilling injury index with ethylene 
and cold regulating its expression (Zhao et al., 2009a,b). This 
observation suggests CBF as a potential target for manipulation 
to  improve  fresh  produce  tolerance  to  low-temperature  post-
harvest storage. Along with the CBF/DREB regulatory system, 
there are other regulatory genes involved with the induction of 
plants’ tolerance to low temperatures. Whereas CDF/DREB is 
considered  to  have  a  quick  response  to  the  cold  stress  signal, 
rice  MYBS3  was  suggested  to  be  part  of  a  slower  responsive 
regulatory system (Su et al., 2010). Gain- and loss-of-function 
analyses  indicated  that  MYBS3  is  sufficient  and  necessary  for 
enhancing cold tolerance (Su et al., 2010).

Much insight is available from recent studies regarding the 
regulatory  components  and  signal  transduction  involved  in 
cold  sensing  in  plants  that  mediate  protection  responses  to 
minimize  damage.  Much  of  this  knowledge  originates  from 
studies  with  plant  model  systems,  some  of  which  are  tem-
perate  zone  plants  that  have  adapted  to  low-temperature 
environments.  It  will  be  necessary  to  examine  if  the  same 

or  similar  regulatory  circuits  and  proteins  function  in  high- 
temperature-adapted  plants  before  their  manipulation  could 
be used for developing plants better adapted to low-tempera-
ture storage conditions. Another challenge is to examine if the 
cold responses of fruit are similar to those that occur in leafy 
tissue, since much of the available information originates from 
leaves in model systems.

Molecules with protective functions during 
cold stress

During abiotic stress the biosynthesis and accumulation of dif-
ferent molecules thought to have protective functions in the 
cells is induced. These molecules are thought to mediate their 
protective function by their interaction with, or stabilizing of, 
different cellular components such as membrane elements or 
proteins/enzymes  whose  structure  or  function  are  sensitive 
and  can  be  damaged  as  a  result  of  the  low  temperature.  For 
some  of  these  protective  molecules  the  biosynthetic  path-
ways were described and genes encoding specific key enzymes 
in  the  pathways  were  identified  and  subjected  to  molecular 
manipulations  to  modulate  biosynthesis  (Bhatnagar-Mathur 
et al., 2008). In cases where these protective molecules con-
tribute to plant chilling tolerance, key biosynthetic or regula-
tory genes could serve as potential targets for biotechnological 
manipulations for improving cold tolerance for fresh produce 
during postharvest storage.

Glycinebetaine  is  an  effective  protectant  against  abiotic 
stress  in  plants  including  chilling  and  freezing  (Chen  and 
Murata,  2008).  Much  progress  was  made  in  recent  years 
toward  improving  plant  tolerance  to  abiotic  stress  by  genetic 
engineering of glycinebetaine biosynthesis (Khan et al., 2009). 
Overproduction  in  tomato  of  glycinebetaine,  otherwise  not 
synthesized in tomato, resulted in plants more tolerant to chill-
ing (Park et al., 2004). This was obtained by over-expression of 
the  codA  gene,  which  encodes  choline  oxidase  catalyzing  the 
conversion of choline to glycinebetaine.

Heat shock pre-treatment in some plants has been found to 
induce  induction  of  chilling  tolerance  and  was  demonstrated 
also to have a beneficial effect as a pre-storage treatment for 
some fruits or vegetables (Porat et al., 2000; Paull and Chen, 
2000; Fallik, 2004). Heat-shock proteins (HSPs) act to stabi-
lize  proteins  in  the  cell  under  temperature  stress  conditions 
by their activity as molecular chaperones. The HSPs support 
protein  folding,  translocation,  assembly,  and  degradation  in 
the cells during optimal and normal growth conditions. Their 
function is also vital under stress conditions such as extreme 
temperatures (Waters et al., 1996; Wang et al., 2004).

Dehydrins, a group of late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) 
proteins,  are  characterized  by  the  presence  of  a  lysine-rich 
amino acid motif. LEA proteins are proposed to act as chap-
erones in the cells and function to protect proteins and mem-
branes under stress conditions leading to dehydration (Kosova 
et al., 2007). Induction of the level of LEA proteins was asso-
ciated  with  improved  tolerance  to  low  temperatures  (Close, 
1997).  The  over-expression  of  multiple  dehydrin  genes 
was  demonstrated  to  enhance  tolerance  to  freezing  stress  in 
Arabidopsis (Puhakainen et al., 2004).

434

Application of biotechnology to maintain postharvest quality and reduce losses during storage

C H A P T E R   2 7

Polyamines (PAs) such as tetramine spermine (Spm), the-
triamine spermidine (Spd), and diamine putrescine (Put) are 
considered components of plants’ defense mechanisms against 
different  types  of  abiotic  stresses  (Groppa  and  Benavides, 
2008;  Alcazar  et  al.,  2010;).  Results  from  different  studies 
demonstrated  an  increase  in  PA  levels  following  postharvest 
exposure of fresh produce to chilling stress, mainly in chilling-
injury-tolerant  fruits  (Kramer  and  Wang,  1989;  McDonald, 
1989).  Manipulation  of  genes  involved  in  the  biosynthe-
sis of PAs can be used to alter PA levels. Over-expression of 
the  apple  spermidine  synthase  gene  in  pear  confers  multiple 
abiotic  stress  tolerance  by  altering  the  amount  of  PA  (Wen 
et al., 2008). No reports are available yet regarding the chill-
ing  tolerance  effects  by  using  this  approach.  Interestingly, 
over-expression  of  yeast  spermidine  synthase  was  recently 
shown to increase tomato fruit shelf life, probably by reducing 
postharvest senescence and decay (Nambeesan et al., 2010).

It is not clear yet to what extent the mechanisms and genes 
found  to  be  involved  in  tolerance  against  low-temperature  
stress  during  growth  are  also  involved  in  tolerance  to  the 
stress  imposed  on  sensitive,  fresh  produce  when  dark  stored 
at low temperatures that induce chilling injuries. Both mem-
brane  structure  characteristics  and  the  antioxidative  system 
seem  to  play  a  major  role  in  both  of  these  low-temperature 
stress conditions. Furthermore, manipulation of these biologi-
cal  processes  may  benefit  other  aspects  such  as  plant  devel-
opment and the ability of crop plants to cope with different 
abiotic  stress  conditions  such  as  drought,  salinity,  or  high 
temperatures.

Affecting Postharvest Texture and 
Appearance Qualities

Background

The  quality  of  texture  of  fresh  fruits  and  vegetables  is  very 
important both as a sensory property that directly influences 
consumer  attraction  and  eating  quality.  Description  of  sen-
sory  evaluation  or  experience  can  be  described  in  different 
terms  that  relate  to  different  texture  characteristics  such  as 
firmness,  softening,  crispness,  mealiness,  crunchiness,  gritti-
ness, and other properties contributing to mouth feel (Harker 
et al., 1997; Toivonen and Brummell, 2008). Frequently firm-
ness  or  softening  are  measured  and  used  as  the  primary  cri-
teria  for  evaluation  of  postharvest  quality.  Although  texture 
characteristics  are  an  inherit  quality  of  the  plant  and  its  rel-
evant genetics, the conditions of postharvest storage and shelf 
life can dramatically affect texture qualities.

Softening and cell wall hydrolysis

The  softening  of  fruits  is  an  integral  part  of  fruit  ripening 
and is thought to be dependent to a large extent on cell wall 
metabolism.  Many  studies  demonstrated  association  between 
changes in cell wall structure and cell wall hydrolases, includ-
ing molecular studies performed to examine how manipulation 
of  different  cell  wall  hydrolase  genes  affect  softening  during 

ripening  and  postharvest  storage  (Brummee,  2006;  Vicente 
et al., 2007; Goulao and Oliveira, 2008; Li et al., 2010).

Most studies that examined the consequences of manipulat-
ing the cell wall metabolism were performed to examine the 
effect on texture or softening of fruit tissues. A recent study 
demonstrated  that  manipulation  of  cell  wall  hydrolases  can 
be  important  to  the  postharvest  qualities  of  leafy  vegetables. 
Transgenic lettuce plants were generated in which the produc-
tion  of  the  cell-wall-modifying  enzyme  xyloglucan  endotrans-
glucosylase/hydrolase  (XTH)  was  downregulated  (Wagstaff 
et  al.,  2010).  In  transgenic  plants  the  leaf  area  and  fresh 
weight  were  decreased,  whereas  leaf  strength  was  increased 
and  membrane  permeability  was  reduced  toward  the  end  of 
shelf life. Overall an extended shelf life of transgenic lines was 
observed  relative  to  the  non-transgenic  control  plants,  which 
illustrated  the  potential  for  manipulation  of  cell-wall-related 
genes for improving postharvest quality of leafy crops.

Softening and turgor

Softening of fruits during ripening has been generally consid-
ered to result from cell wall disassembly due to activation of 
cell wall hydrolases, as previously mentioned. Whereas some 
studies  demonstrated  a  link  between  expression  of  specific 
genes associated with cell wall metabolism and advancement 
of softening, it is clear that the relationship between the two 
is  not  simple  and  depends  upon  the  specific  plant  system 
examined.  Few  studies  suggested  that  turgor  pressure  is  an 
important  factor  in  determining  changes  in  the  resistance  of 
the fruit tissue to pressure, thus contributing to softening dur-
ing postharvest storage (Vicente et al., 2007). Thus, water loss 
that is generally a major problem during storage seems to also 
be relevant to softening in some cases. In apples it was found 
that cultivars with little softening during storage had low rates 
of reduction in turgor, indicating that it closely relates to post-
harvest apple fruit softening (Iwanami et al., 2008). The asso-
ciation  of  a  single  gene,  Delayed  Fruit  Deterioration,  (DFD) 
to both softening and water loss was demonstrated in tomato 
(Saladie et al., 2007). Cell wall metabolism was not altered in 
DFD fruits, whereas water loss was inhibited leading to higher 
cellular  turgor  compared  to  wild-type.  Based  on  observed 
changes in cuticle composition and structure in fruits of DFD, 
it was suggested that cuticle has an influence on intact tomato 
fruit  firmness  and  ripening  physiology.  This  function  makes 
it  a  potential  biotechnological  target  to  prolong  fruit  quality 
(Saladie et al., 2007). An additional interesting link between 
water  status  and  softening  was  proposed  to  be  in  strawberry 
based  on  the  association  found  between  expression  of  fruit-
specific aquaporin genes and changes in firmness during ripen-
ing (Alleva et al., 2010). These studies showed that along with 
the  suggested  role  of  cell  wall  metabolism,  water  balance  in 
fresh produce may have an important contribution to changes 
observed in firmness.

Tissue lignifications

In  most  cases  softening  is  associated  with  increased  storage 
periods  of  fresh  produce,  but  in  some  fruits  or  vegetables 

435

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

under some storage conditions an increase in tissue firmness is 
observed resulting in flesh lignification. Lignification of fruits 
and  vegetables  during  postharvest  storage  leads  to  loss  of 
quality and commercial losses. Accumulation of lignin affects 
digestibility  as  well  as  marked  reduction  in  texture  quality, 
which  in  turn  results  in  loss  of  consumer  attraction.  Lignin 
accumulation  during  postharvest  storage  was  reported  for 
various fruits and vegetables such as apple (Valentines et al., 
2005), asparagus (Hennion et al., 1992), carrot (Bolin, 1992), 
and celery (Vina and Chaves, 2003). Although the problem of 
lignin accumulation is more limited compared to softening, it 
is still an important postharvest problem.

Lignins  are  phenolic  compounds  that  are  important  cell 
wall components. Increases in firmness and lignin content are 
associated with increased activities of a few enzymes involved 
in  lignin  biosynthesis  including  phenylalanineammonia  lyase 
(PAL),  4-coumarate:CoA  ligase  (4CL),  cinnamyl  alcohol 
dehydrogenase (CAD), Omethyltransferase (OMT), and per-
oxidase (POD; Li et al., 2010). The role of these enzymes in 
fruit  ripening  has  been  investigated  recently,  including  func-
tional  characterization  of  these  key  phenylpropanoid  bio-
synthetic  enzymes/genes  during  the  fruit  ripening  processes 
(Singh et al., 2010).

Molecular  manipulations  for  reducing  lignin  level,  mostly 
in tree plants, were reported to be successful. These studies 
focused  on  inhibiting  the  expression  of  the  genes  encoding 
three  of  the  key  enzymes  in  the  phenylpropanoid  biosyn-
thetic pathways such as 4CL in which suppression led to up 
to a 45% reduction of lignin (Hu et al., 1999; Voelker et al., 
2010).  In  plants  in  which  CAD  gene  expression  was  inhib-
ited, although absolute level was not markedly changed, lignin 
characteristics were altered in both composition and structure 
(Halpin  et  al.,  1994).  Alteration  in  lignin  characteristics  and 
reduction  in  their  level  was  also  obtained  in  plants  inhibited 
for OMT gene expression (Dwivedi et al., 1994; Rastogi and 
Dwivedi,  2008;).  Thus,  it  is  possible  that  by  manipulation 
of  genes  encoding  the  above  lignin-biosynthesis  related  key 
enzymes, it would be possible to reduce the problem of lignin 
accumulation in certain fresh fruits or vegetables during post-
harvest storage.

Implications for Plant and Agricultural 
Biotechnology

The use of biotechnology for future improvement of posthar-
vest  quality  and  reduction  of  losses  could  potentially  have  a 

profound  effect  on  agriculture  and  the  ability  to  supply  the 
growing  demand  for  food.  Many  efforts  are  being  invested 
into  developing  new  and  more  efficient  postharvest  storage 
technologies,  treatments,  and  strategies  to  further  improve 
the  ability  to  keep  fresh  produce  quality.  However,  the  abil-
ity  to  further  extend  the  available  postharvest  technologies  
seems  to  be  limited.  Currently  it  seems  that  there  are  two 
main approaches that may yield the greatest benefit and hold 
much  promise  for  further  improving  worldwide  postharvest 
qualities  of  fresh  produce.  The  first,  and  more  simple  and 
immediate,  is  to  efficiently  distribute  the  already  available 
postharvest professional knowledge to sites around the world 
where  such  knowledge  is  limiting.  The  other  approach  is  to 
utilize biotechnology or biotechnology-assisted classical breed-
ing  for  the  development  of  new  crop  varieties  that  will  be 
improved  in  postharvest-related  traits,  thus  becoming  more 
adapted to postharvest storage.

In  this  chapter  several  highly  relevant  examples  for  post-
harvest  storage  of  fresh  produce  were  discussed.  Studies  of 
gene  manipulation  in  transgenic  plants  resulting  in  new  pheno-
types  relevant  to  postharvest  issues  were  presented.  The  basic 
research  conducted  so  far  had  identified  potential  targets  for 
genetic  manipulation,  some  of  which  could  be  used  as  mark-
ers  in  genetic  breeding  programs  to  identify  progenies  better 
adapted  for  postharvest  storage.  Along  with  the  target  genes, 
appropriate  regulatory  elements  of  gene  expression  should  be 
used  to  activate  the  manipulated  genes  at  the  right  time  and 
the  right  tissue.  This  is  crucial  to  obtain  a  specific  effect  dur-
ing  postharvest  storage  without  any  undesired  consequences  to 
normal plant development or response to environmental stress. 
To obtain such specificity of gene expression it might be possi-
ble to take advantage of the fact that in many cases the posthar-
vest fresh produce is exposed to specific and defined conditions 
during storage. These, for example, can include certain CO2/O2 
concentrations very different from that of air, darkness, or low 
temperatures.  If  gene  expression  regulatory  elements  that 
respond  to  these  postharvest-specific  conditions  are  used,  it 
might be possible to limit the manipulation of the expression of 
the targeted genes only to the storage period. In such cases the 
biotechnological manipulation will be silent during the develop-
ment  or  growth  of  the  genetically  modified  plant  and  decrease 
the chances of undesired negative side effects.

Additional  molecular  and  biotechnological  studies  should 
be  performed  in  crop  plants  to  fully  apply  biotechnological 
tools for improving postharvest quality. However, this knowl-
edge  allows  us  to  use  biotechnology  to  improve  postharvest-
related qualities of fresh produce.

References

Aharoni, N., Kenigsbuch, D., Chalupowicz, D., 
Faura-Mlinski, M., Aharon, Z., Maurer, D., 
et al. (2010). Reducing chilling injury and 
decay in stored sweet basil. Israel Journal of 
Plant Sciences, 58, 167–168.

Alcazar, R., Altabella, T., Marco, F., Bortolotti, 

C., Reymond, M., & Koncz, C., et al. 
(2010). Polyamines: Molecules with 

regulatory functions in plant abiotic stress 
tolerance. Planta, 231, 1237–1249.

Alleva, K., Marquez, M., Villarreal, N., Mut, P., 
Bustamante, C., & Bellati, J., et al. (2010). 
Cloning, functional characterization, and 
co-expression studies of a novel aquaporin 
(FaPIP2;1) of strawberry fruit. Journal of 
Experimental Botany, 61, 3935–3945.

Anonymous,  How to feed a hungry world. 

Nature, 466, 531–532.

Atkinson, R. G., Schroder, R., Hallett, I. 

C., Cohen, D., & MacRae, E. A. (2002). 
Overexpression of polygalacturonase in 
transgenic apple trees leads to a range of 
novel phenotypes involving changes in cell 
adhesion. Plant Physiology, 129, 122–133.

436

Application of biotechnology to maintain postharvest quality and reduce losses during storage

C H A P T E R   2 7

Ayub, R., Guis, M., BenAmor, M., Gillot, L., 
Roustan, J. P., & Latche, A., et al. (1996). 
Expression of ACC oxidase antisense gene 
inhibits ripening of cantaloupe melon fruits. 
Nature Biotechnology, 14, 862–866.

Balazadeh, S., Riano-Pachon, D. M., & Mueller-

Roeber, B. (2008). Transcription factors 
regulating leaf senescence in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Plant Biology, 10, 63–75.

Bapat, V. A., Trivedi, P. K., Ghosh, A., Sane, 

V. A., Ganapathi, T. R., & Nath, P. (2010). 
Ripening of fleshy fruit: Molecular insight 
and the role of ethylene. Biotechnology 
Advances, 28, 94–107.

Barth, C., Moeder, W., Klessig, D. F., & 
Conklin, P. L. (2004). The timing of 
senescence and response to pathogens 
is altered in the ascorbate-deficient 
Arabidopsis mutant vitamin c-1. Plant 
Physiology, 134, 1784–1792.

Ben-Amor, M., Flores, B., Latche, A., Bouzayen, 

M., Pech, J. C., & Romojaro, F. (1999). 
Inhibition of ethylene biosynthesis by 
antisense ACC oxidase RNA prevents 
chilling injury in Charentais cantaloupe 
melons. Plant Cell and Environment, 22, 
1579–1586.

Beno-Moualem, D., Gusev, L., Dvir, O., Pesis, 

E., Meir, S., & Lichter, A. (2004). The 
effects of ethylene, methyljasmonate and 
1-MCP on abscission of cherry tomatoes 
from the bunch and expression of endo-
1,4-beta-glucanases. Plant Science, 167, 
499–507.

Bhatnagar-Mathur, P., Vadez, V., & Sharma, K. 

K. (2008). Transgenic approaches for abiotic 
stress tolerance in plants: Retrospect and 
prospects. Plant Cell Reports, 27, 411–424.

Binder, B. M., & Patterson, S. E. (2009). 
Ethylene-dependent and -independent 
regulation of abscission. Stewart Postharvest 
Review, 5(1), 1–10.

Bleecker, A. B., & Patterson, S. E. (1997). Last 
exit: Senescence, abscission, and meristem 
arrest in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 9, 
1169–1179.

Bolin, H. R. (1992). Retardation of surface 

lignification on fresh peeled carrots. Journal 
of Food Processing and Preservation, 16, 
99–104.

Brummell, D. A. (2006). Cell wall disassembly 

in ripening fruit. Functional Plant Biology, 
33, 103–119.

Brummell, D. A., Dal Cin, V., Lurie, S., 

Crisosto, C. H., & Labavitch, J. M. 
(2004). Cell wall metabolism during the 
development of chilling injury in cold-stored 
peach fruit: Association of mealiness with 
arrested disassembly of cell wall pectins. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 55, 
2041–2052.

Brummell, D. A., Hall, B. D., & Bennett, A. B. 

(1999). Antisense suppression of tomato 
endo-1,4-beta-glucanase Cel2 mRNA 
accumulation increases the force required 
to break fruit abscission zones but does 
not affect fruit softening. Plant Molecular 
Biology, 40, 615–622.

Buchanan-Wollaston, V., Page, T., Harrison, E., 
Breeze, E., Lim, P. O., & Nam, H. G., et al. 
(2005). Comparative transcriptome analysis 
reveals significant differences in gene 
expression and signalling pathways between 

developmental and dark/starvation-induced 
senescence in Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 
42, 567–585.

Burg, S. P. (1968). Ethylene plant senescence 

and abscission. Plant Physiology, 43, 
1503–1509.

Burns, J. K. (2002). Using molecular biology 

tools to identify abscission materials for 
citrus. HortTechnology, 37, 459–464.

Butenko, M. A., Patterson, S. E., Grini, P. E., 

Stenvik, G. E., Amundsen, S. S., & Mandal, 
A., et al. (2003). INFLORESCENCE 
DEFICIENT IN ABSCISSION controls 
floral organ abscission in Arabidopsis and 
identifies a novel family of putative ligands 
in plants. Plant Cell, 15, 2296–2307.

Cai, S. Q., & Lashbrook, C. C. (2008). Stamen 

abscission zone transcriptome profiling 
reveals new candidates for abscission 
control: Enhanced retention of floral 
organs in transgenic plants overexpressing 
Arabidopsis ZINC FINGER PROTEIN2. 
Plant Physiology, 146, 1305–1321.

Cara, B., & Giovannoni, J. J. (2008). Molecular 

biology of ethylene during tomato fruit 
development and maturation. Plant Science, 
175, 106–113.

Century, K., Reuber, T. L., & Ratcliffe, O. J. 

(2008). Regulating the regulators: The 
future prospects for transcription- 
factor-based agricultural biotechnology 
products. Plant Physiology, 147, 20–29.

Chang, H. S., Jones, M. L., Banowetz, G. M., 
& Clark, D. G. (2003). Overproduction of 
cytokinins in petunia flowers transformed 
with P-SAG12-IPT delays corolla senescence 
and decreases sensitivity to ethylene. Plant 
Physiology, 132, 2174–2183.

Chen, L. F. O., Huang, J. Y., Wang, Y. H., 

Chen, Y. T., & Shaw, J. F. (2004). Ethylene 
insensitive and post-harvest yellowing 
retardation in mutant ethylene response 
sensor (boers) gene transformed broccoli 
(Brassica olercea var. italica). Molecular 
Breeding, 14, 199–213.

Chen, L. F. O., Hwang, J. Y., Charng, Y. Y., Sun, 
C. W., & Yang, S. F. (2001). Transformation 
of broccoli (Brassica oleracea var. italica) 
with isopentenyltransferase gene via 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens for post-harvest 
yellowing retardation. Molecular Breeding, 
7, 243–257.

Chen, T. H. H., & Murata, N. (2008). 

Glycinebetaine: An effective protectant 
against abiotic stress in plants. Trends in 
Plant Science, 13, 499–505.

Chen, Y. T., Chen, L. F. O., & Shaw, J. F. 

(2008). Senescence-associated genes in 
harvested broccoli florets. Plant Science, 
175, 137–144.

Chinnusamy, V., Zhu, J., & Zhu, J. K. (2007). 
Cold stress regulation of gene expression in 
plants. Trends in Plant Science, 12, 444–451.
Close, T. J. (1997). Dehydrins: A commonality 
in the response of plants to dehydration and 
low temperature. Physiologia Plantarum, 
100, 291–296.

Czarny, J. C., Grichko, V. P., & Glick, B. R. 
(2006). Genetic modulation of ethylene 
biosynthesis and signaling in plants. 
Biotechnology Advances, 24, 410–419.

Dat, J. F., Inze, D., & Van Breusegem, F. (2001). 

Catalase-deficient tobacco plants: Tools for 

in planta studies on the role of hydrogen 
peroxide. Redox Report, 6, 37–42.

Dubouzet, J. G., Sakuma, Y., Ito, Y., Kasuga, 

M., Dubouzet, E. G., & Miura, S., et al. 
(2003). OsDREB genes in rice, Oryza sativa 
L., encode transcription activators that 
function in drought-, high-salt- and cold-
responsive gene expression. Plant Journal, 
33, 751–763.

Dwivedi, U. N., Campbell, W. H., Yu, J., Datla, 
R. S. S., Bugos, R. C., & Chiang, V. L., et al. 
(1994). Modification of lignin biosynthesis 
in transgenic nicotiana through expression of 
an antisense o-methyltransferase gene from 
populus. Plant Molecular Biology, 26, 61–71.

Eason, J. R., Ryan, D. J., Watson, L. M., 

Hedderley, D., Christey, M. C., & Braun, 
R. H., et al. (2005). Suppression of the 
cysteine protease, aleurain, delays floret 
senescence in Brassica oleracea. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 57, 645–657.

Ecker, J. R. (1995). The ethylene signal-

transduction pathway in plants. Science, 
268, 667–675.

Ellis, C. M., Nagpal, P., Young, J. C., Hagen, 
G., Guilfoyle, T. J., & Reed, J. W. (2005). 
AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR1 and 
AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR2 regulate 
senescence and floral organ abscission in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Development, 132, 
4563–4574.

Faircloth, J. C., Edmisten, K. L., Wells, R., & 
Stewart, A. M. (2004). Timing defoliation 
applications for maximum yields and 
optimum quality in cotton containing a 
fruiting gap. Crop Science, 44, 158–164.

Fallik, E. (2004). Prestorage hot water 
treatments (immersion, rinsing and 
brushing). Postharvest Biology and 
Technology, 32, 125–134.

Farage-Barhom, S., Burd, S., Sonego, L., Perl-
Treves, R., & Lers, A. (2008). Expression 
analysis of the BFN1 nuclease gene 
promoter during senescence, abscission, and 
programmed cell death-related processes. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 59, 
3247–3258.

Forney, C. F. (2001). Horticultural and other 

factors affecting aroma volatile composition 
of small fruit. HortTechnology, 11, 529–538.

Foyer, C. H., Lelandais, M., & Kunert, K. J. 
(1994). Photooxidative stress in plants. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 92, 696–717.
Gallie, D. R. (2010). Regulated ethylene 

insensitivity through the inducible 
expression of the Arabidopsis etr1-1 
mutant ethylene receptor in tomato. Plant 
Physiology, 152, 1928–1939.

Gan, S. S., & Amasino, R. M. (1995). Inhibition 

of leaf senescence by autoregulated 
production of cytokinin. Science, 270, 
1986–1988.

Gan, S. S., & Amasino, R. M. (1997). Making 

sense of senescence—Molecular genetic 
regulation and manipulation of leaf 
senescence. Plant Physiology, 113, 313–319.
Gapper, N. E., Coupe, S. A., McKenzie, M. J., 
Scott, R. W., Christey, M. C., & Lill, R. E., 
et al. (2005). Senescence-associated down-
regulation of 1-aminocyclopropane- 
1-carboxylate (ACC) oxidase delays harvest-
induced senescence in broccoli. Functional 
Plant Biology, 32, 891–901.

437

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Gilmour, S. J., Sebolt, A. M., Salazar, M. P., 

Everard, J. D., & Thomashow, M. F. (2000). 
Overexpression of the Arabidopsis CBF3 
transcriptional activator mimics multiple 
biochemical changes associated with  
cold acclimation. Plant Physiology, 124, 
1854–1865.

Gilmour, S. J., Zarka, D. G., Stockinger, 

E. J., Salazar, M. P., Houghton, J. M., & 
Thomashow, M. F. (1998). Low temperature 
regulation of the Arabidopsis CBF family 
of AP2 transcriptional activators as an early 
step in cold-induced COR gene expression. 
Plant Journal, 16, 433–442.

Gomes, E., Jakobsen, M. K., Axelsen, K. B., 
Geisler, M., & Palmgren, M. G. (2000). 
Chilling tolerance in Arabidopsis involves 
ALA1, a member of a new family of putative 
aminophospholipid translocases. Plant Cell, 
12, 2441–2453.

Gonzalez-Carranza, Z. H., Rompa, U., Peters, 
J. L., Bhatt, A. M., Wagstaff, C., & Stead, 
A. D., et al. (2007). HAWAIIAN SKIRT: 
An F-box gene that regulates organ fusion 
and growth in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 
144, 1370–1382.

Gonzalez-Carranza, Z. H., Whitelaw, C. 

A., Swarup, R., & Roberts, J. A. (2002). 
Temporal and spatial expression of a 
polygalacturonase during leaf and flower 
abscission in oilseed rape and Arabidopsis. 
Plant Physiology, 128, 534–543.

Goulao, L. F., & Oliveira, C. M. (2008). Cell 

wall modifications during fruit ripening: 
When a fruit is not the fruit. Trends in Food 
Science and Technology, 19, 4–25.

Grbic, V., & Bleecker, A. B. (1995). Ethylene 
regulates the timing of leaf senescence in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 8, 595–602.
Groppa, M. D., & Benavides, M. P. (2008). 

Polyamines and abiotic stress: Recent 
advances. Amino Acids, 34, 35–45.

Guo, F. Q., & Crawford, N. M. (2005). 
Arabidopsis nitric oxide synthase1 is 
targeted to mitochondria and protects 
against oxidative damage and dark-induced 
senescence. Plant Cell, 17, 3436–3450.

Guo, Y., & Gan, S. (2007). Genetic 

manipulation of leaf senescence. In S. Gan 
(Ed.), Senescence processes in plants (pp. 
304–322). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing.

Guo, Y. F., & Gan, S. S. (2005). Leaf 
senescence: Signals, execution, and 
regulation. Current Topics in Developmental 
Biology, 71, 83. 

Guo, Y. F., & Gan, S. S. (2006). AtNAP, a NAC 
family transcription factor, has an important 
role in leaf senescence. Plant Journal, 46, 
601–612.

Halpin, C., Knight, M. E., Foxon, G. A., 

Campbell, M. M., Boudet, A. M., & Boon, J. 
J., et al. (1994). Manipulation of lignin quality 
by down-regulation of cinnamyl alcohol-
dehydrogenase. Plant Journal, 6, 339–350.

Harker, F. R., Stec, M. G. H., Hallett, I. 

C., & Bennett, C. L. (1997). Texture of 
parenchymatous plant tissue: A comparison 
between tensile and other instrumental and 
sensory measurements of tissue strength and 
juiciness. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 
11, 63–72.

Hennion, S., Little, C. H. A., & Hartmann, C. 

(1992). Activities of enzymes involved in 

438

lignification during the postharvest storage 
of etiolated asparagus spears. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 86, 474–478.

Higgins, J. D., Newbury, H. J., Barbara, D. 
J., Muthumeenakshi, S., & Puddephat, 
I. J. (2006). The production of marker-
free genetically engineered broccoli with 
sense and antisense ACC synthase 1 and 
ACC oxidases 1 and 2 to extend shelf-life. 
Molecular Breeding, 17, 7–20.

Hong, S. B., Sexton, R., & Tucker, M. L. 

(2000). Analysis of gene promoters for 
two tomato polygalacturonases expressed 
in abscission zones and the stigma. Plant 
Physiology, 123, 869–881.

Hortensteiner, S. (2009). Stay-green regulates 
chlorophyll and chlorophyll-binding protein 
degradation during senescence. Trends in 
Plant Science, 14, 155–162.

Hu, W. J., Harding, S. A., Lung, J., Popko, J. 

L., Ralph, J., & Stokke, D. D., et al. (1999). 
Repression of lignin biosynthesis promotes 
cellulose accumulation and growth in 
transgenic trees. Nature Biotechnology, 17, 
808–812.

Hua, J. (2009). From freezing to scorching, 
transcriptional responses to temperature 
variations in plants. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology, 12, 568–573.

Hubert, B., Rosegrant, M., van Boekel, M., 
& Ortiz, R. (2010). The future of food: 
Scenarios for 2050. Crop Science, 50, 
S33–S50.

Iba, K. (2002). Acclimative response to 
temperature stress in higher plants: 
Approaches of gene engineering for 
temperature tolerance. Annual Review of 
Plant Biology, 53, 225–245.

Ishizaki-Nishizawa, O., Fujii, T., Azuma, M., 
Sekiguchi, K., Murata, N., & Ohtani, T., 
et al. (1996). Low-temperature resistance 
of higher plants is significantly enhanced 
by a nonspecific cyanobacterial desaturase. 
Nature Biotechnology, 14, 1003–1006.

Iwanami, H., Moriya, S., Kotoda, N., & Abe, K. 
(2008). Turgor closely relates to postharvest 
fruit softening and can be a useful index 
to select a parent for producing cultivars 
with good storage potential in apple. 
HortTechnology, 43, 1377–1381.

Jaglo-Ottosen, K. R., Gilmour, S. J., Zarka, D. 
G., Schabenberger, O., & Thomashow, M. F. 
(1998). Arabidopsis CBF1 overexpression 
induces COR genes and enhances freezing 
tolerance. Science, 280, 104–106.

Janska, A., Marsik, P., Zelenkova, S., & Ovesna, 

J. (2010). Cold stress and acclimation—
what is important for metabolic adjustment? 
Plant Biology, 12, 395–405.

Jarvis, M. C., Briggs, S. P. H., & Knox, J. 
P. (2003). Intercellular adhesion and 
cell separation in plants. Plant Cell and 
Environmental, 26, 977–989.

Jiang, C. Z., Lu, F., Imsabai, W., Meir, 
S., & Reid, M. S. (2008). Silencing 
polygalacturonase expression inhibits tomato 
petiole abscission. Journal of Experimental 
Botany, 59, 973–979.

Jin, W. M., Dong, J., Hu, Y. L., Lin, Z. P., Xu, 
X. F., & Han, Z. H. (2009). Improved cold-
resistant performance in transgenic grape 
(vitis vinifera L.) overexpressing 

cold-inducible transcription factors 
AtDREB1b. HortTechnology, 44, 35–39.

Jinn, T. L., Stone, J. M., & Walker, J. C. (2000). 

HAESA, an Arabidopsis leucine-rich 
repeat receptor kinase, controls floral organ 
abscission. Genes and Development, 14, 
108–117.

Kader, A. A. (2005). Increasing food availability 

by reducing postharvest losses of fresh 
produce. Acta Horticulturae, 682, 2169–
2175.

Kader, A. A. (2008). Flavor quality of fruits and 
vegetables. Journal of the Science of Food and 
Agriculture, 88, 1863–1868.

Kantor, L. S., Lipton, K., Manchester, A., 
& Oliveira, V. (1997). Estimating and 
addressing America’s food losses. Economic 
Research Service, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. http://www.ers.usda.gov/
Publications/FoodReview/Jan1997/Jan97a.
pdf/

Kasuga, M., Liu, Q., Miura, S., Yamaguchi-
Shinozaki, K., & Shinozaki, K. (1999). 
Improving plant drought, salt, and freezing 
tolerance by gene transfer of a single stress-
inducible transcription factor. Nature 
Biotechnology, 17, 287–291.

Kerdnaimongkol, K., & Woodson, W. R. (1999). 

Inhibition of catalase by antisense RNA 
increases susceptibility to oxidative stress 
and chilling injury in transgenic tomato 
plants. Journal of the American Society for 
Horticultural Science, 124, 330–336.

Khan, M. S., Yu, X., Kikuchi, A., Asahina, 
M., & Watanabe, K. N. (2009). Genetic 
engineering of glycine betaine biosynthesis 
to enhance abiotic stress tolerance in plants. 
Plant Biotechnology, 26, 125–134.

Khodakovskaya, M., Li, Y., Li, J. S., Vankova, 

R., Malbeck, J., & McAvoy, R. (2005). 
Effects of cor15a-IPT gene expression on 
leaf senescence in transgenic Petunia x 
hybrida and Dendranthema x grandiflorum. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 56, 
1165–1175.

Khodakovskaya, M., McAvoy, R., Peters, J., 
Wu, H., & Li, Y. (2006). Enhanced cold 
tolerance in transgenic tobacco expressing 
a chloroplast omega-3 fatty acid desaturase 
gene under the control of a cold-inducible 
promoter. Planta, 223, 1090–1100.

Kim, H. J., Ryu, H., Hong, S. H., Woo, H. 

R., Lim, P. O., & Lee, I. C., et al. (2006). 
Cytokinin-mediated control of leaf longevity 
by AHK3 through phosphorylation of ARR2 
in Arabidopsis. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 103, 814–819.

Kim, J. (2007). Perception, transduction, and 
networks in cold signaling. Journal of Plant 
Biology, 50, 139–147.

Kim, M. D., Kim, Y. H., Kwon, S. Y., Yun, D. J., 
Kwak, S. S., & Lee, H. S. (2010). Enhanced 
tolerance to methyl viologen-induced 
oxidative stress and high temperature in 
transgenic potato plants overexpressing 
the CuZnSOD, APX and NDPK2 genes. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 140, 153–162.

Kim, S. Y. (2007). Recent advances in ABA 

signaling. Journal of Plant Biology, 50, 
117–121.

Kitinoja, L., & Cantwell, M. (2010). WFLO 

grant final report—Identification of 

Application of biotechnology to maintain postharvest quality and reduce losses during storage

C H A P T E R   2 7

appropriate postharvest technologies for 
improving market access and incomes for 
small horticultural farmers in Sub-Saharan 
Africa and South Asia. (p. 316.) World Food 
Logistics Organization. 

Koehler, S. M., Matters, G. L., Nath, P., 

Kemmerer, E. C., & Tucker, M. L. (1996). 
The gene promoter for a bean abscission 
cellulase is ethylene-induced in transgenic 
tomato and shows high sequence conservation 
with a soybean abscission cellulase. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 31, 595–606.

Kondo, S., & Takahashi, Y. (1989). Relation 

between early drop of apple fruit and 
ethylene evolution under high night-
temperature conditions. Journal of the 
Japanese Society for Horticultural Science, 
58, 1–8.

Kong, Z. S., Li, M. N., Yang, W. Q., Xu, W. 
Y., & Xue, Y. B. (2006). A novel nuclear-
localized CCCH-type zinc finger protein, 
OsDOS, is involved in delaying leaf 
senescence in rice. Plant Physiology, 141, 
1376–1388.

Kosova, K., Vitamvas, P., & Prasil, I. T. (2007). 
The role of dehydrins in plant response to 
cold. Biologia Plantarum, 51, 601–617.

Kramer, G. F., & Wang, C. Y. (1989). 

Correlation of reduced chilling injury with 
increased spermine and spermidine levels in 
zucchini squash. Physiologia Plantarum, 76, 
479–484.

Kratsch, H. A., & Wise, R. R. (2000). The 

ultrastructure of chilling stress. Plant Cell 
and Environment, 23, 337–350.

Lara, M. E. B., Garcia, M. C. G., Fatima, T., 
Ehness, R., Lee, T. K., & Proels, R., et al. 
(2004). Extracellular invertase is an essential 
component of cytokinin-mediated delay of 
senescence. Plant Cell, 16, 1276–1287.

Lers, A. (2007). Environmental regulation of 

leaf senescence. In S. Gan (Ed.), Senescence 
processes in plants (pp. 108–144). Oxford, 
UK: Blackwell Publishing.

Lers, A., Sonego, L., Green, P. J., & Burd, S. 

(2006). Suppression of LX ribonuclease in 
tomato results in a delay of leaf senescence 
and abscission. Plant Physiology, 142, 
710–721.

Leslie, M. E., Lewis, M. W., Youn, J. Y., 

Daniels, M. J., & Liljegren, S. J. (2010). The 
EVERSHED receptor-like kinase modulates 
floral organ shedding in Arabidopsis. 
Development, 137, 467–476.

Lewis, M. W., Leslie, M. E., Fulcher, E. H., 
Darnielle, L., Healy, P. N., & Youn, J. Y.,  
et al. (2010). The SERK1 receptor-like kinase 
regulates organ separation in Arabidopsis 
flowers. Plant Journal, 62, 817–828.

Lewis, M. W., Leslie, M. E., & Liljegren, S. J. 
(2006). Plant separation: 50 ways to leave 
your mother. Current Opinion in Plant 
Biology, 9, 59–65.

Li, X., Xu, C. J., Korban, S. S., & Chen, K. S. 
(2010). Regulatory mechanisms of textural 
changes in ripening fruits. CRC Critical 
Reviews in Plant Sciences, 29, 222–243.
Liljegren, S. J., Leslie, M. E., Darnielle, L., 

Lewis, M. W., Taylor, S. M., & Luo, R. B., 
et al. (2009). Regulation of membrane 
trafficking and organ separation by 
the NEVERSHED ARF-GAP protein. 
Development, 136, 1909–1918.

Lim, P. O., Kim, H. J., & Nam, H. G. (2007). 

Leaf senescence. Annual Review of Plant 
Biology, 58, 115–138.

Lin, Z. F., Zhong, S. L., & Grierson, D. (2009). 

Recent advances in ethylene research. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 60, 
3311–3336.

Link, H. (2000). Significance of flower and 

fruit thinning on fruit quality. Plant Growth 
Regulation, 31, 17–26.

Little, H. A., Grumet, R., & Hancock, J. F. 
(2009). Modified ethylene signaling as 
an example of engineering for complex 
traits: Secondary effects and implications 
for environmental risk assessment. 
HortTechnology, 44, 94–101.

Long, S. P., & Ort, D. R. (2010). More than 
taking the heat: Crops and global change. 
Current Opinion in Plant Biology, 13, 
241–248.

Lukatkin, A. S. (2002). Contribution of 
oxidative stress to the development 
of cold-induced damage to leaves of 
chilling-sensitive plants: 2. The activity of 
antioxidant enzymes during plant chilling. 
Russian Journal of Plant Physiology, 49, 
782–788.

Luo, K. M., Deng, W., Xiao, Y. H., Zheng, X. 

L., Li, Y., & Pei, Y. (2006). Leaf senescence 
is delayed in tobacco plants expressing the 
maize knotted1 gene under the control of 
a wound-inducible promoter. Plant Cell 
Reports, 25, 1246–1254.

Lyons, J. M. (1973). Chilling injury in plants. 

Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant 
Molecular Biology, 24, 445–466.

Malacrida, C., Valle, E. M., & Boggio, S. 

B. (2006). Postharvest chilling induces 
oxidative stress response in the dwarf 
tomato cultivar Micro-Tom. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 127, 10–18.

Mao, L., Begum, D., Chuang, H. W., Budiman, 

M. A., Szymkowiak, E. J., & Irish, E. E.,  
et al. (2000). JOINTLESS is a MADS-box 
gene controlling tomato flower abscission 
zone development. Nature, 406, 910–913.
Marangoni, A. G., Palma, T., & Stanley, D. W. 
(1996). Membrane effects in postharvest 
physiology. Postharvest Biology and 
Technology, 7, 193–217.

Martinez-Romero, D., Bailen, G., Serrano, M., 

Guillen, F., Valverde, J. M., & Zapata, P., 
et al. (2007). Tools to maintain postharvest 
fruit and vegetable quality through the 
inhibition of ethylene action: A review. 
Critical Reviews in Food Science and 
Nutrition, 47, 543–560.

Matas, A. J., Gapper, N. E., Chung, M. Y., 

Giovannoni, J. J., & Rose, J. K. C. (2009). 
Biology and genetic engineering of fruit 
maturation for enhanced quality and  
shelf-life. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 
20, 197–203.

McCabe, M. S., Garratt, L. C., Schepers, F., 
Jordi, W., Stoopen, G. M., & Davelaar, E., 
et al. (2001). Effects of P-SAG12-IPT gene 
expression on development and senescence 
in transgenic lettuce. Plant Physiology, 127, 
505–516.

McDonald, R. E. (1989). Temperature-

conditioning affects polyamines of lemon 
fruits stored at chilling temperatures. 
HortTechnology, 24, 475–477.

McGlasson, W. B., Scott, K. J., & Mendoza, 
D. B., Jr (1979). The refrigerated storage 
of tropical and subtropical products. 
International Journal of Refrigeration, 2, 
199–206.

McKim, S. M., Stenvik, G. E., Butenko, M. A., 

Kristiansen, W., Cho, S. K., & Hepworth, 
S. R., et al. (2008). The BLADE-ON-
PETIOLE genes are essential for abscission 
zone formation in Arabidopsis. Development, 
135, 1537–1546.

Michaeli, R., Philosoph-Hadas, S., Riov, J., 
& Meir, S. (1999). Chilling-induced leaf 
abscission of Ixora coccinea plants. I. 
Induction by oxidative stress via increased 
sensitivity to ethylene. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 107, 166–173.

Michaeli, R., Philosoph-Hadas, S., Riov, J., 

Shahak, Y., Ratner, K., & Meir, S. (2001). 
Chilling-induced leaf abscission of Ixora 
coccinea plants. III. Enhancement by high 
light via increased oxidative processes. 
Physiologia Plantarum, 113, 338–345.

Mittler, R., & Blumwald, E. (2010). Genetic 

engineering for modern agriculture: 
Challenges and perspectives. Annual Review 
of Plant Biology, 61, 443–462. (Annual 
Reviews, Palo Alto)

Moffat, A. S. (2000). Plant research—Can 
genetically modified crops go “greener”? 
Science, 290, 253–254.

Murata, N., Ishizakinishizawa, Q., Higashi, 
S., Hayashi, H., Tasaka, Y., & Nishida, I. 
(1992). Genetically engineered alteration 
in the chilling sensitivity of plants. Nature, 
356, 710–713.

Nambeesan, S., Datsenka, T., Ferruzzi, M. G., 
Malladi, A., Mattoo, A. K., & Handa, A. K. 
(2010). Overexpression of yeast spermidine 
synthase impacts ripening, senescence and 
decay symptoms in tomato. Plant Journal, 
63, 836–847.

Nishida, I., & Murata, N. (1996). Chilling 

sensitivity in plants and cyanobacteria: The 
crucial contribution of membrane lipids. 
Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant 
Molecular Biology, 47, 541–568.

Ogawa, M., Kay, P., Wilson, S., & Swain, S. M. 

(2009). ARABIDOPSIS DEHISCENCE 
ZONE POLYGALACTURONASE1 
(ADPG1), ADPG2, and QUARTET2. 
Are polygalacturonases required for cell 
separation during reproductive development 
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 21, 216–233.
Orlova, I. V., Serebriiskaya, T. S., Popov, V., 

Merkulova, N., Nosov, A. M., & Trunova,  
T. I., et al. (2003). Transformation of 
tobacco with a gene for the thermophilic 
acyl-lipid desaturase enhances the chilling 
tolerance of plants. Plant and Cell 
Physiology, 44, 447–450.

Owens, C. L., Thomashow, M. F., Hancock, 

J. F., & Iezzoni, A. F. (2002). CBF1 
orthologs in sour cherry and strawberry and 
the heterologous expression of CBF1 in 
strawberry. Journal of the American Society 
for Horticultural Science, 127, 489–494.

Park, E. J., Jeknic, Z., Sakamoto, A., 

DeNoma, J., Yuwansiri, R., & Murata, 
N., et al. (2004). Genetic engineering of 
glycinebetaine synthesis in tomato protects 
seeds, plants, and flowers from chilling 
damage. Plant Journal, 40, 474–487.

439

S E C T I O N   E

Biotechnology for improvement of yield and quality traits

Patterson, S. E. (2001). Cutting loose. 

Abscission and dehiscence in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Physiology, 126, 494–500.

Patterson, S. E., & Bleecker, A. B. (2004). 
Ethylene-dependent and -independent 
processes associated with floral organ 
abscission in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 
134, 194–203.

Paull, R. E., & Chen, N. J. (2000). Heat 

treatment and fruit ripening. Postharvest 
Biology and Technology, 21, 21–37.

Penfield, S. (2008). Temperature perception 

and signal transduction in plants. New 
Phytologist, 179, 615–628.

Perl, A., Perltreves, R., Galili, S., Aviv, D., 
Shalgi, E., & Malkin, S., et al. (1993). 
Enhanced oxidative-stress defense in 
transgenic potato expressing tomato cu,zn 
superoxide dismutases. Theoretical and 
Applied Genetics, 85, 568–576.

Pino, M. T., Skinner, J. S., Jeknic, Z., Hayes, P. 
M., Soeldner, A. H., & Thomashow, M. F.,  
et al. (2008). Ectopic AtCBF1 over-
expression enhances freezing tolerance 
and induces cold acclimation-associated 
physiological modifications in potato. Plant 
Cell and Environment, 31, 393–406.
Porat, R., Pavoncello, D., Peretz, J., Ben-

Yehoshua, S., & Lurie, S. (2000). Effects 
of various heat treatments on the induction 
of cold tolerance and on the postharvest 
qualities of “Star Ruby” grapefruit. 
Postharvest Biology and Technology, 18, 
159–165.

Prasad, T. K. (1996). Mechanisms of  

chilling-induced oxidative stress injury and 
tolerance in developing maize seedlings: 
Changes in antioxidant system, oxidation of 
proteins and lipids, and protease activities. 
Plant Journal, 10, 1017–1026.

Pruzinska, A., Tanner, G., Aubry, S., Anders, 
I., Moser, S., & Muller, T., et al. (2005). 
Chlorophyll breakdown in senescent 
Arabidopsis leaves. Characterization of 
chlorophyll catabolites and of chlorophyll 
catabolic enzymes involved in the degreening 
reaction. Plant Physiology, 139, 52–63.

Puhakainen, T., Hess, M. W., Makela, P., 

Svensson, J., Heino, P., & Palva, E. T. (2004). 
Overexpression of multiple dehydrin genes 
enhances tolerance to freezing stress in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Molecular Biology, 54, 
743–753.

Rastogi, S., & Dwivedi, U. N. (2008). 

Manipulation of lignin in plants with special 
reference to O-methyltransferase. Plant 
Science, 174, 264–277.

Richmond, A. E., & Lang, A. (1957). Effect of 

kinetin on protein content and survival of 
detached Xanthium leaves. Science, 125, 
650–651.

Roberts, J. A., Elliott, K. A., & Gonzalez-

Carranza, Z. H. (2002). Abscission, 
dehiscence, and other cell separation 
processes. Annals Reviews Plant Biology, 53, 
131–158.

Roberts, J. A., & Gonzalez-Carranza, Z. H. 

(2009). Pectinase functions in abscission. 
Stewart Postharvest Review, 1, 2.

Rosenvasser, S., Mayak, S., & Friedman, H. 

(2006). Increase in reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) and in senescence-associated gene 
transcript (SAG) levels during dark-induced 

440

senescence of Pelargonium cuttings, and the 
effect of gibberellic acid. Plant Science, 170, 
873–879.

Taylor, J. E., & Whitelaw, C. A. (2001). 

Signals in abscission. New Phytologist, 151, 
323–339.

Saladie, M., Matas, A. J., Isaacson, T., Jenks, M. 

A., Goodwin, S. M., & Niklas, K. J.,  
et al. (2007). A reevaluation of the key factors 
that influence tomato fruit softening and 
integrity. Plant Physiology, 144, 1012–1028.

Saltveit, M. E. (1999). Effect of ethylene on quality 

of fresh fruits and vegetables. Postharvest 
Biology and Technology, 15, 279–292.

Scandalios, J. G. (1993). Oxygen stress and 
superoxide dismutases. Plant Physiology, 
101, 7–12.

Schelbert, S., Aubry, S., Burla, B., Agne, B., 

Kessler, F., & Krupinska, K., et al. (2009). 
Pheophytin pheophorbide hydrolase 
(pheophytinase) is involved in chlorophyll 
breakdown during leaf senescence in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 21, 767–785.

Schippers, J. H. M., Jing, H. C., Hille, J., & 
Dijkwel, P. (2007). Developmental and 
hormonal control of leaf senescence. In  
S. Gan (Ed.), Senescence processes in plants 
(pp. 145–170). Oxford, UK: Blackwell 
Publishing.

Sevillano, L., Sanchez-Ballesta, M. T., Romojaro, 

F., & Flores, F. B. (2009). Physiological, 
hormonal and molecular mechanisms 
regulating chilling injury in horticultural 
species. Postharvest technologies applied to 
reduce its impact. Journal of the Science of 
Food and Agriculture, 89, 555–573.

Sharom, M., Willemot, C., & Thompson, J. E. 
(1994). Chilling injury induces lipid phase-
changes in membranes of tomato fruit. Plant 
Physiology, 105, 305–308.

Singh, R., Rastogi, S., & Dwivedi, U. N. (2010). 

Phenylpropanoid metabolism in ripening 
fruits. Comprehensive Reviews in Food 
Science and Food Safety, 9, 398–416.

Stearns, J. C., & Glick, B. R. (2003). Transgenic 

plants with altered ethylene biosynthesis 
or perception. Biotechnology Advances, 21, 
193–210.

Su, C. F., Wang, Y. C., Hsieh, T. H., Lu, C. A., 

Tseng, T. H., & Yu, S. M. (2010). A novel 
MYBS3-dependent pathway confers cold 
tolerance in rice. Plant Physiology, 153, 
145–158.

Sui, N., Li, M., Zhao, S. J., Li, F., Liang, H., 
& Meng, Q. W. (2007). Overexpression 
of glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase 
gene improves chilling tolerance in tomato. 
Planta, 226, 1097–1108.

Sun, L. X., & van Nocker, S. (2010). Analysis 

of promoter activity of members of the 
PECTATE LYASE-LIKE (PLL) gene family 
in cell separation in Arabidopsis. BMC Plant 
Biology, 10, 13.

Sung, D. Y., Kaplan, F., Lee, K. J., & Guy, C. L. 
(2003). Acquired tolerance to temperature 
extremes. Trends in Plant Science, 8, 
179–187.

Suzuki, N., & Mittler, R. (2006). Reactive 

oxygen species and temperature stresses: 
A delicate balance between signaling and 
destruction. Physiologia Plantarum, 126, 
45–51.

Tanaka, Y., Katsumoto, Y., Brugliera, F., & 

Mason, J. (2005). Genetic engineering in 
floriculture. Plant Cell Tissue and Organ 
Culture, 80, 1–24.

Toivonen, P. M. A., & Brummell, D. A. (2008). 
Biochemical bases of appearance and texture 
changes in fresh-cut fruit and vegetables. 
Postharvest Biology and Technology, 48, 
1–14.

Tsuchisaka, A., & Theologis, A. (2004). Unique 
and overlapping expression patterns among 
the arabidopsis 1-amino-cyclopropane-1-
carboxylate synthase gene family members. 
Plant Physiology, 136, 2982–3000.

Tucker, M. L., Whitelaw, C. A., Lyssenko, N. 
N., & Nath, P. (2002). Functional analysis 
of regulatory elements in the gene promoter 
for an abscission-specific cellulase from bean 
and isolation, expression, and binding affinity 
of three TGA-Type basic leucine zipper 
transcription factors. Plant Physiology, 130, 
1487–1496.

Valentines, M. C., Vilaplana, R., Torres, R., 

Usall, J., & Larrigaudiere, C. (2005). 
Specific roles of enzymatic browning and 
lignification in apple disease resistance. 
Postharvest Biology and Technology, 36, 
227–234.

van Breusegem, F., Slooten, L., Stassart, J. M., 
Botterman, J., Moens, T., & Van Montagu, 
M., et al. (1999). Effects of overproduction 
of tobacco MnSOD in maize chloroplasts on 
foliar tolerance to cold and oxidative stress. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 50, 71–78.

van Buskirk, H. A., & Thomashow, M. F. 

(2006). Arabidopsis transcription factors 
regulating cold acclimation. Physiologia 
Plantarum, 126, 72–80.

van Doorn, W. G. (2002). Effect of ethylene 
on flower abscission: A survey. Annals of 
Botany, 89, 689–693.

van Doorn, W. G., & Stead, A. D. (1997). 

Abscission of flowers and floral parts. Journal 
of Experimental Botany, 48, 821–837.

van Doorn, W. G., & Woltering, E. J. 

(1991). Developments in the use of 
growth regulators for the maintenance of 
postharvest quality in cut flowers and potted 
plants. Acta Horticulturae, 298, 195–204.

Vicente, A. R., Saladie, M., Rose, J. K. C., 
& Labavitch, J. M. (2007). The linkage 
between cell wall metabolism and fruit 
softening: Looking to the future. Journal 
of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 87, 
1435–1448.

Vina, S. Z., & Chaves, A. R. (2003). Texture 

changes in fresh cut celery during 
refrigerated storage. Journal of the Science of 
Food and Agriculture, 83, 1308–1314.

Voelker, S. L., Lachenbruch, B., Meinzer, F. C., 

Jourdes, M., Ki, C., & Patten, A. M., et al. 
(2010). Antisense down-regulation of 4CL 
expression alters lignification, tree growth, 
and saccharification potential of field-grown 
poplar. Plant Physiology, 154, 874–886.
Wagstaff, C., Clarkson, G. J. J., Zhang, F. 

Z., Rothwell, S. D., Fry, S. C., & Taylor, 
G., et al. (2010). Modification of cell 
wall properties in lettuce improves shelf 
life. Journal of Experimental Botany, 61, 
1239–1248.

Wang, T. W., Lu, L., Zhang, C. G., Taylor, C., & 
Thompson, J. E. (2003). Pleiotropic effects 
of suppressing deoxyhypusine synthase 

Application of biotechnology to maintain postharvest quality and reduce losses during storage

C H A P T E R   2 7

expression in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 52, 1223–1235.

Wang, W. X., Vinocur, B., Shoseyov, O., & 

Altman, A. (2004). Role of plant heat-shock 
proteins and molecular chaperones in the 
abiotic stress response. Trends in Plant 
Science, 9, 244–252.

Wang, Y., & Kumar, P. P. (2004). Heterologous 

expression of Arabidopsis ERS1 causes 
delayed senescence in coriander. Plant Cell 
Reports, 22, 678–683.

Wang, Y. J., Wisniewski, M., Meilan, R., Cui, 
M. G., Webb, R., & Fuchigami, L. (2005). 
Overexpression of cytosolic ascorbate 
peroxidase in tomato confers tolerance 
to chilling and salt stress. Journal of the 
American Society for Horticultural Science, 
130, 167–173.

Waterer, D., Benning, N. T., Wu, G. H., Luo, 

X. M., Liu, X. J., & Gusta, M., et al. (2010). 
Evaluation of abiotic stress tolerance of 
genetically modified potatoes (Solanum 
tuberosum cv. Desiree). Molecular Breeding, 
25, 527–540.

Waters, E. R., Lee, G. J., & Vierling, E. (1996). 

Evolution, structure and function of the 
small heat shock proteins in plants. Journal 
of Experimental Botany, 47, 325–338.

Wen, X. P., Pang, X. M., Matsuda, N., Kita, M., 
Inoue, H., & Hao, Y. J., et al. (2008). Over-
expression of the apple spermidine synthase 
gene in pear confers multiple abiotic stress 
tolerance by altering polyamine titers. 
Transgenic Research, 17, 251–263.

Whitelaw, C. A., Lyssenko, N. N., Chen, L. W., 

Zhou, D. B., Mattoo, A. K., & Tucker, M. 
L. (2002). Delayed abscission and shorter 
internodes correlate with a reduction in 
the ethylene receptor LeETR1 transcript in 
transgenic tomato. Plant Physiology, 128, 
978–987.

Whitney, J. D., Hartmond, U., Kender, W. 

J., Burns, J. K., & Salyani, M. (2000). 
Orange removal with trunk shakers and 
abscission chemicals. Applied Engineering in 
Agriculture, 16, 367–371.

Wilkinson, J. Q., Lanahan, M. B., Clark, D. G., 

Bleecker, A. B., Chang, C., & Meyerowitz, 
E. M., et al. (1997). A dominant mutant 
receptor from Arabidopsis confers ethylene 
insensitivity in heterologous plants. Nature 
Biotechnology, 15, 444–447.

Winichayakul, S., Moyle, R. L., Ryan, D. J., 

Farnden, K. J. F., Davies, K. M., & Coupe, 
S. A. (2004). Distinct cis-elements in the 
Asparagus officinalis asparagine synthetase 
promoter respond to carbohydrate and 
senescence signals. Functional Plant Biology, 
31, 573–582.

Wise, R. R. (1995). Chilling-enhanced 

photooxidation—the production, action and 
study of reactive oxygen species produced 
during chilling in the light. Photosynthesis 
Research, 45, 79–97.

Wolfe, J. (1978). Chilling injury in plants — 
The role of membrane lipid fluidity. Plant, 
Cell and Environmental, 1, 241–247.

Wongsheree, T., Ketsa, S., & van Doorn, W. G. 

(2009). The relationship between chilling 
injury and membrane damage in lemon basil 
(Ocimum x citriodourum) leaves. Postharvest 
Biology and Technology, 51, 91–96.

Woo, H. R., Chung, K. M., Park, J. H., Oh, S. 

A., Ahn, T., & Hong, S. H., et al. (2001). 
ORE9, an F-box protein that regulates leaf 
senescence in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell, 13, 
1779–1790.

Xue-Xuan, X., Hong-Bo, S., Yuan-Yuan, M., 
Gang, X., Jun-Na, S., & Dong-Gang, G., 
et al. (2010). Biotechnological implications 
from abscisic acid (ABA) roles in cold stress 
and leaf senescence as an important signal 
for improving plant sustainable survival 
under abiotic-stressed conditions. Critical 
Reviews in Biotechnology, 30, 222–230.
Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K., & Shinozaki, K. 

(2006). Transcriptional regulatory networks 
in cellular responses and tolerance to 
dehydration and cold stresses. Annual 
Review of Plant Biology, 57, 781–803.

Yang, T. F., Gonzalez-Carranza, Z. H., 

Maunders, M. J., & Roberts, J. A. (2008). 
Ethylene and the regulation of senescence 
processes in transgenic Nicotiana sylvestris 
plants. Annals of Botany, 101, 301–310.

Yoshida, S., Ito, M., Callis, J., Nishida, I., 
& Watanabe, A. (2002). A delayed leaf 
senescence mutant is defective in arginyl-
tRNA: Protein arginyltransferase, a 
component of the N-end rule pathway in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Journal, 32, 129–137.
Zapata, J. M., Guera, A., Esteban-Carrasco, 

A., Martin, M., & Sabater, B. (2005). 
Chloroplasts regulate leaf senescence: 

Delayed senescence in transgenic ndhF-
defective tobacco. Cell Death and 
Differentiation, 12, 1277–1284.

Zhang, C. F., Ding, Z. S., Xu, X. B., Wang, Q., 

Qin, G. Z., & Tian, S. P. (2010). Crucial 
roles of membrane stability and its related 
proteins in the tolerance of peach fruit to 
chilling injury. Amino Acids, 39, 181–194.

Zhang, C. F., & Tian, S. P. (2009). Crucial 

contribution of membrane lipids’ 
unsaturation to acquisition of chilling-
tolerance in peach fruit stored at 0 degrees 
C. Food Chemistry, 115, 405–411.

Zhao, D., Reddy, K. R., Kakani, V. G., Koti, S., 

& Gao, W. (2005). Physiological causes of 
cotton fruit abscission under conditions of 
high temperature and enhanced ultraviolet-B 
radiation. Physiologia Plantarum, 124, 
189–199.

Zhao, D. Y., Shen, L., Fan, B., Liu, K. L., Yu, M. 
M., & Zheng, Y., et al. (2009a). Physiological 
and genetic properties of tomato fruits from 
2 cultivars differing in chilling tolerance at 
cold storage. Journal of Food Science, 74, 
C348–C352.

Zhao, D. Y., Shen, L., Fan, B., Yu, M. M., 
Zheng, Y., & Lv, S. N., et al. (2009b). 
Ethylene and cold participate in the 
regulation of LeCBF1 gene expression in 
postharvest tomato fruits. FEBS Letters, 
583, 3329–3334.

Zhou, C. J., Cai, Z. H., Guo, Y. F., & Gan, S. S. 

(2009). An Arabidopsis mitogen-activated 
protein kinase cascade, MKK9-MPK6, plays 
a role in leaf senescence. Plant Physiology, 
150, 167–177.

Zhu, J., Dong, C. -H., & Zhu, J. -K. (2007). 
Interplay between cold-responsive gene 
regulation, metabolism and RNA processing 
during plant cold acclimation. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology, 10, 290–295.

Zimmermann, P., & Zentgraf, U. (2005). The 

correlation between oxidative stress and 
leaf senescence during plant development. 
Cellular and Molecular Biology Letters, 10, 
515–534.

441

Crop biotechnology in developing 
countries

36

Hugo De Groote
International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre (CIMMYT), Nairobi, Kenya

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 563
Agriculture and Food in  
Developing Countries: The Needs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 564
Feeding a growing world population . . . . . . . . . . . . . .564
Undernutrition and poverty  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .564
Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .565
Current State of GM Crops   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 565
Geographic distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .565
Crops, traits, and farmers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .565
Future and trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .565

Economic Impact of Transgenic Crops  
in Developing Countries  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 567
Main effects of current GM crops  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .567
Empirical evidence of farm level benefits . . . . . . . . . . .567
Effect of GM crops on poverty and inequality . . . . . . .568
Combined effects on farmer income . . . . . . . . . . . . . .568
Macro level impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .569
Health Impact  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 569
Safety concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .569
Nutritional benefits of biofortification . . . . . . . . . . . . . .570
Nutritional impact of GM biofortification . . . . . . . . . . .570
Reduced exposure to toxins, pesticides,  
and anti-nutrients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .571
The Environment   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 571
Consumer Acceptance of GM Food  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 572
Regional differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .572
Factors influencing acceptance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .572
Regulatory Systems  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 573
Importance of regulatory systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .573
Regional differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .573
Economics of regulation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .573
The way forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .574

Conclusions   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 574
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 574

Introduction

Since  its  first  commercial  release  in  1996,  transgenic  crops 
have  been  adopted  at  a  rate  never  before  seen  in  the  devel-
oped  world  (James,  2010).  The  current  first-generation 
genetically  modified  (GM)  varieties  mainly  use  two  traits, 
herbicide  tolerance  (HT)  and  insect  resistance  (Bt),  in  four 
major crops: soybeans, maize, cotton, and canola. The produc-
tion  of  these  crops  is  used,  for  the  most  part,  for  feed  and 
fiber. A set of second-generation GM crops is currently under 
development, with the aim to improve the nutritional status 
and other qualities of major food crops (Qaim, 2009). Golden 
rice,  for  example,  has  been  biofortified  with  high  levels  of 
provitamin A (Zimmermann and Qaim, 2004).

GM crops were developed by and for the developed world, 
in  particular  Europe  and  North  America.  The  basic  research 
was  often  done  at  public  research  institutes,  but  the  appli-
cations  and  crop  varieties  are  almost  uniquely  developed  by 
private  companies  in  response  to  the  needs  of  commercial 
farmers  in  the  developed  world  (Pingali  and  Traxler,  2002). 
Still,  the  area  in  GM  crops  in  the  developing  world  is  large 
and  increasing,  and  the  number  of  farmers  growing  GM 
crops  is  actually  much  higher  in  developing,  rather  than  in 
developed  countries.  These  varieties  were  not  developed  in 
response  to  the  needs  of  poor  smallholders,  and  currently 
these varieties are mainly for feed and fiber, not food crops.

In  the  United  States,  where  most  GM  crops  have  been 
developed, they are not seen as essentially different from other 
crops  and  follow  the  same  regulations.  But  the  use  of  GM 
technology  in  food  is  still  controversial,  and  many  countries, 
notably in Europe and Japan, have not embraced it. The princi-
pal objections concern possible harm to human health, damage 
to  the  environment,  and  unease  about  the  “unnatural”  sta-
tus  of  the  technology  (Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics,  1999). 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00036-5

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

Consumers  in  Europe  also  perceive  the  technology  as  having 
limited benefits. Although there is little scientific evidence to 
support consumers’ preference for non-GM food (FAO, 2004; 
ICSU,  2004),  this  preference  is  clear  and  well  documented 
(Lusk  et  al.,  2005).  GM  technology  does  not  generate  many 
benefits  for  countries  that  already  have  large  agricultural  sur-
pluses (Demont et al., 2004). This combination has led Europe 
to  adopt  the  precautionary  principle.  While  this  principle  is 
not easily defined, it does put GM crops in a special category, 
where applications are dealt with on a case-by-case basis. The 
regulatory system based on this principle also puts a heavy bur-
den of proof on the research institute or company applying for 
the commercial use of GM technology.

Many  developing  countries  have  now  adopted  biosafety 
laws  and  regulatory  systems  on  the  same  principle,  even 
though  their  conditions  are  very  different  (Paarlberg,  2008). 
Unlike  Europe,  developing  countries  could  benefit  strongly 
from  GM  crops.  First,  both  the  yield-increasing  and  cost-
reducing  effects  of  the  first-generation  and  the  nutritional 
improvement of the second-generation GM crops could bring 
large  benefits  to  large  numbers  of  farmers  and  consumers. 
Secondly,  consumers  in  developing  countries  do  not  neces-
sarily  share  the  concerns  of  their  European  counterparts. 
The  regulatory  institutions  in  many  developing  countries  are 
new  and,  apart  from  Latin  America  and  South  Africa,  have 
only  recently  started  to  approve  GM  crops.  It  is,  therefore, 
important  for  regulators  and  policy  makers  to  bring  scien-
tific evidence to the debate, based not only on objective risk 
assessment and cost benefit analysis, but also on the subjective 
opinion of consumers, their gatekeepers, and the policy mak-
ers themselves. This evidence is particularly important in the 
developing debate on the desirability of labeling.

To contribute to the debate, an overview of the evidence so 
far is presented in this chapter, based on the literature on the 
use  of  GM  crops  in  developing  countries,  their  benefits  and 
costs, the risks, the perceptions of consumers, and the regula-
tory process.

Agriculture and Food in Developing 
Countries: The Needs

Feeding a growing world population

The world today faces the daunting challenge of feeding a still 
rapidly growing population at a time when the limits of con-
ventional technologies are being felt. At the beginning of the 
nineteenth  century,  the  world  had  fewer  than  1  billion  peo-
ple, and it was relatively easy to increase food production over 
the next 100 years to feed another 0.6 billion (James, 2008). 
This was mainly achieved by increasing the area of land under 
cultivation, in particular in the Americas, Eastern Europe, and 
Australia  (James,  2010).  At  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth 
century, the world population stood at 1.6 billion. To feed the 
increasing  population  during  this  century,  an  increase  in  glo-
bal  food  production  years  was  achieved  mainly  by  increasing 
crop productivity through the Green Revolution (Evenson and 
Gollin, 2003).

Agricultural  statistics  from  the  1960s  and  1970s  show  a 
phenomenal growth of cereal crop productivity in the develop-
ing world (Pingali and Heisey, 1999). The Green Revolution, 
the  initial  phase  of  this  growth,  resulted  from  an  increase  in 
land  productivity  which  occurred  in  areas  of  increasing  land 
scarcity  and  areas  with  high  land  values.  Significant  invest-
ments  in  research  and  infrastructure  development,  especially 
irrigation, were the strategic components of this increased pro-
ductivity. In a second phase, particularly in Asia, productivity 
growth  has  been  sustained  through  increased  input  use  and, 
more recently, through more efficient use of inputs.

Despite the success of the Green Revolution in keeping food 
production  abreast  of  population  growth,  there  are  over  800 
million  people  in  the  world  today  who  are  chronically  under-
nourished,  and  180  million  children  who  are  severely  under-
weight  for  their  age  (Conway,  2000).  At  the  same  time,  the 
work population continues to increase rapidly. At the beginning 
of  the  twenty-first  century,  the  population  stood  at  6.1  bil-
lion and is expected to rise to 9.2 billion by 2050. Moreover, 
dietary  patterns  change  when  people  become  more  affluent. 
Projections  by  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO) 
and  the  International  Food  Policy  Research  Institute  (IFPRI) 
on  the  future  supply  and  demand  of  food  necessary  to  keep 
pace with population growth and changing dietary habits pre-
dict large increases in global demand for food (Rosegrant et al., 
2001; FAO, 2009). Cereal production for food and feed needs 
to increase by 40% by 2050 (FAO, 2009). The global demand 
for food is expected to double again in 50 years (James, 2010).

Undernutrition and poverty

While  various  econometric  models  predict  that  market  sup-
ply  will  meet  market  demand  by  2020,  there  could  still  be 
nearly one billion people who lie outside the market and are 
chronically  undernourished  (Conway,  2000).  Moreover,  400 
million  women  of  childbearing  age  suffer  from  iron  defi-
ciency,  and  the  resultant  anemia  leads  to  infant  and  mater-
nal  mortality.  Undernutrition  is  estimated  to  cause  more 
than  one  in  three  child  deaths  globally  (Caulfield  et  al., 
2004; Black et al., 2008). Lack of access to nutritious food is 
a major cause of child mortality (Caulfield et al., 2004; Black 
et al., 2008). In rural areas, household diets are dominated by 
staples such as cereals and tubers, most of it produced at the 
homestead, while the consumption of other foods that would 
improve  dietary  quality,  such  as  legumes,  vegetables,  fruits, 
and animal sourced foods, is limited by availability and price.

Subsistence farmers also depend on storing their crops on-
farm to bridge seasons. High temperatures and high levels of 
humidity in many developing countries, combined with poor 
storage and drying facilities, lead to contamination by aflatox-
ins and other mycotoxins. An estimated 4.5 billion people in 
developing countries are chronically exposed to large amounts 
of  aflatoxins,  a  well-known  cause  of  liver  cancer,  that  also 
compromise  immunity  and  interfere  with  the  metabolism  of 
protein and micronutrients (Williams et al., 2004).

The situation is particularly difficult in Africa. Despite the 
Millennium  Development  Goal  to  halve  the  proportion  of 
people  who  suffer  from  hunger  by  2015,  Africa  is  the  only 

564

Crop biotechnology in developing countries

C H A P T E R   3 6

region where both the proportion and the number of under-
weight children are increasing (Rosegrant et al., 2001; de Onis 
et al., 2004). In East Africa particularly, food production per 
capita decreased from the mid-1970s to the early 1990s with 
no improvement since then (FAOSTAT, 2010).

Technology

Despite the need to feed an increasing population, the world 
stock of arable land is exhausted. Fossil fuels, the basis for fer-
tilizer, are about to be depleted, and water levels and supply 
are decreasing in many areas of the world (The World Bank, 
2008).  The  effects  of  global  warming  need  to  be  addressed 
urgently,  and  environmental  degradation  brought  under  con-
trol to feed future generations in a sustainable way.

The  classic  technologies  and  conventional  breeding  that 
have  helped  to  sustain  the  world  population  in  the  past,  in 
particular  with  improved  varieties,  fertilizer,  tillage,  irriga-
tion,  and  pesticides,  clearly  have  their  limitations.  Indicators 
show a decrease in the growth rate of productivity of two of 
the three primary cereals: rice and wheat (Pingali and Heisey, 
1999).  The  maintenance  of  soil  fertility  is  a  major  problem, 
particularly in Africa (Sanchez et al., 1997).

Reducing  tillage  is  one  of  the  promising  options,  but  this 
technology  needs  cost-efficient  weed  control.  Water  levels 
have  been  decreasing,  especially  in  Asia,  and  the  expansion 
of  irrigation  for  staple  crops  is  unlikely.  Finally,  the  use  of 
pesticides  is  problematic  in  developing  countries,  where  low 
education  levels,  lack  of  equipment  and  training,  and  poor 
regulatory  systems  can  lead  to  the  high  exposure  of  farmers 
and  farm  workers  to  toxic  pesticides.  The  resultant  health 
effects of pesticide use have been documented in many coun-
tries (Pingali et al., 1994; Houndekon et al., 2006).

Biotechnology  is  not  a  panacea  to  solve  the  world’s  food 
problem. It does, however, offer a range of opportunities and 
methods  that  can  help  lift  the  limitations  of  conventional 
technologies.  Moreover,  it  dramatically  expands  the  range  of 
possibilities for increasing the quality of food staples, still the 
major source of food for the world’s poor.

Current State of GM Crops

Geographic distribution

GM  technology  has  been  developed  since  the  early  1980s, 
and the first commercial GM varieties were planted in 1996. 
Area  and  production  statistics,  as  documented  annually  by 
the  International  Service  for  the  Acquisition  of  Agri-biotech 
Applications (ISAAA), show their immediate popularity with 
farmers  (James,  2010):  once  the  crops  are  approved,  their 
adoption is fast. Approval, however, has been slow, and only a 
small number of countries so far have commercial production 
of GM crops.

By 2009, after only 13 years, 134 million hectares had been 
planted  as  GM  crops  (James,  2010).  No  other  agricultural 
technology has ever spread as quickly and on such a massive 
scale.  Still,  GM  crops  are  only  grown  by  25  countries,  with 

only  15  serious  producers  who  cultivate  more  than  100,000 
hectares each. Most of the GM area (95%) is situated in just 
six  countries:  the  United  States,  Brazil,  Argentina,  India, 
Canada, and China (Table 36.1). Of the ten major producers, 
each with more than 0.8 million hectares, eight are developing 
countries;  the  most  important  are  Brazil  and  Argentina  with 
more  than  20  million  hectares  each,  India  and  China  with 
more  than  8  million  hectares  each,  and  Paraguay  and  South 
Africa with more than 2 million hectares each.

In  the  developing  world,  most  GM  crops  are  grown  in 
South America (eight countries) and Asia (four countries). In 
Africa, only South Africa is a major producer, while Egypt and 
Burkina  Faso  have  only  recently  started.  South  Africa  is  the 
only country in the world (up to 2009) that grew a GM crop 
specifically  for  food:  white  Bt  maize.  The  map  of  countries 
growing GM crops (Figure 36.1) clearly shows that most of the 
Americas and large areas in Asia are covered, but large areas in 
Europe and Africa are left blank. The major areas in developing 
countries that do not grow GM crops, or at least not on a sub-
stantial scale, are in Europe and Japan. Whereas five European 
countries  grow  GM  crops,  only  Spain  grows  them  on  more 
than 100,000 hectares. The limited acreage in Europe is due to 
strong consumer objections (Gaskell et al., 2000) driven by a 
lack of perceived benefit (Gaskell et al., 2004).

Crops, traits, and farmers

In 2009, more than half of the GM area worldwide was planted 
in herbicide-tolerant soybean (52%), followed by maize (31%), 
cotton  (12%),  and  canola  (5%).  Other  GM  crops  are  papaya, 
sugar  beet,  tomato,  squash,  and  sweet  pepper,  but  these  are 
only  grown  by  three  countries  and  in  small  quantities.  Within 
the  three  major  crops,  a  large  proportion  is  now  grown  using 
GM varieties: more than three-quarters of soybean (77%), one-
half of the cotton (49%), and one-quarter of the maize (26%).

From  the  first  commercialization  of  GM  crops,  herbicide 
tolerance  (HT)  has  consistently  been  the  dominant  trait.  In 
the four main crops (soybean, maize, cotton, and canola), HT 
varieties  covered  62%  of  the  area  worldwide  in  2009.  The 
stacked double and triple traits covered 21%, whereas varie-
ties with only insect resistance covered 15%. Most countries 
in the developing world only produce industrial crops (cotton) 
and feed crops (soybean and maize). Only South Africa pro-
duces a specific GM staple food crop (white Bt maize).

Worldwide,  14  million  farmers  grow  GM  crops.  The 
large  majority  (90%)  are  small  and  resource-poor  farmers  in 
developing  countries,  who  grow  mainly  Bt  cotton  (7  million 
in  China  and  5.6  million  in  India).  About  one  million  farm-
ers  are  large  farmers  from  industrial  countries,  such  as  the 
United  States  and  Canada,  and  developing  countries,  such 
as Argentina and Brazil. HT technology is less appreciated in 
developing  countries,  where  labor  costs  are  low  and  small-
holders usually rely on manual weeding.

Future and trends

The  trends  indicate  an  increased  use  of  stacked  traits,  an 
increased interest in food crops, and an increasing number of 

565

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

Table 36.1  Countries growing different GM crops

Country

United States

Brazil

Argentina

India

Canada

China

Paraguay

South Africa

Uruguay

Bolivia

Philippines

Australia

Burkina Faso

Spain

Mexico

Chile

Colombia

Honduras

Czech Republic

Portugal

Costa Rica

Egypt

Slovakia

Source: James, 2010.

Area (million ha)

Soybean

Maize

Cotton

Other crops

Canola, squash, papaya, alfalfa, sugar beet

Canola, sugar beet

Papaya, tomato, sweet pepper

Canola

Canola

64.0

21.4

21.3

8.4

8.4

8.2

2.2

2.1

0.8

0.8

0.5

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

  0.1

  0.1

  0.1

  0.1

  0.1

  0.1

  0.1

  0.1

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

private–public partnerships (PPPs) to develop GM food crop. 
Increasingly, seed companies develop GM crop varieties with 
stacked  traits.  In  the  United  States,  85%  of  the  maize  area 
and  75%  of  the  cotton  area  are  now  sown  in  varieties  with 
stacked  traits.  This  poses  particular  problems  for  the  regula-
tory  systems  in  developing  countries,  given  the  low  level  of 
expertise. The HT trait is not of major interest to subsistence 
and small-scale farmers.

The  second  important  trend  is  the  increasing  importance 
of  food  crops.  Until  2009,  only  South  Africa  was  producing 
a specific GM food crop. In that same year, however, China 
approved  the  release  and  commercial  production  of  Bt  rice 
and India approved the use of Bt eggplant. The approval of Bt 
rice in China is of major importance to the developing world, 
because it was the first staple food crop in a large developing 

country  and  the  first  GM  rice  variety.  This  experience  can 
lead  the  way  for  other  GM  food  crops,  particularly  golden 
rice. The release of Bt eggplant in India was extremely impor-
tant because it was the first vegetable GM crop outside of the 
United States and China, and could have been very influential 
for  this  increasingly  important  sector  for  small-scale  farmers 
in developing countries. However, India recalled the release of 
Bt eggplant in 2010 under pressure from consumer organiza-
tions and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

For  the  developing  world,  PPPs  are  increasingly  impor-
tant,  because  the  development  and  the  release  of  GM 
crops  is  very  expensive.  Most  developing  countries  do  not 
have  the  scientific  capacity  to  develop  GM  crops,  and  the 
resources  for  biotechnology  in  the  international  agricultural 
research institutes are limited. The International Maize and 

566

Crop biotechnology in developing countries

C H A P T E R   3 6

 Area in GM crops (million ha)

 

0.05 - 0.1
0.1 - 2
2 - 10
> 20

Figure 36.1 l Countries growing GM crops l  From ISAAA (James, 2010). 

Wheat  Improvement  Centre  (CIMMYT)  and  the  Kenya 
Agricultural Research Institute (KARI) have tried to develop 
Bt  maize  varieties  for  Africa  with  Bt  events  from  the  pub-
lic  sector,  in  particular  events  developed  by  CIMMYT  and 
the  University  of  Ottawa  (Mugo  et  al.,  2011).  These  pub-
lic sector events did not, however, provide sufficient control 
of some stem borer species, so CIMMYT and KARI are now 
collaborating  with  private  companies  to  use  their  Bt  events 
(De  Groote  et  al.,  2011b).  CIMMYT  is  working  with  the 
private sector as well to develop drought-tolerant and nitro-
gen-efficient maize varieties for developing countries in dif-
ferent PPP projects.

Economic Impact of Transgenic 
Crops in Developing Countries

Main effects of current GM crops

At  the  farm  level,  the  economic  impact  of  the  current  trans-
genic crops, based on the Bt and HT genes, is realized through 
yield increase, cost reduction, or both. The Bt gene, inserted in 
cotton or maize varieties, causes the plant to produce a protein 
that is toxic to certain insects, in particular lepidopteran pests 
such as the maize stem borers and the cotton boll weevil (FAO, 
2004). Several Bt genes are highly effective in controlling these 
pests but, by themselves, do not increase crop yield; they only 
reduce the losses due to better pest control, or make pest con-
trol  cheaper  (Zilberman  et  al.,  2007).  Moreover,  Bt  genes  do 
not control all insect pests; therefore, they do not eliminate all 
crop loss due to insects or all pesticide use.

In developed countries, farmers usually have access to the 
means  and  the  know-how  to  control  most  pests  with  pesti-
cides.  Bt  varieties,  therefore,  do  not  generally  increase  crop 
yields,  but  they  will  provide  a  cheaper  alternative  to  pesti-
cides,  and  reduce  their  applications  and  cost.  Insects  usu-
ally  thrive  in  the  warmer  and  more  humid  climates  typical 
of  many  developing  countries,  leading  to  higher  pest  pres-
sure.  Moreover,  resource-poor  farmers  often  face  serious 
constraints  in  using  pesticides,  in  particular  having  access, 

know-how, equipment, and cash or credit, which often leads 
to  the  suboptimal  use  of  pesticides  (Qaim  and  Zilberman, 
2003; Qaim, 2009; Smale et al., 2009). In such cases, Bt vari-
eties  will  reduce  crop  loss  through  better  control  of  the  tar-
get pests, leading to higher yields. For those farmers who have 
used  pesticides  before,  switching  to  Bt  varieties  will  reduce 
their production costs.

HT  crops  work  on  another  principle:  they  are  tolerant 
to  the  broad  spectrum  herbicide  Glyphosate  (FAO,  2004). 
Therefore,  the  use  of  HT  technology  can  reduce  produc-
tion  costs  through  the  substitution  of  Glyphosate  for  an 
array  of  more  expensive,  and  usually  more  toxic,  herbicides. 
HT  would  only  increase  yields  in  cases  where  weeds  were 
not  properly  controlled  before.  An  extra  advantage  of  the 
improved  weed  control  from  HT  technology  is  the  option 
of  reducing  tillage,  because  weed  control  is  one  of  the  main 
objectives  of  tilling.  Unlike  Bt  crops,  HT  crops  are  mainly 
grown  in  developing  countries  and  by  large-scale  farmers  in 
Latin America, while farmers in developing countries usually 
rely on manual weeding (James, 2010).

Apart from estimating the farm level benefits, the distribu-
tion of these benefits is also important, in particular to small-
scale versus large-scale farmers. Moreover, the total economic 
benefit of new crop varieties is not limited to increased yields 
or  reduced  costs  at  the  farm  level:  price  effects  and  impact 
on  the  rest  of  the  economy  also  need  to  be  considered.  An 
increase of production levels or a decrease in production costs 
generally reduces the market price, benefiting the consumer. 
If consumer demand is inelastic, as is often the case with basic 
agricultural  products,  most  benefits  will  go  to  the  consumer. 
Increased production also increases trade and employment in 
other sectors.

Empirical evidence of farm level benefits

Bt cotton
The  economic  impact  of  Bt  cotton  has  been  the  subject  of 
a  large  number  of  studies,  based  on  farmer  surveys,  farm 
records,  or  trials.  A  recent  IFPRI  review  of  the  economic 
impact  of  GM  crops  in  developing  countries  identified  15 

567

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

studies of Bt cotton in South Africa, 11 in China, 16 in India, 
and 5 in Latin America (Smale et al., 2009). In South Africa, 
the analyses comparing economic returns per hectare between 
smallholders  and  large-scale  producers  found  that  smallhold-
ers in South Africa are major beneficiaries of Bt cotton (Smale 
et al., 2009). In China, the synthesis of many studies is that 
Bt cotton leads to sustained, widespread, and positive effects 
on farm profits.

Studies from India were not as clear: Bt cotton is grown in 
all agroecological zones and yields are highly variable, authors 
use  different  methods,  and  there  is  a  difference  between 
types of Bt varieties (Smale et al., 2009). In another review of 
studies on the impact of GM crops, estimated yield effects of 
Bt  cotton  in  developing  countries  varied  from  9%  in  Mexico 
to  33%  in  Argentina  and  37%  in  India  (Qaim,  2009).  In 
Argentina,  conventional  cotton  farmers  underutilize  chemi-
cal insecticides and insect pests are not effectively controlled 
(Qaim  and  de  Janvry,  2003).  In  India,  however,  insecticide 
use in conventional cotton is much higher. This suggests that 
factors other than insecticide quantity influence damage con-
trol  in  conventional  cotton  and,  thus,  the  yield  effects  of  Bt 
technology.  These  factors  include  insecticide  quality,  insecti-
cide resistance, and the correct choice of products and timing 
of  sprays.  The  same  review  found  increases  in  gross  margins 
from $23/ha in Argentina to $470/ha in China, as compared 
to $58/ha in the United States.

Bt maize
The  effects  of  Bt  maize  are  similar  to  those  observed  in  Bt 
cotton,  albeit  generally  at  a  lower  magnitude  (Qaim,  2009). 
Except for Spain, where the percentage reduction in insecti-
cide use is large, the more important result of the use of Bt 
maize is an increase in effective yields. Mean yield effects are 
higher in developing countries such as Argentina (9%), South 
Africa  (11%),  and  the  Philippines  (34%)  because  pest  pres-
sure  is  more  severe  there  than  in  temperate  climates.  The 
average yield in South Africa is mostly from yellow Bt hybrids 
produced  by  large  commercial  farms.  On-farm  trials  carried 
out  with  smallholder  farmers  and  white  Bt  maize  hybrids 
found average yield gains of 32% (Gouse et al., 2006).

Estimates of gross margin increases from using Bt maize in 
developing countries ranged from $20/ha in Argentina to $42 
in South Africa and $53 in Argentina. In developed countries, 
estimates  ranged  from  only  $12/ha  in  the  United  States  to 
$70/ha in Spain (Qaim, 2009).

In  Africa  only  Kenya,  apart  from  South  Africa,  has  been 
testing  Bt  maize.  Here,  crop  losses  due  to  stem  borers  in 
maize  are  estimated  at  13.5%  or  0.4  million  tons,  valued  at 
$80  million  (De  Groote  et  al.,  2011a).  Benefits  of  Bt  maize 
for  the  country  are  calculated  at  $208  million  over  25  years 
(66% of which is consumer surplus) as compared to a cost of 
$5.7 million.

Some preliminary evidence from field trials is available for 
maize and other Bt crops. In Bt rice in China, high insecticide 
reductions,  but  relatively  small  yield  effects  were  observed 
(Huang et al., 2005), while in Bt eggplants in India, significant 
insecticide as well as yield effects were observed (Krishna and 
Qaim, 2008a).

HT crops
The  use  of  HT  in  developing  countries  has  not  resulted  in 
increased  yields,  but  (as  in  North  America)  it  has  resulted 
in  a  reduction  in  herbicide  costs  (Qaim  and  Traxler,  2005). 
As  in  the  United  States,  Glyphosate  applications  have 
increased,  but  the  number  of  applications  for  other  herbi-
cides has decreased. This increase was caused by the increase 
in  reduced  tillage  —  farming  techniques  that  limit  soil  dis-
turbance  to  increase  water  retention  and  to  reduce  erosion. 
Reduced tillage methods usually rely on herbicides, in combi-
nation with HT varieties, to control weeds.

Because  HT  crops  were  developed  and  commercialized 
by  private  companies,  a  technology  fee  is  charged  on  seeds, 
which  varies  among  crops  as  well  as  countries.  In  North 
America,  the  fee  costs  for  HT  crops  were  similar  or  some-
times  higher  than  the  average  cost  reduction,  so  that  gross 
margin effects were small or sometimes even negative (Qaim, 
2009). The main reasons for farmers in such situations to con-
tinue using HT technologies were easier weed control and sav-
ings in management time.

In  South  American  countries,  however,  the  agronomic 
advantages are similar but the fees charged are lower because 
HT technology is not patented there, and many soybean farm-
ers use farm-saved GM seeds (Qaim, 2009). This has led to 
larger average gross margin effects of HT crops, especially HT 
soybeans  (Trigo  and  Cap,  2006).  The  average  gross  margin 
gains through HT soybean adoption in Argentina, for example, 
were estimated at $23/ha (Qaim and Traxler, 2005).

Effect of GM crops on poverty  
and inequality

So far, HT crops have not been widely adopted in the small-
farm sector. Smallholders often weed manually, so HT crops 
are  inappropriate,  unless  labor  shortages  or  weeds  that  are 
difficult  to  control  justify  conversion  to  chemical  practices 
(Qaim, 2009).

Bt  crops, on  the  other hand,  are  very popular  with  small-
scale  farmers,  especially  Bt  cotton,  which  is  produced  by 
many small-scale farmers in China (Huang et al., 2002), India 
(Smale et al., 2009), and South Africa (Gouse et al., 2004).

In  South  Africa,  many  smallholders  now  grow  Bt  white 
maize as their staple food, with substantial increases in yield 
and  gross  margin  (Gouse  et  al.,  2006).  Several  studies  show 
that  Bt  technology  advantages  for  small-scale  farmers  are  of 
a similar magnitude as those of larger scale producers and, in 
some cases, the advantages can be even greater (Qaim, 2009).

Combined effects on farmer income

The  total  increase  of  farmer  income  worldwide  from  the 
first  13  years  of  commercialization  of  GM  crops  (1996  to 
2008)  is  estimated  at  $52  billion  (Brookes  and  Barfoot, 
2010).  About  half  of  this  gain  was  generated  in  developing 
countries.  The  income  increase  in  the  last  year  of  the  study 
(2008) was estimated at $9.4 billion, with slightly more than 
half  going  to  farmers  in  developing  countries  (Figure  36.2). 

568

Crop biotechnology in developing countries

C H A P T E R   3 6

Developed countries

Developing countries

n
o

i
l
l
i

m
 
$
S
U

3,000

2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0

Figure 36.2 l Increases of global farm level income from GM technologies l From Brookes and Barfoot (2010). 

HT-soybeans

IR-cotton

HT-maize

IR-maize

HT-canola

HT  soybeans  were  the  most  important  crop,  with  increased 
revenue  estimated  at  $2.9  billion,  which  was  almost  equally 
divided between developed and developing countries. Most of 
this  increased  revenue  from  HT  soybeans,  however,  went  to 
large-scale  farmers.  The  benefits  of  insect  resistant  (IR)  cot-
ton  (largely  Bt  cotton)  are  of  the  same  magnitude  ($2.9  bil-
lion), but, in contrast to HT soybeans, their benefits go almost 
uniquely  to  developing  countries  and  to  many  smallholders. 
The benefits of GM maize are again of the same magnitude, 
but most of it is from IR maize ($2.6 billion), and most of it 
goes to developed countries.

Macro level impacts

When a new technology increases production and the welfare 
of  producers,  the  supply  curve  shifts  and  leads  to  a  decrease 
in  food  prices  that  affects  consumers’  welfare  (Alston  et  al., 
1998). The combined effects are often analyzed with the eco-
nomic surplus method, which is a partial equilibrium method. 
In the United States, the economic surplus gain from Bt cot-
ton, for example, was estimated at 164%, of which 37% went 
to farmers, 18% to consumers, and 45% to the innovating com-
panies.  Economic  surplus  in  China  was  estimated  at  a  similar 
$140  million,  but  only  1.5%  went  to  the  innovating  company 
and  the  rest  to  farmers,  whereas  consumers  did  not  receive 
any benefit because prices were fixed by the government (Pray 
et al., 2001). GM crops can bring sizable welfare gains, but the 
distributional  effects  depend  on  intellectual  property  rights 
(IPRs) and institutional conditions (Qaim, 2009).

Global effects from new technologies include their effects 
on  other  sectors  of  the  economy  as  well  as  their  effects, 
through  trade,  on  markets  in  other  countries  and  regions. 
Increased  production  can  increase  the  demand  for  labor  at 
harvest,  increasing  income  and  demand  for  other  products, 
whereas reduced prices on international markets are beneficial 
to consumers worldwide. These global effects can be captured 

by  estimating  general  equilibrium  models.  Global  welfare 
gains  of  Bt  cotton,  as  estimated  by  different  studies,  range 
from  $0.7  to  $1.8  billion  per  year,  while  GM  rice  (Bt,  HT, 
and  drought  tolerance)  could  bring  gains  of  $2.1–2.5  billion 
per year (Qaim, 2009) .

Health Impact

Safety concerns

The power of the new discoveries in genetics raises concerns 
in many societies as to the ethics and safety of their use and 
the risks they may pose to human health, biodiversity, and the 
environment  (ICSU,  2004).  The  introduction  of  GM  crops 
has  become  highly  controversial  in  the  UK  and  some  other 
parts  of  the  world.  The  principal  objections  concern  possi-
ble  harm  to  human  health,  damage  to  the  environment,  and 
unease about the unnatural status of the technology (Nuffield 
Council on Bioethics, 1999).

Many reviews by national and international science organi-
zations, and reviews of these reviews, synthesizing the scien-
tific knowledge on GM crops on human health show a wide 
consensus  among  the  scientific  community  that  currently 
available GM foods are safe to eat (FAO, 2004; ICSU, 2004). 
The most important review, by the International Council for 
Science,  concludes  that  food  safety  assessments  by  national 
regulatory  agencies  in  several  countries  have  deemed  cur-
rently  available  GM  foods  to  be  as  safe  to  eat  as  their  con-
ventional  counterparts  and  suitable  for  human  consumption 
(ICSU, 2004). This view is shared by several intergovernmen-
tal  agencies,  including  the  FAO/WHO  Codex  Alimentarius 
Commission  on  food  safety  which  has  162  member  coun-
tries,  the  European  Commission,  and  the  Organization  for 
Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (OECD).  Further, 
there is no evidence of any ill effects from the consumption of 

569

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

foods containing GM ingredients. Since GM crops were first 
cultivated commercially in 1995, many millions of meals have 
been made with GM ingredients and consumed by people in 
a number of countries with no demonstrated adverse effects 
(ICSU, 2004).

Still,  the  reviews  do  point  out  that,  although  currently 
available  GM  foods  are  considered  safe  to  eat,  this  does  not 
guarantee  that  no  risks  will  be  encountered  as  more  foods 
are developed with novel characteristics, and different genes 
are  stacked  into  one  crop.  An  ongoing  evaluation  of  emerg-
ing products is, therefore, required to ensure that new foods 
coming  to  market  are  safe  for  consumers.  They  recommend 
that food safety evaluation must be undertaken on a case-by-
case  basis,  and  that  the  extent  of  the  risk  evaluation  should 
be proportionate to the possible risks involved with particular 
foods (FAO, 2004; ICSU, 2004).

Nutritional benefits of biofortification

Undernutrition  remains  a  persistent  problem  in  develop-
ing countries, especially in rural areas where the poor largely 
depend  on  staples  and  have  limited  access  to  a  diverse  diet. 
Malnutrition  is  still  widespread,  with  both  protein-energy 
deficiencies and micronutrient deficiencies, in particular vita-
min A, zinc, and iron.

Biofortification,  or  improvement  of  the  nutritional  qual-
ity of food crops using conventional plant breeding or genetic 
engineering (White and Broadley, 2005; Nestel et al., 2006), 
is one strategy to improve access to nutritious food. Because 
staple  foods  are  eaten  in  large  quantities  every  day  by  the 
malnourished  poor,  delivery  of  biofortified  foods  can  rely 
on  existing  consumer  behavior  (Bouis,  1999).  Studies  have 
shown  that  biofortification  is  a  cost-effective  way  to  reduce 
micronutrient  deficiencies  (Meenakshi  et  al.,  2010),  and  it 
is  more  sustainable  than  nutrient  supplementation  (Bouis, 
1999).  Therefore,  it  is  a  viable  complementary  strategy  to 
food  fortification,  which  relies  on  the  central  processing  of 
food and whose products may be less accessible, particularly 
to the rural poor (Bouis, 1999; Horton, 2006).

While  both  conventional  breeding  and  biotechnology  can 
be  used  for  biofortification,  conventional  methods  require 
sufficient  variation  in  the  genetic  pools  to  justify  the  effort. 
Maize and sweet potatoes have sufficient variability in provi-
tamin A content, but variability for iron in maize or provita-
min A in rice, for example, are not sufficient for conventional 
breeding. Transgenic engineering, on the other hand, can draw 
from a much wider pool of genes, can increase micronutrients 
to  much  higher  levels  (as  the  example  of  golden  rice  shows; 
Unnevehr et al., 2007), and can progress much more quickly.

So  far,  no  GM  biofortified  crops  have  been  released,  but 
two  conventionally  biofortified  crops  have  been  released: 
quality protein maize (QPM) and orange fleshed sweet pota-
toes (OFSP). Both have shown to increase the nutritional sta-
tus  of  children  and  are  indicative  of  the  potential  impact  of 
GM biofortification.

Although  the  term  biofortification  most  commonly  refers 
to  the  process  of  increasing  micronutrient  levels,  more 
recently  it  has  been  used  in  a  larger  sense  to  include  other 

nutritional enhancements, such as the increased bioavailability 
of existing nutrients, improved oil profiles, or improved amino 
acid profiles resulting in improved protein quality (Unnevehr 
et al., 2007). Under this definition, the first biofortified crop 
was  opaque-2  (o2)  maize,  based  on  a  natural  mutation  that 
nearly  doubles  the  lysine  and  tryptophan  content  of  maize 
grain  (Mertz  et  al.,  1964).  Further  breeding,  using  conven-
tional  methods,  led  to  the  development  of  agronomically 
competitive  maize  varieties  with  improved  protein  quality, 
collectively  called  quality  protein  maize  (National  Research 
Council,  1988;  Vasal,  2000).  QPM  varieties  are  currently 
being developed and disseminated, particularly in sub-Saharan 
Africa (Krivanek et al., 2007).

A  study  in  Ethiopia,  where  randomized  households  were 
provided  with  QPM  seed  or  seed  of  a  conventional  variety 
for  home  production  and  consumption,  found  that  children 
consuming  conventional  maize  progressively  faltered  in  their 
growth  during  the  hungry  season,  whereas  children  consum-
ing  QPM  did  not  change  significantly  in  height-for-age  and 
had a marginal increase in weight-for-age (Akalu et al., 2010). 
A  meta-analysis  of  available  randomized,  controlled  studies 
in  target  communities  indicated  that  consumption  of  QPM 
instead of conventional maize leads to a 12% increase in the 
rate  of  growth  in  weight  and  a  9%  increase  in  the  rate  of 
growth  in  height  in  infants  and  young  children  with  mild  to 
moderate undernutrition from populations in which maize is 
the major staple food (Gunaratna et al., 2010).

The  second  biofortified  crop  released  was  OFSP,  which 
shows  a  high  potential  to  reduce  vitamin  A  deficiencies.  In 
a  study  in  Mozambique,  combining  agricultural  and  nutri-
tional interventions to disseminate and promote OFSP (using 
a  quasi-experimental  design  with  a  control  group),  vitamin 
A  intakes  were  much  higher  in  intervention  children  than  in 
control  children,  leading  to  a  significant  increase  of  serum 
retinol concentrations (Low et al., 2007).

Nutritional impact of GM biofortification

Building  on  the  experience  of  conventional  biofortification, 
investments in biofortification research are likely to result in 
high  returns  due  to  the  high  malnutrition  rates  in  develop-
ing countries and their high costs to human welfare and pro-
ductivity, the low cost of breeding biofortified crops, and the 
relative ease of disseminating them to large groups of people 
(Bouis, 1999).

So far, several GM biofortified crops have been developed, 
but none has been released. The potential impact of these and 
future  biofortified  varieties  can,  however,  be  estimated  from 
trials and ex ante impact assessments.

Rice  is  the  most  important  food  crop  in  the  world,  so 
golden  rice,  which  has  received  the  most  attention,  has  the 
potential  to  dramatically  reduce  vitamin  A  (VA)  deficiency 
in  Asia.  A  first  study,  based  on  actual  consumption  patterns 
in  the  Cebu  region  of  the  Philippines,  concluded  that  VA 
enriched  rice  is  likely  to  deliver  substantial  amounts  of  VA, 
although  it  is  unlikely  to  fulfill  all  requirements  since  rice 
is  not  the  major  staple  of  this  country  (Dawe  et  al.,  2002). 
Using  national  data  for  the  Philippines,  developing  a  link 

570

Crop biotechnology in developing countries

C H A P T E R   3 6

between  VA  intake  and  disease,  and  quantifying  the  dis-
ease  burden  using  the  concept  of  disease  adjusted  life  years 
(DALYs),  high  rates  of  return  for  the  development  and  dis-
semination of golden rice were predicted (Zimmermann and 
Qaim, 2004). Given broad public support, golden rice could 
more than halve the disease burden of VA deficiency in India 
(Stein et al., 2008a)

Similarly,  through  biofortification  of  rice  and  wheat  in 
India, the disease burden associated with iron deficiency (esti-
mated  at  4.0  million  DALYs  per  year)  could  be  reduced  by 
19–58% (Stein et al., 2008b) and the burden from zinc defi-
ciency (estimated at 2.8 million DALYs per year) by 20–51% 
(Stein  et  al.,  2007).  The  cost  of  saving  one  DALY  through 
improved health from increased zinc intake through bioforti-
fication in India is estimated at $0.73–$7.31, which is lower 
than  that  of  most  other  micronutrient  interventions  (Stein 
et al., 2007).

An ex ante impact assessment of the biofortification of glo-
bally important staple food crops with provitamin A, iron, and 
zinc for 12 countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, again 
using a modification of the DALY framework, indicated that 
the intervention can make a significant impact on the burden 
of  micronutrient  deficiencies  in  the  developing  world  in  a 
highly cost-effective manner (Meenakshi et al., 2010).

Reduced exposure to toxins, pesticides, 
and anti-nutrients

Evidence  shows  that  GM  crops  have  additional  benefits  for 
human health by reducing exposure to mycotoxins and pesti-
cides, and have the potential to reduce anti-nutrients. Insect-
resistant  food  crops  suffer  less  insect  damage  in  storage  and 
are,  therefore,  less  likely  to  be  infected  by  fungi.  Bt  maize 
kernels,  for  example,  accumulate  fewer  mycotoxins  from 
opportunistic fungi than maize kernels from insect susceptible 
varieties. Mycotoxins are harmful, and often lethal, to humans 
and livestock (Miller et al., 2006).

Many studies have documented the reduced pesticide use 
in  Bt  cotton  and  Bt  maize  (Smale  et  al.,  2009).  Data  from 
South Africa suggest that the number of accidental pesticide 
poisoning cases there has declined since the introduction of Bt 
crops (Bennett et al., 2003).

Finally, food crops can be engineered to reduce the effect 
of  anti-nutrients  and  improve  digestion.  No  such  varie-
ties  have  been  released  for  human  consumption,  but  China 
approved  GM  phytase  maize  for  animal  feed  in  2009.  Pork 
production with phytase maize will be more efficient because 
pigs can more easily digest phosphorus, coincidentally enhanc-
ing growth and reducing pollution due to the lower phosphate 
animal waste (James, 2010).

The Environment

Several  reviews  conclude  that  the  environmental  impact  of 
GM crops may be either positive or negative depending on how 
and  where  they  are  used  (FAO,  2004;  ICSU,  2004).  Possible 
negative  environmental  effects  include  gene  transfer  to  wild 

relatives of conventional crops, weediness, and trait effects on 
non-target  species  (FAO,  2004).  Positive  effects  on  the  envi-
ronment include reduced pesticide use (insecticides and herbi-
cides) and reduced tillage from Bt and HT crops (Qaim, 2009). 
These risks might affect developing countries differently where 
farmers have low levels of education, and regulatory and moni-
toring agencies have limited expertise and resources.

Currently available evidence suggests that genes can move 
from GM crops into landraces and related wild species, gen-
erally  at  low  frequency  and  only  in  areas  where  compatible 
wild relatives are found (ICSU, 2004). In theory, GM traits 
like  pest  resistance  could  provide  a  fitness  advantage  (FAO, 
2004),  but  evidence  suggests  that  they  do  not  significantly 
increase  the  fitness  of  the  plants  in  semi-natural  habitats. 
Hybridization between GM crops and wild relatives are likely 
to  transfer  those  genes  that  are  advantageous  in  agricultural 
environments,  but  they  will  not  prosper  in  the  wild  (GM 
Science Review Panel, 2003).Traits that make them desirable 
as crops often make them less fit to survive in the wild (FAO, 
2004).  So  far,  no  evidence  of  any  deleterious  environmental 
effects has occurred from the trait and species combinations 
currently available (ICSU, 2004).

Evidence  suggests  that  genes  can  move  from  GM  crops 
into landraces (ICSU, 2004). This is important for developing 
countries where, despite the availability of improved varieties, 
many farmers still grow a wide range of local varieties. These 
varieties  have  particular  characteristics  desirable  to  farmers, 
in  particular,  hardiness  and  storability,  or  to  consumers,  such 
as taste, texture, and color. If GM varieties of open pollinated 
crops  with  dominant  traits  (e.g.,  Bt  maize)  are  grown  in  the 
neighborhood  of  local  varieties,  these  traits  are  likely  to  cross 
over. Farmers often select desirable plants in the field for seed 
production,  and  since  they  skip  plants  with  insect  damage, 
those plants with the Bt gene will have a higher probability of 
being selected. Since maize pollen is heavy and does not travel 
far,  buffer  zones  could,  in  theory,  stop  this  flow,  albeit  a  cost 
(Tumusiime et al., 2010). However, small-scale farmers do not 
have the required land, and regulatory agencies are unlikely to 
enforce a mandatory buffer. The release of GM crops in cent-
ers  of  origin  is,  therefore,  one  possible  strategy  (FAO,  2004) 
currently used in Mexico. Another strategy would be to engi-
neer GM crops to limit their reproduction, but these so-called 
terminator genes were heavily contested and several seed com-
panies have now agreed not to use them (Stein, 2005).

By using GM crops, farmers have been able to substantially 
reduce  pesticide  applications  (ICSU,  2004).  Globally,  by 
2004, the reduced use of pesticides in cotton was estimated 
at  14%,  with  several  country  studies  showing  reductions  of 
40–60%  (ICSU,  2004).  This  is  of  particular  benefit  to  the 
millions  of  small  Bt  cotton  producers  in  developing  coun-
tries.  While  HT  technology  decreased  the  use  of  more  toxic 
herbicides,  the  total  use  of  herbicides  did  not  decrease.  The 
technology does, however, reduce tillage and, therefore, ero-
sion (Qaim and Traxler, 2005). While these effects are similar 
in developing and developed countries, they are not of major 
interest to smallholders.

In  crop-associated  biodiversity,  the  number  of  beneficial 
insects  has  increased  (ICSU,  2004),  but  the  effect  on  crop 
biodiversity  is  not  clear.  If  farmers  choose  a  limited  number 

571

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

of popular GM varieties, diversity could decrease, but if the 
traits become available in a wide range of varieties, such as Bt 
maize in South Africa, this does not have to be the case.

GM  technology  can  make  crops  more  suitable  to  new 
areas, for example, drought-tolerant maize for dry lands, and 
rice  tolerant  to  salinity  (ICSU,  2004).  At  the  same  time, 
expanding  crop  acreage  into  marginal  dry  land  areas  or  into 
mangroves  can  threaten  delicate  ecosystems.  Clearly,  a  case-
by-case  environmental  impact  assessment  of  specific  appli-
cations  in  specific  agroecosystems  is  needed.  The  scientific 
community  generally  agrees  that  these  assessments,  as  well 
as  ecological  monitoring  of  the  environment  for  unintended 
effects  after  the  release  of  GM  crops,  are  necessary  (FAO, 
2004).  To  realize  this,  however,  the  capacity  of  environmen-
tal impact assessment and monitoring in developing countries 
needs to be increased.

Consumer Acceptance of GM Food

Regional differences

Although GM crops might be technologically superior and of 
great benefit to the farmer, they cannot have an impact if con-
sumers  are  not  willing  to  accept  them.  Despite  the  available 
scientific  evidence,  presented  in  this  chapter,  that  GM  food 
is safe to eat and GM crops have not demonstrated any nega-
tive effect on the environment, a large number of studies show 
that  consumers  in  developed  countries  consistently  show  a 
preference for non-GM food over GM food (Lusk et al., 2005; 
Costa-Font  et  al.,  2008).  Only  a  few  studies  have  quantified 
consumer preferences in developing countries, with one review 
(Smale et al., 2009), but these studies clearly indicate a more 
positive attitude than in the developed countries.

The  preference  for  non-GM  food  is  particularly  strong 
in  Europe,  where  the  latest  survey  of  public  perceptions  of 
biotechnology  reveals  widespread  opposition  to  GM  food  in 
much  of  Europe,  although  public  attitudes  to  medical  and 
environmental  applications  remain  positive  (Gaskell  et  al., 
2000).  In  most  European  countries,  consumers  find  benefits 
associated with GM food insufficient to overcome their asso-
ciated perceived risk, and they are willing to pay a premium 
for GM-free food (Costa-Font et al., 2008). Worldwide, con-
sumers  associate,  on  the  whole,  more  negative  than  positive 
attributes  to  agrobiotechnology,  and  individual  behaviors  are 
driven by perceptions of beliefs about risks (Costa-Font et al., 
2008).  A  meta-analysis  of  25  studies  reporting  57  valuations 
for  GM  food  concluded  that  consumers  on  average  place  a 
23–43%  premium  on  non-GM  products,  and  that  premium 
is  higher  for  European  consumers  than  for  consumers  from 
North  America  and  Asia  (Lusk  et  al.,  2005).  Only  one  of 
these  studies,  however,  was  in  a  developing  country  (China) 
where consumers actually showed a preference for GM food.

Studies  on  consumer  preferences  in  developing  countries 
are few, but the available evidence indicates a low awareness 
of  GM  food  and  a  more  positive  attitude.  A  recent  review 
covering the 1996–2007 period identified 33 studies on con-
sumers’  attitudes  toward  GM  food.  Only  12  of  them,  how-
ever,  tried  to  quantify  consumers’  willingness  to  pay  (WTP) 

for  GM  food,  and  all  of  those  were  in  Asia  (Smale  et  al., 
2009). The studies in China and India all found positive con-
sumer attitudes toward GM food. The studies in China indi-
cated  that  consumers  there  were  actually  willing  to  pay  a 
premium  for  GM  food.  In  Beijing,  for  example,  consumers 
were willing to pay a premium of 38% for GM rice (Li et al., 
2002).  The  high  level  of  acceptance  of  biotech  products  in 
China can be ascribed in part to government policies and also 
to cultural and political history (Smale et al., 2009).

Similarly, Indian consumers (in New Delhi and Patna) were 
willing to pay a small premium for biotech chapattis (Anand 
et  al.,  2007)  even  if  no  information  was  provided,  and  this 
premium increased slightly with “producer friendly” informa-
tion. A second Indian study (in Ahmedabad) found very low 
awareness among consumers, but still 70% were willing to buy 
GM  food  at  the  same  price  as  conventional  food  (Deodhar 
et  al.,  2007).  These  results  were  confirmed  by  a  later  study 
in  India,  showing  that  60%  of  urban  consumers  would  pur-
chase  Bt  vegetables  at  current  conventional  vegetable  prices 
(Krishna and Qaim, 2008b).

In  Africa,  three  studies  on  consumer  acceptance  of  GM 
food  are  available.  Among  urban  maize  consumers  in  Kenya, 
only 38% were aware of GM crops, but two-thirds would buy 
GM maize at the same price as conventional maize (Kimenju 
and De Groote, 2008). Many of these consumers were, how-
ever, concerned about the loss of biodiversity and the associ-
ated  impact  on  non-target  insects.  A  second  study  in  urban 
centers of northern Nigeria, on the other hand, found 90% of 
the respondents were aware of GM products, but two-thirds 
disapproved  of  the  use  of  GM  cowpeas  (Kushwaha  et  al., 
2008). The third study, in Kenya, shows that only a small pro-
portion  of  rural  consumers  were  aware  of  GM  crops,  but  a 
large majority would be willing to buy GM maize meal at the 
same  price  as  conventional  maize  (those  unaware  were  pro-
vided with neutral information; Kimenju et al., 2011). A sur-
vey study among the gatekeepers of the food industry found 
that most respondents were largely non-committal on the use 
of GM products in their companies, preferring to decide on a 
case-by-case basis (Bett et al., 2010).

Factors influencing acceptance

Since  consumer  acceptance  has  been  such  a  driving  force  in 
the  regulatory  process,  a  good  understanding  of  the  factors 
that  influence  consumers’  perceptions  and  WTP  is  impor-
tant.  Consumers’  attitudes  and  behaviors  are  complex  and 
derive  from  subjective  knowledge,  information,  and  values. 
Important factors that were found to play a role, apart from 
country  or  region  of  origin,  were  awareness  and  informa-
tion, risk and benefit perceptions, and the type of product. In 
quantifying WTP, the methods used in consumer surveys cre-
ated major differences.

In general, most consumers reluctant about GM foods are 
typically  those  who  are  relatively  more  risk  conscious  and 
who  exhibit  attitudes  favoring  sluggish  technology  innova-
tion  in  the  food  sector  (Costa-Font  et  al.,  2008).  Consumer 
characteristics,  the  food  studied,  and  the  research  method 
used  were  the  most  important  factors  in  estimating  WTP 

572

Crop biotechnology in developing countries

C H A P T E R   3 6

for  non-GM  food  (Lusk  et  al.,  2005).  GM  meat  products 
were  found  least  acceptable  and  GM  oil  most  acceptable, 
whereas GM products that provided tangible benefits such as 
increased  nutrition  significantly  decreased  the  premiums  for 
non-GM  food.  Methodologically,  non-hypothetical  premiums 
were lower than hypothetical premiums, whereas conducting 
the  valuation  task  in  person  generated  lower  premiums  for 
non-GM food as compared to when the valuation was elicited 
over the phone or by mail.

In  developing  countries,  the  impact  of  information  on  the 
preferences expressed by consumers was found to be crucial, 
irrespective  of  the  region  of  study,  and  the  attitudes  of  con-
sumers  change  significantly  as  they  absorb  new  information, 
particularly negative messages (Smale et al., 2009). In Nigeria, 
those respondents who were most concerned about the ethics 
of genetic transformation were also more likely to disapprove 
of  such  products  (Kushwaha  et  al.,  2008).  In  Kenya,  percep-
tions of health risk and ethical and equity concerns had a nega-
tive influence on the likelihood of purchasing GM maize meal, 
whereas trust in government to ensure food quality had a posi-
tive  influence  on  WTP  (Kimenju  and  De  Groote,  2008).  All 
studies in developing countries reported so far used hypotheti-
cal methods, which are likely to raise the estimated WTP, but 
they were also mostly conducted in person.

Regulatory Systems

Importance of regulatory systems

When scientists develop technologies based on living organisms, 
which  are  the  essence  of  biotechnology,  the  outcome  of  their 
applications cannot be predicted with 100% accuracy, because 
the  application  of  biotechnology  always  carries  certain  risks. 
Regulatory systems are, therefore, needed to assess those risks, 
in particular with respect to food safety and the environment. 
These  impacts  need  to  be  quantified  where  possible,  and  the 
benefits of proposed technologies compared to their benefits.

Apart  from  the  Codex  Alimentarius,  which  governs  food 
safety  standards,  there  are  no  international  standards  for 
health  and  environmental  assessment,  and  each  country  has 
to set up its own regulatory system. So when a company has 
developed a new GM product, it needs to apply for a license 
for  that  product  in  each  of  the  different  countries  where  it 
wants to deploy the product. The regulation of biotech prod-
ucts can be expensive and time-consuming, depending on the 
standards  of  risk  assessment  maintained.  Moreover,  this  can 
delay  access  to  the  technology  by  producers  and  consumers, 
or it can even deprive target populations of the potential ben-
efits altogether (Paarlberg, 2008).

Currently, the heavy regulatory systems arguably pose the 
most  important  single  constraint  to  the  adoption  of  biotech 
crops  in  most  developing  countries  (James,  2010).  Proper 
economic  analysis  of  these  systems  is,  therefore,  needed 
(Qaim,  2009).  Regional  harmonization  needs  to  be  explored 
to  reduce  the  burden  of  regulation  to  make  the  benefits  of 
biotechnology  available  to  the  poor,  while  maintaining  high 
health and environmental safety standards.

Regional differences

Despite  large  potential  benefits,  the  use  of  GM  varieties 
remains  controversial,  largely  driven  by  negative  perceptions 
from  Western  consumers,  in  particular,  Europeans.  In  the 
United  States,  scientific  studies  have  concluded  that  GM 
crops do not pose any more risk than their conventional coun-
terparts, and they have basically been deregulated (Paarlberg, 
2000). In Europe, the potential benefits of biotechnology are 
limited  (Demont  et  al.,  2004),  but  consumers  are  worried 
about the safety of their food quality and of their food system 
and are well organized, and trade barriers offer protection for 
local farmers. As a result, a regulatory system has been built 
upon  the  precautionary  principle  (McMahon,  2003),  which 
requires that new technologies demonstrate no harm (ICSU, 
2004). In practice, this has put high burdens of proof on the 
applicants, and as a result the production of GM crops is all 
but banned from the EU.

In  developing  countries,  however,  food  crop  yields  are 
often  stagnating,  and  the  need  for  and  potential  gains  from 
biotech crops are much more important. Moreover, given the 
food  security  situation  there,  consumers  in  developing  coun-
tries  are  likely  more  concerned  about  sufficient  food  than 
about  perceived  risks.  This  is  supported  by  most  studies  of 
consumer  acceptance  in  developing  countries  (Qaim,  2009; 
Smale et al., 2009).

Still, governments and the public have been alarmed, mostly 
by  concerns  from  Western  consumers  (Paarlberg,  2002).  In 
Africa,  the  political  elite  has  strong  cultural  ties  with  Europe, 
where  many  have  been  trained,  go  on  vacation,  and  receive 
medical  treatment,  and  from  where  they  receive  important 
news  and  information  services.  Therefore,  with  the  help  of 
donors and some international agencies, most African countries 
have, or are in the process of, developing regulatory frameworks 
and systems based on the European example (Paarlberg, 2008).
It  can  be  argued  that  these  regulatory  systems,  designed 
almost  15  years  ago  to  answer  the  initial  needs  of  wealthy 
industrial  countries  dealing  with  a  new  technology  and  with 
access to significant resources for regulation, are not appropriate 
for the current GM crops in poor developing countries that do 
not have the resources or the expertise required (James, 2010).

Economics of regulation

The regulatory process of having a GM product approved in 
one  country,  and  so  far  each  country  approves  them  sepa-
rately, can be very expensive. Estimates vary from $1 million 
(James,  2010)  to  $6–15  million  for  a  new  Bt  or  HT  maize 
technology in one country (Kalaitzandonakes et al., 2007).

Delays  in  forgone  benefits  are  also  an  important  indirect 
cost of regulation (Qaim, 2009). The cost of a two-year delay 
in the approval of Bt cotton in India led to estimated aggre-
gated losses to farmers of more than $100 million (Pray et al., 
2005). In Brazil, the approval of HT soybean took from 1998 
to  2006,  due  to  a  cumbersome  process  and  legal  challenges. 
The cost of this delay to the economy has been estimated at 
$4.5 billion, most of which ($3.10 billion) was borne by the 
farmers (Anderson et al., 2008).

573

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

The  cost,  complexity,  and  uncertainty  of  the  regulation  of 
GM  crops  make  regulatory  requirements  a  barrier  for  public 
research institutes, poor countries, and small companies (ICSU, 
2004),  and  can  impede  their  commercialization  of  GM  tech-
nologies in small countries and for minor crops (Qaim, 2009), 
limiting the choices for generating public good (ICSU, 2004).

Biological  systems  cannot  deliver  certainty;  zero  risk  is  an 
unattainable standard (ICSU, 2004). Probabilistic risk assess-
ment  models,  however,  can  and  should  be  used,  similar  to 
models  used  in  pesticide  regulation  (Qaim,  2009).  These 
models  should  balance  objective,  scientific  risk  assessment 
with subjective, but clearly stated and transparent safety rule 
decision making.

The way forward

Within  the  scientific  community,  there  is  broad  agreement 
that  regulatory  systems  need  to  be  science-based  and  trans-
parent,  and  must  involve  community  participation  (ICSU, 
2004).  Further,  safety  assessments  should  be  undertaken 
on  a  case-by-case  basis,  using  the  best  available  techniques. 
International  standards  and  regional  harmonization  would 
reduce the cost and make GM technologies more available to 
the  people  who  would  benefit  the  most  from  them:  farmers 
and consumers in developing countries.

For food, there is the Codex Alimentarius, an intergovern-
mental forum that seeks to achieve international agreement in 
standards of food safety, including GM food. A similar forum 
is  needed  to  facilitate  international  agreement  on  standards 
for  assessing  the  environmental  impact  of  gene  technology 
(ICSU,  2004).  The  Cartagena  Protocol  of  the  Convention 
on Biological Diversity (CBD) provides for one aspect, but a 
broader forum is needed to enable the development of inter-
nationally agreed standards for comprehensive environmental 
impact assessments of the risks and benefits of new genetics 
in agriculture.

The  data  sought  by  regulators  are  similar,  but  the  inter-
pretation  in  risk  assessment  and  management  differs  among 
countries  and  regions,  particularly  in  dealing  with  areas  of 
uncertainty.  The  development  of  probabilistic  models  would 
help in making the discussion more scientific.

With  the  accumulated  knowledge  of  the  last  fourteen 
years, it is now possible to design appropriate regulatory sys-
tems  that  are  responsible,  rigorous,  and  yet  not  onerous, 
requiring only modest resources that are within the means of 
most developing countries (James, 2010).

Conclusions

benefited  from  technologies  that  fit  their  needs,  particularly 
from Bt crops and especially from Bt cotton.

Biotech crops have also been shown to benefit the environ-
ment,  especially  in  reducing  pesticide  applications  and  till-
age,  and  to  increase  biodiversity  in  non-target  mechanisms. 
Environmental risks such as the development of insect resist-
ance  and  gene  flow  are  clearly  possible,  but  so  far  have  not 
had  any  major  effect.  The  crossover  of  biotech  genes  into 
local  varieties,  while  not  yet  demonstrated,  seems  likely  to 
happen and would be hard to contain.

Further  applications  of  GM  technology  to  address  the 
specific  needs  of  poor  farmers  and  consumers  in  developing 
countries  look  promising.  The  experience  with  convention-
ally biofortified crops and ex ante impact assessment indicates 
that  GM  biofortified  crops  have  a  high  potential  to  reduce 
micronutrient deficiencies and improve nutrition among poor 
consumers.  Several  other  GM  technologies  are  under  devel-
opment, many under PPPs, to address the needs of poor farm-
ers.  These  include  crops  resistant  to  abiotic  stresses,  such  as 
drought,  low  fertility,  and  salinity.  These  crops  can  increase 
yields, food security, and income, as well as reduce the vari-
ability of those outcomes.

However,  several  factors  hinder  the  use  of  GM  crops  in 
developing  countries  and  prevent  them  from  reaching  their 
full potential. They cause costly delays in foregone benefits to 
the poor. First, the specific needs of developing countries are 
addressed  by  public  research  institutes  in  national  and  inter-
national systems, but their resources and capacity are limited 
and, therefore, need to be expanded. Secondly, awareness of 
biotechnology and knowledge of the benefits and risks of GM 
crops  and  food  is  limited.  Consumers  in  developing  coun-
tries, both urban and rural, need better information and need 
to be engaged in the ongoing debate. A better understanding 
of  their  attitudes  and  perceptions  of  GM  food  is,  therefore, 
needed.  Thirdly,  the  regulatory  system  is  cumbersome  and 
expensive.  Evaluations  need  to  be  objective  and  scientific, 
and  based  on  objective  risk  assessment.  Moreover,  clear  and 
transparent  safety  rule  decision  mechanisms  are  needed  that 
should  include  the  opinions  of  farmers  and  consumers.  The 
cost of these evaluations and the regulatory process should be 
balanced with the perceived risks and the potential benefits.

Finally,  GM  crops  are  not  risk-free,  as  with  any  biologi-
cal  intervention.  Proper  evaluation  on  a  case-by-case  basis  is 
needed for every combination of trait, crop, and agroecologi-
cal  system.  Apart  from  regulation,  continuous  monitoring  of 
these crops in the environment will be needed. Similarly, the 
use of GM food in the food systems and its effect on health 
needs to be monitored.

GM  crops  have  now  been  successfully  deployed  in  both 
developing  and  developed  countries  for  the  last  15  years. 
With  much  of  the  basic  research  in  genetic  engineering  pro-
vided  by  the  public  sector,  most  GM  crops  were  developed 
by private companies in developed countries for the needs of 
farmers there. However, current economic benefits to farmers 
are equally divided between developed and developing coun-
tries.  Moreover,  a  majority  of  the  farmers  using  GM  crops 
are  small-scale  farmers  in  developing  countries  who  have 

Acknowledgments

This  chapter  was  written  during  a  sabbatical  at  Cornell 
University.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  faculty  and  staff  of 
the  Charles  H.  Dyson  School  of  Applied  Economics  and 
Management  for  hosting  me,  the  Frosty  Hill  Foundation  for 
their financial support, and the Mann Library for their assist-
ance. I also would like to thank Kathleen Sinclair for editing 
the manuscript.

574

References

Akalu, G., Taffesse, S., Gunaratna, N. S., &  
De Groote, H. (2010). The effectiveness 
of quality protein maize in improving the 
nutritional status of young children in the 
ethiopian highlands. Food and Nutrition 
Bulletin, 31, 418–430.

Alston, J. M., Norton, G. W., & Pardey, P. G. 
(1998). Science under scarcity: Principles 
and practices for agricultural research 
evaluation and priority setting. Wallingford, 
U.K: CAB International (CABI).
Anand, A., Mittelhammer, R. C., &  

McCluskey, J. J. (2007). Consumer response 
to information and second-generation 
genetically modified food in India. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Industrial 
Organization, 5, 1–18.

Anderson, K., Valenzuela, E., & Jackson, L. A. 

(2008). Recent and prospective adoption 
of genetically modified cotton: A global 
computable general equilibrium analysis of 
economic impacts. Economic Development 
and Cultural Change, 56, 265–296.

Bennett, R., Morse, S., & Ismael, Y. (2003). 

Bt cotton, pesticides, labour and health: A 
case study of smallholder farmers in the 
Makhathini Flats, Republic of South Africa. 
Outlook on Agriculture, 32, 123–128.

Bett, C., Ouma, J. O., & De Groote, H. (2010). 

Perspectives of gatekeepers in the Kenyan 
food industry towards genetically modified 
food. Food Policy, 35, 332–340.

Black, R. E., Allen, L. H., Bhutta, Z. A., 

Caulfield, L. E., de Onis, M., Ezzati, M.,  
et al. (2008). Maternal and child 
undernutrition: Global and regional 
exposures and health consequences. Lancet, 
371, 243–260.

Bouis, H. E. (1999). Economics of enhanced 

micronutrient density in food staples. Field 
Crops Research, 60, 165–173.

Brookes, G., & Barfoot, P. (2010). GM crops: 
Global socio-economic and environmental 
impacts 1996–2008. Dorchester, UK: PG 
Economics Ltd.

Caulfield, L. E., de Onis, M., Blössner, M., & 
Black, R. E. (2004). Undernutrition as an 
underlying cause of child deaths associated 
with diarrhea, pneumonia, malaria, and 
measles. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 80, 193–198.

Conway, G. (2000). Genetically modified 
crops: Risks and promise. Conservation 
Ecology, 4 (1), 2. [online] URL:   http://
www.consecol.org/vol4/iss1/art2/  

Costa-Font, M., Gil, J. M., & Traill, W. B. 

(2008). Consumer acceptance, valuation of 
and attitudes towards genetically modified 
food: Review and implications for food 
policy. Food Policy, 33, 99–111.

Dawe, D., Robertson, R., & Unnevehr, L. 

(2002). Golden rice: What role could it play 
in alleviation of vitamin A deficiency? Food 
Policy, 27, 541–560.

De Groote, H., Overholt, W. A., Ouma, J. O. &  

Wanyama, J. (2011a). Assessing the 
potential economic impact of Bacillus 
thuringiensis (Bt) maize in Kenya. African 
Journal of Biotechnology, 10, 4741–4751.

Crop biotechnology in developing countries

C H A P T E R   3 6

De Groote, H., Hall, M. D., Spielman, D. J., 

Mugo, S. N., Andam, K., & Munyua, B. G.  
et al. (2011b). Options for pro-poor maize 
seed market segmentation in Kenya.  
African Journal of Biotechnology, 10, 
4699–4712.

de Onis, M., Blossner, M., Borghi, E.,  

Frongillo, E. A., & Morris, R. (2004). 
Estimates of global prevalence of childhood 
underweight in 1990 and 2015. Journal of 
the American Medical Association, 291, 
2600–2606.

Demont, M., Wesseler, J., & Tollens, E. (2004). 

Biodiversity versus transgenic sugar beets: 
The one Euro question. European Review of 
Agricultural Economics, 31, 1–18.

Deodhar, S. Y., Ganesh, S., & Chern, W. S. 

(2007). Emerging markets for GM foods: An 
Indian perspective on consumer understanding 
and willingness to pay. Ahmedabad, India: 
Indian Institute of Management. IIMA 
Working Paper 2007-06-08

Evenson, R. E., & Gollin, D. (2003). Assessing 
the impact of the green revolution. Science, 
300, 758–762.

FAO. (2004). The state of food and agriculture 

2003–2004. Agricultural Biotechnology: 
Meeting the needs of the poor. Rome: Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations.

FAO. (2009). How to Feed the World in 2050 
[Online]. Available by FAO   http://www.
fao.org/fileadmin/templates/wsfs/docs/
expert_paper/How_to_Feed_the_World_
in_2050.pdf   (verified March 1, 2011).

FAOSTAT. (2010). Core production data 

(online). http://faostat.fao.org/site/339/
default.aspx (verified May 1, 2010).

Gaskell, G., Wolfgang, W., Nicole, K., Helge, T., 

Juergen, H., & Julie, B. (2004). GM foods 
and the misperception of risk perception. 
Risk Analysis, 24, 185–194.

Gaskell, G., Allum, N., Bauer, M., Durant, J.,  

Allansdottir, A., & Bonfadelli, H., et al. 
(2000). Biotechnology and the European 
public. Nature Biotechnology, 18, 
935–938.

GM Science Review Panel. (2003). GM 

Science Review, First Report. An open 
review of the science relevant to GM crops 
and food based on the interests and concerns 
of the public, London.

Gouse, M., Pray, C., & Schimmelpfennig, 
D. (2004). The distribution of benefits 
from Bt cotton adoption in South Africa. 
AgBioForum, 7, 187–194.

Gouse, M., Pray, C., Schimmelpfennig, D., &  

Kirsten, J. (2006). Three seasons of 
subsistence insect-resistant maize in South 
Africa: Have smallholders benefited?. 
AgBioForum, 9, 15–22.

Gunaratna, N. S., De Groote, H., Nestel, P., 
Pixley, K. V., & McCabe, G. P. (2010). A 
meta-analysis of community-level studies 
on quality protein maize. Food Policy, 35, 
202–210.

Horton, S. (2006). The economics of food 
fortification. Journal of Nutrition, 136, 
1068–1071.

Houndekon, V., De Groote, H., & Lomer, C.  

(2006). Health costs and externalities 
of pesticide use in the sahel. Outlook on 
Agriculture, 35, 25–31.

Huang, J., Rozelle, S., Pray, C., & Wang, Q. 

(2002). Plant Biotechnology in China. 
Science, 25, 674–676.

Huang, J., Hu, R., Rozelle, S., & Pray, C. 

(2005). Insect-resistant GM rice in farmers’ 
fields: Assessing productivity and health 
effects in China. Science, 308, 688–690.

ICSU. (2004). New Genetics, Food and 

Agriculture: Scientific Discoveries – Societal 
Dilemmas. International Council for Science.

James, C. (2008). Global Status of 

Commercialized Biotech/GM Crops: 
2007. Ithaca NY, New York: International 
Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech 
Applications (ISAAA). ISAAA Briefs No. 
37-2007.

James, C. (2010). Global Status of 

Commercialized Biotech/GM Crops: 2009. 
The first fourteen years, 1996 to 2009. Ithaca 
NY, New York: International Service for the 
Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications 
(ISAAA). ISAAA Briefs No. 41-2009.

Kalaitzandonakes, N., Alston, J. M., & 

Bradford, K. J. (2007). Compliance costs for 
regulatory approval of new biotech crops. 
Nature Biotechnology, 25, 509–511.

Kimenju, S. C., & De Groote, H. (2008). 

Consumers’ willingness to pay for genetically 
modified food in Kenya. Agricultural 
Economics, 38, 35–46.

Kimenju, S. C., Bett, C., & De Groote, H. 

(2011). Attitudes and perceptions of maize 
consumers and food industry stakeholders 
towards Genetically Modified Food in 
Kenya. African Journal of Biotechnology, 10, 
4767–4776.

Krishna, V. V., & Qaim, M. (2008a). Potential 
impacts of Bt eggplant on economic surplus 
and farmers’ health in India. 38, 167–180.

Krishna, V. V., & Qaim, M. (2008b). Consumer 

attitudes toward GM food and pesticide 
residues in India. Applied Economic 
Perspectives and Policy, 30, 233–251.

Krivanek, A. F., De Groote, H., Gunaratna, N. S.,  

Diallo, A. O., & Friesen, D. (2007). 
Breeding and disseminating quality protein 
maize (QPM) for Africa. African Journal of 
Biotechnology, 6, 312–324.

Kushwaha, S., Musa, A. S., Lowenberg-

DeBoer, J., & Fulton, J. (2008). Consumer 
acceptance of genetically modified  
(GM) — Cowpeas in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Journal of International Food & Agribusiness 
Marketing, 20, 7–23.

Li, Q., Curtis, K. R., McCluskey, J. J., &  

Wahl, T. I. (2002). Consumer attitudes 
toward genetically modified foods in Beijing, 
China. AgiBioForum, 5, 145–152.

Low, J. W., Arimond, M., Osman, N.,  

Cunguara, B., Zano, F., & Tschirley, D. 
(2007). A food-based approach introducing 
orange-fleshed sweet potatoes increased 
vitamin A intake and serum retinol 
concentrations in young children in rural 

575

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

Mozambique. Journal of Nutrition, 137, 
1320–1327.

Mexico D.F.: CIMMYT. CIMMYT 
Economics Paper 99-03.

Golden rice and public health in India. 
World Development, 36, 144–158.

Pingali, P. L., & Traxler, G. (2002). Changing 

locus of agricultural research: Will the poor 
benefit from biotechnology and privatization 
trends? Food Policy, 27, 223–238.

Pingali, P. L., Marquez, C. B., & Palis, G. F. 

(1994). Pesticides and Philippine rice farmer 
health: A medical and economic analysis. 
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 
76, 587–592.

Pray, C. E., Bengali, P., & Ramaswami, B. 

(2005). The cost of biosafety regulations: 
The Indian experience. Quarterly Journal of 
International Agriculture, 44, 267–289.
Pray, C. E., Ma, D., Huang, J., & Qiao, F. 

(2001). Impact of Bt cotton in China. World 
Development, 29, 813–825.

Qaim, M. (2009). The economics of genetically 
modified crops. Annual Review of Resource 
Economics, 1, 665–694.

Qaim, M., & de Janvry, A. (2003). Genetically 
modified crops, corporate pricing strategies, 
and farmers’ adoption: The case of Bt 
cotton in Argentina. American Journal of 
Agricultural Economics, 85, 814–828.
Qaim, M., & Zilberman, D. (2003). Yield 
effects of genetically modified crops in 
developing countries. Science, 299, 
900–902.

Qaim, M., & Traxler, G. (2005). Roundup 
ready soybeans in Argentina: Farm level 
and aggregate welfare effects. Agricultural 
Economics, 32, 73–86.

Rosegrant, M. W., Paisner, M. S., Meijer, S., &  

Witcover, J. (2001). 2020 Global food 
outlook trends, alternatives, and choices. 
Washington, D.C: International Food Policy 
Research Institute (IFPRI).

Sanchez, P. A., Shepherd, K. D., Soule, M. J., 

Place, F. M., Mokwunye, A. U., &  
Buresh, R. J., et al. (1997). Soil fertility 
replinishment in Africa: An investment in 
natural resource capital. In R. J. Buresh 
(Ed.), Replenishing soil fertility in Africa 
(pp. 1–46). Madison WI: Soil Science 
Society of America.

Smale, M., Zambrano, P., Gruerè, G., Falck-

Zepeda, J., Matuschke, I., Horna, D., et al. 
(2009). Measuring the Economic Impacts of 
Transgenic Crops in Developing Agriculture 
during the First Decade. Approaches, 
Findings, and Future Directions. Food Policy 
Review 10 IFPRI, Washington DC.

Stein, A. J., Sachdev, H. P. S., & Qaim, M. 

(2008a). Genetic engineering for the poor: 

Stein, A. J., Nestel, P., Meenakshi, J. V., Qaim, M., 

Sachdev, H. P. S., & Bhutta, Z. A. (2007). 
Plant breeding to control zinc deficiency in 
India: How cost-effective is biofortification? 
Public Health Nutrition, 10, 492–501.
Stein, A. J., Meenakshi, J. V., Qaim, M., 

Nestel, P., Sachdev, H. P. S., & Bhutta, 
Z. A. (2008b). Potential impacts of iron 
biofortification in India. Social Science & 
Medicine, 66, 1797–1808.

Stein, H. (2005). Intellectual property and 
genetically modified seeds: The United 
States, trade, and the developing world. 
North Western Journal of Technology and 
Intellectual Property, 3, 160–178.

The World Bank,  World Development Report 

2008. Washington DC: Agriculture for 
Development The World Bank.

Trigo, E. J., & Cap, E. J. (2006). Ten years 

of genetically modified crops in Argentine 
agriculture. Buenos Aires: Argent. Counc. 
Inf. Dev. Biotechnol.

Tumusiime, E., De Groote, H., Vitale, J., & 

Adam, B. (2010). The cost of coexistence 
between Bt maize and open pollinated 
maize varieties in lowland coastal Kenya. 
AgBioForum, 13, 208–221.

Unnevehr, L., Pray, C., & Paarlberg, R. (2007). 

Addressing micronutrient deficiencies: 
Alternative interventions and technologies. 
AgBioForum, 10, 124–134.

Vasal, S. K. (2000). The quality protein maize 

story. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 21, 
445–450.

White, P. J., & Broadley, M. R. (2005). 

Biofortifying crops with essential mineral 
elements. Trends in Plant Science, 10, 
586–593.

Williams, J. H., Phillips, T. D., Jolly, P. E., Stiles, 

J. K., Jolly, C. M., & Aggarwal, D. (2004). 
Human aflatoxicosis in developing countries: 
A review of toxicology, exposure, potential 
health consequences, and interventions. The 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 80, 
1106–1122.

Zilberman, D., Ameden, H., & Qaim, M. 

(2007). The impact of agricultural 
biotechnology on yields, risks, and 
biodiversity in low-income countries.  
Journal of Development Studies, 43, 
63–78.

Zimmermann, R., & Qaim, M. (2004). Potential 

health benefits of golden rice: A Philippine 
case study. Food Policy, 29, 147–168.

Lusk, J. L., Jamal, M., Kurlander, L., Roucan, M.,  

& Taulman, L. (2005). A meta analysis of 
genetically modified food valuation studies. 
Journal of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics, 30, 28–44.

McMahon, J. A. (2003). Food safety and the 
precautionary principle. EuroChoices, 41, 
42–46.

Meenakshi, J. V., Johnson, N. L., Manyong, V. M.,  

DeGroote, H., Javelosa, J., Yanggen, D. R.,  
et al. (2010). How cost-effective is 
biofortification in combating micronutrient 
malnutrition? An ex ante assessment. World 
Development, 38, 64–75.

Mertz, E. T., Bates, L. S., & Nelson, O. E. 

(1964). Mutant gene that changes protein 
composition and increases lysine content of 
maize endosperm. Science, 145, 279–280.

Miller, H. A., Conko, G., & Kershen, D. L. 
(2006). Why spurning food biotech has 
become a liability. Nature Biotechnology, 24, 
1075–1077.

Mugo, S. N., Mwimali, M. G., Taracha, C. O., 
Songa, J. M., Gichuki, S. T., & Tende, R.,  
et al. (2011). Testing public Bt maize 
events for control of stem borers in the 
first confined field trials in Kenya. African 
Journal of Biotechnology, 10, 4713–4718.
National Research Council. (1988). Quality-

protein maize. Washington, D.C., USA: 
National Academy Press.

Nestel, P., Bouis, H. E., Meenakshi, J. V., & 

Pfeiffer, W. (2006). Biofortification of 
staple food crops. Journal of Nutrition, 136, 
1064–1067.

Nuffield Council on Bioethics. (1999).  

Genetically modified crops: The ethical and 
social issues. London, UK: Nuffield Council 
on Bioethics.

Paarlberg, R. (2008). Starved for science: How 

biotechnology is being kept out of Africa. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Paarlberg, R. L. (2000). Governing the GM 

crop revolution policy choices for developing 
countries. Washington, D. C: International 
Food Policy Research Institute. Food, 
Agriculture, and the Environment. 
Discussion Paper 33.

Paarlberg, R. L. (2002). The real threat to 
GM crops in poor countries: Consumer 
and policy resistance to GM foods in rich 
countries. Food Policy, 27, 247–250.

Pingali, P. L., & Heisey, P. W. (1999). Cereal 

Crop Productivity in Developing Countries. 

576

Intellectual property rights of 
biotechnologically improved plants

Antoine Harfouche1  Richard Meilan2  Kannan Grant3 
Vincent K. Shier4
1Department for Innovation in Biological, Agro-food and Forest Systems, University of Tuscia, 
Viterbo, Italy,
2Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,
3Office of Technology Commercialization, University of Alabama Huntsville, Huntsville, Alabama,
4Oblon, Spivak, McClelland, Maier, & Neustadt, LLP, Alexandria, Virginia

33

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction: Capitalizing on Research and  
Development in Agricultural Biotechnology  
with Intellectual Property Protection  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 525
Intellectual Property Protection of Biotechnologically 
Improved Plants  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 526

International intellectual property  
protection agreements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .526
Types of intellectual property protection in plant 
biotechnology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .528

Freedom-to-Operate in Agricultural Biotechnology:  
The Road from a Research Idea to Commercialization  
of a Biotechnologically Improved Plant Product   .  .  .  .  .  .  . 532
Technology Transfer as a Means to Facilitate the 
Development of Biotechnology-Based Agriculture   .  .  .  .  . 534
Conclusion and Future Needs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 536
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 537

Introduction: Capitalizing on 
Research and Development in 
Agricultural Biotechnology with 
Intellectual Property Protection

Agricultural  biotechnology  is  a  fast-expanding  industry  in 
many  countries  of  the  world  that  will  continue  to  offer 
remarkable economic, environmental, and social opportunities 
in the years ahead. Since its introduction about 15 years ago, 
plant biotechnology has achieved very important milestones in 
increasing global crop productivity to improve food, feed, and 
fiber security, and in reducing the environmental footprint of 
agriculture.

With the world turning to agricultural technologies for solu-
tions, the twenty-first century will witness a major development 
of genetically improved bioenergy crops that help to mitigate cli-
mate change and contribute to the cost-effective production of 

biofuels  (Harfouche  et  al.,  2010).  The  sequencing  of  genomes 
from several plant species and advances made in plant genetics 
and other aspects of agricultural sciences have led to technologi-
cal breakthroughs that will provide the building blocks for what 
are likely to be major industries, with profound implications for 
agriculture.  Not  only  will  humankind  benefit  from  these  inno-
vative technologies, but the efforts that spawned them are con-
tributing  to  the  existing  body  of  scientific  knowledge  and  the 
development  of  global  biotechnology  industries  (Singh  et  al., 
2009).

Sustaining  this  plant  biotechnology  revolution  requires 
long-term  commitment  to  both  public  and  private  sector 
research  and  development  (R&D).  In  the  agricultural  sector, 
R&D  is  unique  among  industries  in  at  least  two  aspects:  the 
truly global reach of a majority of agricultural R&D; and the 
historical success of what has been largely a public enterprise. 
In relation to other industries, research and innovation in agri-
culture are far more geographically dispersed (Boettiger et al., 
2004). Private enterprises contribute roughly one-third of glo-
bal  agricultural  R&D  expenditures,  whereas  public  research 
institutions  make  up  the  other  two-thirds,  which  is  evenly 
split  between  developed  and  developing  countries  (Pardey 
and Beintema, 2001).

Through  the  ages,  innovations  in  agriculture  have  greatly 
benefited  humanity.  It  is  no  small  irony,  then,  that  contro-
versy  surrounds  agriculture  and  the  intellectual  property 
(IP)  laws  that  were  enacted  for  the  very  purpose  of  foster-
ing  invention  (Bent,  2006).  As  the  pace  of  scientific  discov-
ery  in  plant  biotechnology  has  accelerated  over  the  past  few 
decades,  the  use  of  IP  rights  to  protect  these  inventions  has 
increased tremendously. These advances can only be achieved 
through resource-intensive R&D. Capitalizing on R&D invest-
ments  using  IP  protection  is  just  one  part  of  the  research-
to-marketplace  continuum.  Protecting  IP  rights  is  becoming 
increasingly more important in public, private, and non-profit 
sectors,  both  as  a  means  of  fueling  innovation  and  provid-
ing  incentives  for  researchers  to  produce  new  and  improved  
agricultural technologies.

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00033-X

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

In  addition,  IP  protection  in  agriculture  is  crucial  in  
driving economic growth and competitiveness. Innovative bio-
technologists are expected to make major contributions as the 
world  emerges  from  the  current  period  of  economic  uncer-
tainty  (Adams  et  al.,  2009).  The  IP  protection  differences 
between  countries  remain  a  contentious  issue.  Countries 
with strong innovation systems (technology producers) often 
favor  strong  IP  protection  because  it  stimulates  innovation 
by granting innovators temporary market exclusivity for their 
new, non-obvious, and useful inventions. Countries with less-
developed  innovation  systems  (technology  consumers)  often 
prefer  weaker  patent  protection,  because  it  enables  them  to 
access inventions developed elsewhere without having to for-
feit licensing or manufacturing fees that may be beyond their 
capacity (or desire) to pay (Friedman, 2009).

Although  investments  in  R&D  and  agricultural  innova-
tions  have  been  fundamental  to  long-term  economic  growth 
worldwide, global resource allocation has been uneven. While 
some developing nations are approaching the scientific capaci-
ties  of  developed  countries,  others  are  regaining  ground  lost 
over  the  past  decade  or  so,  but,  unfortunately,  many  others 
are  either  stalled  or  slipping  behind  (Wright  et  al.,  2007). 
Substantial shifts in the scientific basis for a great deal of bio-
logical research have created new and promising opportunities 
for  innovation  in  agricultural  biotechnologies.  Moreover,  the 
institutional,  regulatory  regimes,  especially  those  that  affect 
agricultural R&D IP, are also undergoing rapid change and pro-
viding  enhanced  incentives  for  applications  of  biotechnology 
in  agriculture.  However,  the  nature  of  these  developments 
is raising real concerns about the extent to which agriculture 
in developing countries will be able to partake in the benefits 
offered by these advancements (Wright et al., 2007).

In  this  chapter,  we  review  the  major  types  of  IP  in  agri-
cultural  biotechnology,  each  having  different  rights  and 
requirements for their protection, including: Plant breeder's 
rights;  plant  variety  protection  (PVP);  plant  patents;  util-
ity  patents;  gene  patenting;  material  transfer  agreements 
(MTAs);  trademarks;  trade  secrets;  know-how;  and  geo-
graphical  designations  of  origin.  We  will  then  provide  an 
overview  of  IP-related  technology  transfer  (TT).  One  of 
the goals of this chapter is to shed light on the freedom-to-
operate  (FTO)  and  risk-management  issues  that  are  critical 
to scientists. Afterward, a case study on how to conduct an 
FTO  analysis  will  be  presented.  A  discussion  of  the  most 
important concerns raised by developing countries related to 
IP protection and access will conclude the chapter.

Intellectual Property Protection of 
Biotechnologically Improved Plants

Plant  biotechnologists  around  the  world  are  in  hot  pursuit 
of  new  innovations  in  agriculture;  however,  one  of  the  main 
features  of  plant  biotechnology  is  its  increasingly  proprietary 
nature.  Biotechnologically  related  plant  products  and  proc-
esses can be copied much easier than in other fields of tech-
nology,  and  seeds  from  improved  varieties  can  be  harvested 
and  planted.  Likewise,  with  the  advent  of  bioinformatics, 
gene(s) of interest can be cloned and incorporated into plants 

according to established and readily accessible protocols. This 
means that protection and enforcement of IP rights is becom-
ing increasingly difficult.

Since  1989,  over  10  multilateral  agreements,  guided  by 
external  forces,  have  been  put  into  place  to  strengthen  IP 
protection.  These  include:  (1)  Union  International  pour  la 
Protection  des  Obtentions  Végétales,  known  more  simply  as 
UPOV;  (2)  agreement  on  Trade-related  IP  Rights  (TRIPS); 
and  (3)  International  Treaty  on  Plant  Genetic  Resources 
(ITPGR). All are directly related to agricultural biotechnology 
inventions and are discussed in this chapter. Moreover, newly 
developed plant varieties can be protected by different types 
of regulations depending on the legal jurisdiction, the nature 
of  the  plant,  the  means  of  reproduction  (sexual  or  vegeta-
tive), and other characteristics. The most common IP rights in 
agricultural biotechnology are plant patents, PVP certificates, 
and  utility  patents,  as  described  in  the  following  section. 
Trademarks  and  geographical  designations,  know-how,  trade 
secrets,  and  contractual  agreements,  if  available,  are  other 
forms of IP protection that may be relevant in plant biotech-
nology, but are only briefly discussed.

International intellectual property protection 
agreements

Union International pour la Protection des 
Obtentions Végétales
Because  the  IP  protection  for  plants  varies  widely  between 
countries,  the  UPOV  came  into  existence  as  a  global  agree-
ment  setting  a  minimum  standard  for  the  protection  of 
plant  varieties  (Union  International  pour  la  Protection  des 
Obtentions Végétale, 1991). Member states that have signed 
the  UPOV  Convention  must  guarantee  that  these  stand-
ards  are  met  within  their  own  legislation.  UPOV  was  first 
brought  into  law  in  1961  and  revised  in  1972,  1978,  and 
1991. Currently two versions of UPOV, 1978 and 1991, are 
in  force.  Despite  the  fact  that  these  versions  are  similar  in 
that  they  provide  protection  for  a  plant  variety  that  is  dis-
tinct  from  existing,  known  varieties  and  all  that  is  uniform, 
stable,  and  novel,  there  are  several  important  changes  in  the 
1991 Act. For example, the definition of propagating material 
has  been  tightened  and  provisions  relating  to  farmers’  rights 
(e.g., permitting a farmer to harvest and sow seed for personal 
use) have been defined (Sechley and Schroeder, 2002). Even 
if  plant-variety  protection  meeting  the  standard  established 
under UPOV is accepted in many countries, such protection 
has  not  been  uniformly  adopted,  and  countries  with  strong 
histories  of  farmers’  privilege  have  yet  to  comply  with  the 
convention (Cullet, 1999).

UPOV  acknowledges  that  the  generation  of  new  plant 
varieties  is  desirable,  and  that  the  farmer  should  be  allowed 
to continue the traditional farming practices of reserving part 
of  the  harvested  seed  for  planting  to  produce  a  new  crop 
(Sterckx, 2010). While UPOV of 1961 preserved the breed-
er’s  right  to  use  the  seed  of  a  new  plant  variety  to  generate 
additional new varieties, the 1978 version enshrined the farm-
er’s privilege to keep part of his harvest for subsequent sowing.

526

Intellectual property rights of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 3

Significant  amendments  have  been  added  to  the  1991 
Act.  These  pertain  to  the  number  of  plant  genera  and  spe-
cies  that  was  increased  from  a  selected  list  of  plants  in  the 
UPOV of 1978 to all plants. The UPOV of 1991 extends the 
minimum period of protection for most plants from 15 to 20 
years, and for trees and vines the minimum is 25 years. The 
1991 Act also removed farmers’ privilege to sell or exchange 
seeds  with  other  farmers  for  propagating  purposes  by  pro-
tecting only the production and reproduction of a plant vari-
ety. Yet, the application of this provision is optional for each 
member  state  of  UPOV  and  a  member  state  can  provide  an 
exemption in its laws to permit farmers’ privilege, if desired 
(Article  15,  1991).  Another  important  amendment  in  the 
1991 Act includes the ability to cover essentially derived vari-
eties  —  comprising  the  properties  of  the  protected  variety 
along with only a minor change (Article 14, 1991). Essentially 
derived  varieties  may  be  obtained  by  the  selection  of  a  nat-
ural  or  induced  mutant,  a  somaclonal  variant,  or  a  variant 
individual  of  the  initial  variety  obtained  by  backcrossing  or 
transformation by genetic engineering. The insertion of a gene 
into  a  protected  plant  variety  by  means  of  genetic  engineer-
ing technologies might not be sufficient to surpass the essen-
tially derived criteria unless a significant plant phenotype was 
caused by the introduced gene (Article 14(5)(c), 1991).

As  of  October  2009,  68  countries  had  become  mem-
bers of the UPOV Convention, with 45 countries under the 
terms of the 1991 Act and 22 countries under the 1978 Act; 
only Belgium is still bound by the older 1961/1972 Act. The 
United  States  (U.S.)  became  a  party  to  the  1978  UPOV  in 
1981.  With  the  exception  of  Cyprus,  Greece,  Luxembourg, 
and  Malta,  all  member  states  of  the  European  Union  (EU) 
are members of UPOV. The Norwegian government made an 
unusual  move  by  turning  down  a  proposed  law  enabling  its 
membership of UPOV in 1991. A thorough debate is continu-
ing on the effect of PVP and associated MTAs on sharing and 
developing  new  germplasm  (Price,  1999).  Furthermore,  as 
individual countries enact their national PVP laws, more dif-
ferences may arise. For example, a PVP act recently enacted 
by the Indian government provides lower levels of IP protec-
tion for plant breeders than the UPOV of 1978.

Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights
The  TRIPS  agreement  came  into  effect  on  January  1,  1995. 
To  date,  it  is  the  most  comprehensive  multilateral  agree-
ment  on  IP  (Agreement  on  Trade-related  Aspects,  1996). 
The  protection  and  enforcement  of  IP  rights  under  TRIPS 
are  intended  to  contribute  to  the  promotion  of  technologi-
cal innovations and to the transfer and dissemination of tech-
nology, to the mutual benefit of its producers and users, in a 
manner conducive to social and economic welfare, and to bal-
ance rights and obligations (Article 7, 1996; Article 8, 1996). 
The areas of IP covered by TRIPS include: copyright; trade-
marks; geographical indications; trade secrets; and patents.

With  respect  to  each  of  the  main  areas  of  IP  that  TRIPS 
covers,  the  minimum  standard  of  protection  that  should  be 
provided  by  each  member  is  defined.  Each  of  the  main  ele-
ments  of  protection  is  defined,  namely  the  subject  matter 
to  be  protected,  the  rights  to  be  conferred  and  permissible 

exceptions to those rights, and the minimum duration of pro-
tection.  Member  countries  that  have  signed  this  agreement 
are  free  to  determine  the  appropriate  method(s)  for  imple-
menting  the  provisions  of  the  Agreement  within  their  own 
legislation. Under TRIPS, any inventions, whether products or 
processes, in all fields of technology, are patentable, provided 
that they are new, involve an inventive step, and are suitable 
for industrial application (Article 27(1), 1996). Although this 
statement seems consistent with the requirements for obtain-
ing  a  patent  in  most  developed  countries,  patenting  biotech-
nological inventions is often controversial.

With  respect  to  plant  biotechnology,  Article  27(2)  of 
TRIPS  permits  several  grounds  for  exclusions,  which  are 
optional and vary from country to country, in issuing a patent 
related  to  essentially  biological  processes  (consisting  entirely 
of  natural  phenomena  such  as  crossing  or  selection)  for  the 
production  of  plants  (Article  27(2),  1996).  Following  adop-
tion of the TRIPS Agreement, the question of sui generis (one 
of a kind, unique) IP rights protection for plant varieties has 
become a matter of great importance. TRIPS states that mem-
ber countries must protect plant varieties either by patents, by 
an  effective  sui  generis  system,  or  by  a  combination  thereof 
(Article 27(3)(b), 1996). Beyond the protections afforded or 
possibly afforded by treaty, common law has evolved to offer 
greater options and flexibility when pursuing IP rights in plant 
biotechnology.  For  example,  in  2001,  the  U.S.  judicial  sys-
tem recognized that dual protection by way of utility patents 
and plant variant protection is permissible for plant materials. 
Specifically, the U.S. Supreme Court held that “newly devel-
oped plant breeds fall within terms of 35 U.S.C. § 101, and 
neither  Plant  Patent  Act,  35  U.S.C.  §  §  161–164,  nor  PVP 
Act,  7  U.S.C.  §  2321  et  seq.,  limits  scope  of  subject  matter 
patentable under Section 101” (decision in J.E.M. Ag Supply, 
Inc. v. Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc. (2001).

International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources
This  treaty  originated  from,  and  ultimately  replaced,  the 
International  Undertaking  on  Plant  Genetic  Resources  (IU), 
a  previous,  voluntary  agreement  that  is  not  legally  bind-
ing  and  was  adopted  in  1983  by  the  Food  and  Agriculture 
Organization  (FAO)  of  the  United  Nations.  The  IU  was  the 
first  international  tool  to  ensure  that  plant  genetic  resources 
of  economic  and  social  interest,  particularly  for  agriculture, 
would be explored, preserved, evaluated, and made available 
for plant breeding and research purposes. Accordingly, ITPGR 
provides a general framework for conservation and sustainable 
use of plant genetic resources.

The  Treaty  was  adopted  by  consensus  during  the  31st 
session  of  the  FAO  conference  on  November  3,  2001,  and 
entered into force on June 29, 2004, 90 days after the ratifi-
cation, acceptance, approval, or accession of the 40th country. 
The Treaty currently has 120 contracting parties and ensures 
that the plant genetic resources that serve as the raw material 
used by plant breeders to develop new crop varieties remain 
publicly available. In short, ITPGR promotes the conservation 
and utilization of plant genetic resources for food and agricul-
ture.  The  fundamental  purpose  of  the  Treaty  is  to  preserve 
farmers’ privilege and develop a Multilateral System of Access 

527

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

and  Benefit  Sharing  (MLS).  The  MLS  was  created  to  ease 
access to genetic resources of major food and feed crop spe-
cies and to share, in a fair way, the benefits arising from the 
exploitation of these materials, in accordance with multilater-
ally agreed terms and conditions. For example, genetic materi-
als  from  the  member  countries  are  accessed  by  members  of 
the Treaty free of charge, or, when a fee is charged, it shall not 
exceed the minimal cost involved. The wording in the Treaty 
recognizes  implicitly  that  farmers  may  have  unlimited  rights 
under  national  law.  In  addition,  the  Treaty’s  preamble  indi-
cates that nothing in it shall be interpreted as implying in any 
way a change in the rights and obligations of the contracting 
parties under other international agreements.

However,  there  is  a  vigorous  debate  as  to  whether  the 
Treaty  will  remain  subordinate  to  TRIPS  and  UPOV.  The 
U.S. has not yet taken any further action on the Treaty since 
it  was  submitted  to  its  Senate  for  advice  and  ratification  in 
2007. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee held a Treaty 
hearing in 2009 with testimony in support of ratification, but 
further action is still pending. Even though proponents of the 
Treaty  assert  that  the  U.S.  might  provide  needed  leadership 
and  resources  to  the  Treaty,  it  abstained  from  signing  this 
Treaty partially because of the lack of clarity in the IP provi-
sions. An American presence could help to foster more trust 
between the contracting parties and possibly provide incentive 
for becoming a signatory to the Treaty, especially for countries 
like Japan and China. However, without the participation by 
the U.S., this Treaty is not likely to have a major international 
effect.

Types of intellectual property protection in 
plant biotechnology

Plant variety protection
In  most  fields  of  technology,  the  favored  mode  of  legal  pro-
tection  for  inventions  is  patents  (a  time-limited  exclusionary 
right).  In  agriculture,  an  alternative  form  of  IP  rights  called 
plant variety rights, also known as plant breeders’ rights (PBRs) 
outside  of  the  United  States,  was  developed.  Importantly, 
most of the existing PVP systems are based on one of the ver-
sions of the UPOV Convention. PBRs are used to protect new 
varieties of plants by giving exclusive commercial rights for 20 
years (25 years for trees or vines) to market a new variety or 
its  reproductive  material.  Additionally,  PBRs  prevent  others 
from securing PVP or utility patent rights. The subject matter 
of PBRs is a plant variety. To be eligible for protection by way 
of  a  PVP  certificate,  a  particular  variety  must  be  novel  (new 
and  distinct  from  other  varieties),  genetically  uniform,  and 
stable through successive generations. This protection thwarts 
anyone from growing or selling the variety without the owner's 
permission.  However,  exceptions  may  be  made  for  research 
use or the sowing of saved seeds. Of particular concern is that 
the requirements for evaluation in each country, and the need 
for  local  legal  representation,  can  render  broad  international 
application for PBRs costly and time-intensive.

The European Patent Convention (EPC), to which a large 
majority of EU member states are a contracting party, states 

that  plant  varieties  are  excluded  from  patent  protection 
(Article  52(b),  1973).  The  exception  that  plant  varieties  as 
such cannot be protected by a patent has been confirmed in 
an  EU  biotechnology  directive  (European  Directive  98/44/
CE,  1998).  Most  of  the  countries  in  the  EU  have  adopted 
legislation  based  on  one  of  the  versions  of  the  UPOV 
Convention.  There  are  two  plausible  explanations  for  this 
exclusion.  First,  no  consensus  on  this  controversial  issue  has 
been  achieved.  Secondly,  in  parallel  with  those  national  sys-
tems,  a  Community  PVP  system  has  been  created  to  offer 
PVP  for  the  whole  territory  of  the  EU.  On  the  basis  of  one 
application, a Community plant variety right can be obtained, 
which  is  valid  in  all  member  states.  This  Community  sys-
tem,  based  on  the  UPOV  of  1991,  has  thus  far  been  quite 
successful.

As  of  2003,  more  than  2500  applications  for  Community 
plant  variety  rights  were  received  by  the  Community  Plant 
Variety Office, and more than 8500 Community plant variety 
rights are in force. The demarcation line between the scope of 
a patent and the PVP system will be discussed in the utility 
patent section.

In the U.S., the legislative situation relating to the protec-
tion  of  plants  and  plant  varieties  is  quite  different  from  the 
EU.  In  the  U.S.  breeders  and  inventors  of  new  plant  varie-
ties  can  choose  between  three  types  of  IP  rights  to  protect 
their  inventions.  Although  the  U.S.  is  a  UPOV  member,  its 
PVP  legislation  does  not  cover  asexually  reproduced  plants 
(except tubers). PVP certificates are administered by the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) under the legal authority 
of the PVP Act (PVPA) of 1970, which has been amended six 
times  and  is  based  on  the  UPOV  1991  Convention.  It  pro-
vides  protection  for  any  sexually  or  tuber-propagated  plant 
variety  if  the  UPOV  requirements  for  protection  are  met. 
The U.S. PVP Office (PVPO) considers a variety to be new 
and,  therefore,  eligible  for  PVP  certification,  only  if  propa-
gated or harvested material of the variety has not been sold, 
or otherwise made available to other persons, for the purpose 
of exploiting the variety for more than one year in the United 
States  or  four  years  outside  of  the  United  States.  It  is  very 
important that after a PVP certificate has been issued owners 
should be diligent about watching for infringements (Pardee, 
2007).  The  PVP  certificate  offers  the  certificate  holder  the 
right  to  sell  or  market  the  variety,  condition  or  stock  the 
variety,  offer  the  variety  for  sale  or  for  reproduction,  and  to 
import or export the variety.

U .S . plant patents
Legislation  governing  IP  rights  continues  to  evolve  in  the 
agricultural sector. The U.S. Plant Patent Act (PPA) of 1930 
was  a  major  twentieth-century  innovation  relating  to  germ-
plasm.  Plant  patents,  which  are  a  unique  form  of  IP  protec-
tion  offered  in  the  U.S.,  are  different  from  utility  patents. 
Numbers  of  American  and  foreign  plant  patents  granted  at 
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) are listed in 
Table 33.1. The right to a plant patent stems from Title 35 of 
the U.S. Code U.S.C. § 161. Patents for plants. The PPA pro-
vides  protection  for  asexually  reproduced,  novel  plant  varie-
ties, not consisting of tuber-propagated plants or plants found 

528

Intellectual property rights of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 3

Table 33.1  Numbers of U.S. plant patents granted at the USPTO 
and assigned by type of inventing organization, 1977–2009.a

Organization

Private sector

U.S. corporation

Foreign corporation

U.S. individual

Foreign individual

Subtotal

Public sector

U.S. government

Foreign government

Subtotal

Total

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office

7084

5554

2328

1523

16,489

21

62

83

16,572

aData are taken from the USPTO Web site (http://www.uspto.gov/) as of July 6, 2010.

in  an  uncultivated  state.  This  protection  was  introduced  pri-
marily  to  benefit  the  horticulture  industry  by  encouraging 
plant breeding and enhancement of plant genetic diversity.

One  of  the  conditions  the  U.S.  placed  on  becoming  a 
UPOV signatory was that it could continue to provide protec-
tion  for  asexually  reproduced  plants  under  its  existing  plant 
patent legislation. The term of a plant patent is for 20 years 
from the earliest effective U.S. filing date (35 U.S.C. § 154). 
Plant  patents  protect  the  inventor’s  right  to  exclude  others 
from asexually reproducing the plant, and from using, offering 
for sale, or selling the plant so reproduced, or any of its parts, 
throughout  the  U.S.,  or  from  importing  the  plant  so  repro-
duced, or any parts thereof, into the U.S. (35 U.S.C. § 163).

In contrast with utility patents, where deposit of biological 
material into a public germplasm repository may be required 
by  the  USPTO  to  comply  with  description  and  enablement 
requirements, it is not necessary to deposit the claimed plant 
to secure a plant patent. Another key difference between util-
ity and plant patents is that the latter can have only a single 
claim tied to the plant variety specified in the application.

Recently,  the  USPTO  has  started  rejecting  plant  patent 
applications  with  a  UPOV-based  certificate  that  had  been 
granted before filing for a plant patent application, if the cer-
tificate  had  been  filed  more  than  one  year  before  filing  the 
plant  patent  application.  Rejection  on  these  grounds  is  in 
direct  opposition  to  that  decided  In  re  LeGrice  (1962),  but 
argued  by  the  USPTO  as  consistent  with  Ex  parte  Thomson 
(1992).  A  one-year  grace  period  is  granted  to  the  applicant. 
Thus, a public disclosure of a new plant variety or a granted 
patent  of  the  new  variety  in  a  foreign  jurisdiction  does  not 
preclude patentability, provided that the disclosure or foreign 
patent occurred less than 12 months prior to the plant patent 

application  being  lodged  in  the  U.S.  If  publication  occurred 
in any other country prior to the 12-month grace period, the 
plant  patent  application  will  be  refused  (Ex  parte  Thomson, 
1992). This has led to strong pressure from industry, resulting 
in a review of the USPTO position. A proposal to extend the 
grace period to 10 years on the basis that plants from foreign 
jurisdictions are often held in quarantine by the USDA for a 
period exceeding 12 months, effectively nullifying patentabil-
ity, is still under discussion.

The  PPA  was  amended  effective  October  27,  1998,  to 
extend  the  exclusive  right  to  plant  parts  obtained  from  vari-
eties  protected  by  plant  patents  that  are  issued  on  or  after 
the  effective  date.  Interestingly,  in  the  U.S.  a  dual  protec-
tion is allowed; a plant and utility patent (infra) can both be 
obtained to protect the same plant, provided that the require-
ments for both types of patents are fulfilled.

Utility patents applied to plant biotechnology
Another type of IP protection available for plant biotechnol-
ogy  is  the  utility  patent.  Any  plant  inventions  that  meet  the 
statutory requirements of novelty, utility, and non-obviousness 
are  eligible  for  utility  patent  protection.  On  April  10,  1790, 
the first U.S. Patent Act was passed into law. It specified that 
U.S.  utility  patent  shall  provide  protection  for  any  new  and 
useful manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and 
useful improvement thereof (35 U.S.C. § 101). Initially, the 
1980  Supreme  Court  decision  in  Diamond  v.  Chakrabarty 
(1980)  held  that  utility  patents  could  be  granted  for  inven-
tions  involving  living  organisms.  The  2001  landmark  deci-
sion in the case of J.E.M. AG Supply, Inc. v. Pioneer Hi-Bred 
International,  Inc., (2001) further established that such pro-
tection  is  valid  also  for  plants.  This  case  also  validated  that 
plants are a composition of matter, as ruled earlier by the U.S. 
Patent Board of Appeal.

Patents  have  been  issued  in  the  U.S.  for  plant  inbreds; 
hybrids;  plant  parts  (e.g.,  seeds,  pollen,  fruits,  and  flowers); 
biotechnology  methods;  genes;  and  many  other  innovative 
plant-derived products. Although it is the most expensive and 
complex process, utility patents provide the strongest protec-
tion for biotechnologically improved materials. It may protect 
DNA  sequences  and  processes  used  to  produce  transgenic 
plants, as well as the plants themselves, and uses thereof for 
a period of time (usually 20 years from the earliest effective 
filing  date  or,  for  much  older  patents,  17  years  from  grant-
ing).  In  addition,  it  protects  plant  breeders’  rights  to  control 
the  use,  sale,  import,  and  reproduction  of  protected  plants. 
With a utility patent, one can prevent others from using a pro-
tected plant for subsequent breeding. Besides, it may be use-
ful where an invention is not limited to a particular variety, or 
where  method  claims  are  desired.  There  is  a  complex  inter-
play  between  plant  and  utility  patents.  Any  asexually  repro-
duced  plant  may  alternatively  be  protected  under  35  U.S.C. 
§ 101, as the PPA is not an exclusive form of protection that 
conflicts  with  the  granting  of  utility  patents  for  plants.  Ex 
parte  Hibberd  (1985)  was  affirmed  by  the  Supreme  Court 
in  J.E.M.  Ag  Supply,  Inc.  v.  Pioneer  Hi-Bred  International, 
Inc.  (2001).  Inventions  claimed  under  35  U.S.C.  §  101  may 
include  the  same  asexually  reproduced  plant  that  is  claimed 

529

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

under  35  U.S.C.  §  161,  as  well  as  plant  materials  and  
processes involved in producing the plant materials.

In  conclusion,  there  is  a  broad  range  of  ways  to  protect 
plant-related  innovations.  It  is  critical  to  look  at  the  intended 
use of the plant(s) and/or plant material(s) to devise a multi-
tiered  approach  to  protecting  IP.  Conceptually,  one  cannot 
obtain a PVP certificate and a plant patent for the same plant, 
but  it  is  possible  to  simultaneously  pursue  a  utility  patent 
together with either. Alternatively, one can obtain a PVP for a 
sexually  produced  variety  and  then  make  an  asexually  repro-
duced variant that would be eligible for plant patent protection.
Advances  in  genetic  engineering  have  generated  a  com-
pletely  new  set  of  concerns  related  to  patent  law.  Although 
many  countries  have  taken  an  inclusive  approach,  allow-
ing  various  higher  life  forms  (HLFs)  to  be  patented,  the 
Canadian  Supreme  Court  has  expressed  an  opposing  opin-
ion.  In  the  landmark  Harvard  College  v.  Canada  decision 
(2002),  it  denied  patent  protection  to  Harvard  College  for 
what was known as an Oncomouse — a genetically modified 
mouse (and for all similarly modified non-human mammals), 
which  was  deemed  valuable  for  cancer  research.  Patents  on 
the  genetic  alteration  process  were  granted,  excluding  the 
end  result,  the  genetically  modified  mouse  itself.  The  Court 
argued that HLFs do not fall within the definition of invention 
and do not qualify as composition of matter. The USPTO was 
the  first  to  allow  the  patent  for  the  Oncomouse  to  Harvard 
College, followed by the European Patent Office (EPO).

Pursuant to the ruling in the Harvard College case, plants 
are HLFs, and consequently, are not patentable. However, this 
opinion is open to interpretation. For example, one can argue 
that even if a herbicide-tolerant transgenic plant is not techni-
cally covered by patent protection, any use of the transgenic 
plant  would  implicitly  include  use  of  the  underlying  process 
and genes. Consequently, use of the plant itself would be pro-
hibited, effectively giving patent protection to the herbicide-
tolerant plant.

A second decision was made a few years later, in Monsanto 
Canada,  Inc.  v.  Schmeiser  (2004)  in  which  Monsanto  was 
the  owner  of  a  patent  containing  claims  to  a  chimeric  gene, 
a  Glyphosate-resistant  plant  cell,  and  to  genetic  engineer-
ing  methods  for  producing  a  herbicide-resistant  plant,  but 
without claims to a plant, knowing that this was not allowed 
by  the  Canadian  Patent  Office.  The  case  involved  a  canola 
farmer,  Schmeiser,  who  infringed  on  Monsanto’s  patent  by 
using canola plants that contained a patented gene. This time, 
the Court ruled in favor of patent protection.

In  Europe,  based  on  the  1999  formalization  of  the  EU 
Biotechnology  Directive  (European  Directive  98/44/CE, 
1998),  the  rules  of  the  EPC  were  amended  to  comply  with 
the  provisions  outlined  in  the  Directive.  Accordingly,  EPO 
has  accepted  claims  to  plants  and  animals  if  the  technical 
feasibility  is  not  confined  to  a  particular  plant  or  animal  vari-
ety.  Shortly  afterward,  the  EPO’s  Enlarged  Board  of  Appeal 
ruled that a claim that might encompass plant varieties is not 
excluded  from  patentability  under  Article  53(b)  (1999)  if 
the claim does not specify certain plant varieties. As stated in 
Article  8  of  the  European  Directive  involving  the  protection 
of  biotechnological  inventions  and  a  decision  of  the  Enlarged 
Boards  of  Appeal  of  the  EU  in  the  Novartis  case  (Fleck  and 

Baldock, 2003), germplasm can be included in the scope of a 
patent claim so long as protection is not limited to a single vari-
ety (Le Buanec, 2004). However, some countries (e.g., France 
and  Germany)  have  incorporated  breeder  exemption  clauses 
in their patent laws (Smith, 2008). As the effective level of IP 
protection available to plant breeders is also influenced by the 
use of new technologies and changes in breeding practices (Le 
Buanec,  2004,  2005;  Donnenwirth  et  al.,  2004;  McConnell, 
2004; Heckenberger et al., 2005; Lence et al., 2005; Smolders, 
2005; Kock et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2008), further complex-
ity  arose.  For  example,  transgenic  approaches  resulted  in  the 
rapid development of new distinct varieties from existing ones 
(Fleck and Baldock, 2003; Smolders, 2005). Thus, under PVP 
laws  enacted  in  accordance  with  the  1978  revision  of  UPOV, 
it is possible to pirate existing varieties, for example, through 
their  conversion  to  herbicide-  or  insect-resistant  versions 
(Smith, 2008).

Some of the decision's critics could argue that the Court’s 
decision not to permit patents for HLFs was based on public 
morality and an outcry rather than a technical interpretation 
of the Patent Act. Thus, by further amending the patent law, 
patent offices around the world should allow the issuance of 
patents that claim not only the process, but also the plant as 
the  product;  otherwise,  we  run  the  risk  of  opening  the  door 
to parties to circumvent patent protection. The extension of 
HLFs to plants makes perfect sense from both scientific and 
commercial perspectives.

Gene patenting
Plant  biotechnology  or  genetic  engineering  allows  breed-
ers  to  modify  plants  in  an  effort  to  meet  the  demands  of  a 
fast-growing  global  community.  Many  plant  biotechnol-
ogy  companies  and  universities  are  behind  a  wave  of  patent 
claims  on  hundreds  of  genes  that  confer  tolerance  to  herbi-
cides and biotic and abiotic stresses; genes that improve wood 
properties for the biofuel and paper and pulp industries; and 
genes  that  have  important  applications  in  phytoremediation, 
nutrition,  pest  resistance,  and  plant-based  pharmaceuticals. 
The  patents  cover  the  development  of  new  crops  capable  of 
resisting attack by insects and diseases, and withstanding salt, 
drought,  high  and  low  temperatures,  or  other  environmental 
changes brought on by global climate change. Worldwide, pat-
ent offices have documented thousands of patent applications 
for  genes  that  confer  these  characteristics.  They  have  been 
filed  in  multiple  countries  and  several  of  the  patents  cover 
many genes across a range of plant species.

However, one of the issues relating to the patenting of genetic 
inventions  revolves  around  the  question  of  whether  a  DNA 
sequence  can  be  considered  a  discovery  or  an  invention.  In 
Europe, the rules of the EPC (Official Journal of the EPC, 1999) 
were  recently  amended  to  comply  with  the  EU  Biotechnology 
Directive. These amendments state that biological material iso-
lated  from  its  natural  environment  or  produced  by  means  of  a 
technical process, even if it occurred previously in nature, is pat-
entable (Rule 23(c) EPC, 1999). In addition to the need for the 
sequence  to  be  novel  and  non-obvious,  the  process  of  isolating 
and characterizing it must also be patentable in order to patent 
the sequence.

530

Intellectual property rights of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 3

The  USPTO  takes  the  position  that  genes  are  chemical 
compounds,  albeit  complex  ones,  and,  as  such,  they  qualify 
for potential patenting as compositions of matter. Whereas a 
naturally  occurring  product,  as  it  exists  in  nature,  cannot  be 
patented, the USPTO has allowed patents on naturally occur-
ring  products  that  have  been  purified,  isolated,  or  otherwise 
altered.  For  this  reason,  gene  patents  have  been  issued  in 
the  U.S.  for  decades  (Harfouche  et  al.,  2010).  Additionally, 
the USPTO produced a set of guidelines arguing that a gene 
sequence  is  patentable  if  it  is  novel,  isolated,  its  molecu-
lar  structure  is  known,  and  if  it  has  substantive  and  cred-
ible  utility  (Utility  Guidelines,  2001;  Written  Description 
Guidelines,  2001).  This  position  is  consistent  with  the 
European rule amendments; however, on March 29, 2010, the 
U.S.  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York 
delivered  a  serious  blow  to  human-gene  patent  holders.  The 
opinion, the first round in the closely followed Association for 
Molecular  Pathology  v.  United  States  Patent  and  Trademark 
Office (widely known as the ACLU v. Myriad Genetics) case, 
invalidates  several  patents  with  claims  covering  genes  associ-
ated  with  breast  cancer.  The  result  surprised  many  in  the 
biotechnology  industry  because  the  broad  ruling,  if  upheld 
on  appeal,  would  eliminate  future  gene  patenting,  as  well  as 
effectively make existing gene patents invalid. Weakening pat-
ent protection for human genes could lead to a market change 
for  future  R&D  involving  genes  not  only  related  to  human 
health, but also to agricultural biotechnology.

The complex nature of gene patents and enabling technolo-
gies involved in the development of transgenic plants presents 
other  concerns  related  to  IP  rights.  These  issues  are  coming 
to the fore more frequently in developing countries, where no 
possibilities  for  gene  patenting  exist  and  no  PVP  laws  are  in 
place.  For  example,  India’s  experience  with  insect-resistant 
cotton,  transformed  with  a  Bacillus  thuringiensis  (Bt)  gene, 
was  first  developed  by  a  joint  venture  between  Mahyco, 
India’s  largest  seed  company,  and  Monsanto.  Despite  the 
fact that these varieties were hybrids and, thus, providing at 
least some protection against farmers saving seed, there were 
widespread reports of black markets for seeds and clandestine 
plant breeding to incorporate the Bt gene (Jayaraman, 2004).

Another  example  is  herbicide-tolerant  soybean,  which  is 
the  most  widely  grown  transgenic  crop  in  the  world.  It  has 
become very popular in Argentina (Qaim and Traxler, 2005), 
where although genes may be patented, Monsanto was unable 
to make an application deadline, so its Roundup Ready® (RR) 
varieties were simply protected by PVP. But much of the RR 
soybean in Argentina is grown from seed that is saved or infor-
mally  traded.  In  Paraguay  and  Brazil,  RR  soybean  has  gained 
great  popularity  based  on  the  sale  of  black-market  seed. 
Because only a small fraction of the RR soybean seed used in 
these countries is from authorized sources, Monsanto is begin-
ning  to  pursue  legal  action  for  patent  infringement  against 
shipments of soybeans from South America that arrive in the 
ports of European countries, where the technology is patented. 
The solution currently under discussion is to charge farmers a 
royalty based on grain sold at harvest, to be collected by grain 
dealers, processors, or farmer associations. One of the major 
points  of  disagreement  here  is  farmers’  insistence  on  their 
legal right to save seed (Tripp et al., 2007).

Hence, in developing countries, controlling the use of genes 
and access to transgenic varieties will require the implementa-
tion of restrictive IP protection, such as strong laws related to 
patents  and  plant  breeder’s  rights,  and  the  vigorous  enforce-
ment of these laws, as well as biosafety regulations.

Material transfer agreements
While  the  defense  of  R&D  related  to  biotechnologically 
improved  plant  products  has  traditionally  been  based  on  pat-
ents, PVP, and other means of IP protection, academic research 
is  conducted  in  an  open  environment,  with  relatively  unre-
stricted access to fundamental scientific knowledge and prod-
ucts, often with few formal arrangements. However, under the 
patent laws, there is no explicit exemption for academic use, 
prompting  administrators  at  publicly  funded  research  institu-
tions  to  execute  MTAs  granting  permission  to  use  patented 
materials  in  laboratory  research  and  in  breeding  programs. 
Although  this  action  allows  these  institutions  to  capitalize  on 
their R&D investments, it constitutes another method for con-
trolling access to research results. MTAs are a preferred mech-
anism for the transfer of tangible property (e.g., plant genetic 
resources,  plasmids  containing  genes  of  interest,  and  genetic 
transformation vectors) in countries where enforcement of IP 
rights is not appropriate (Kowalski et al., 2002).

Material  Transfer  Agreements  are  the  most  common  legal 
arrangement  by  which  centers  of  the  Consultative  Group 
on  International  Agricultural  Research  (CGIAR)  system 
obtain  permission  to  utilize  proprietary  biotechnologies 
(Cohen et al., 1998). If access to the materials is not other-
wise  restricted,  this  protection  may  be  effective  in  preserv-
ing the provider’s rights to the germplasm. Effective January 
2007, germplasm exchange for all parties in TRIPS, including 
the whole CGIAR system, is now covered by a standardized 
MTA, known as the Uniform Biological MTA (UBMTA).

An  MTA  is  a  type  of  two-party  legal  agreement.  A  typi-
cal  MTA  would  stipulate  the  following:  (1)  materials  are  to 
be used for research purposes only; (2) a separate agreement 
is required for commercial use; and (3) materials may not be 
transferred to any third party without prior written approval 
from the provider. However, these terms can go beyond those 
established  for  patents.  For  example,  they  may  restrict  the 
recipient’s rights to modify, improve, re-sell, or commercialize 
the  transferred  material.  But,  plant  materials  created  by  the 
recipient  that  contain  or  incorporate  the  transferred  materi-
als  are  considered  modifications.  Ownership  of  such  modifi-
cations  is  determined  according  to  appropriate  inventorship 
laws using terms that are consistent with the UBMTA. They 
can also take the form of a first right of refusal to negotiate a 
non-exclusive  license  to  utilize  products  that  were  improved 
using the original material provided. Licensing structure, fees, 
and royalties on products resulting from material provided in 
the agreement may be discussed in bona fide between the pro-
vider and recipient. In transgenic plant product development, 
such  modifications  occur  frequently.  A  gene  conferring  a 
desirable trait could be provided by one source and deployed 
in  an  elite  genotype  (obtained  through  traditional  breed-
ing) derived from another source, and perhaps using enabling  
technologies developed by a third or fourth source.

531

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

There is also considerable concern over the possible role of 
MTAs  in  raising  research  costs.  Others  suggest  that  the  con-
tractual structure provided by MTAs may reduce transaction 
costs  and  facilitate  exchange  (Mowery  and  Ziedonis,  2007). 
In  their  work,  Mowery  and  Ziedonis  (2007)  undertook  a 
preliminary  analysis  of  the  role  of  MTAs  in  the  biomedical 
research enterprise at the University of Michigan, a significant 
patenter  and  licensor  of  biomedical  IP.  After  examining  the 
relationship  among  invention  disclosures,  patents,  licenses, 
and the existence of an MTA, their analysis suggested that the 
increased assertion of property rights by universities through 
MTAs  does  not  appear  to  impede  the  commercialization  of 
the products of university research.

Trademarks, trade secrets, know-how, and 
geographical designations
Protection of IP rights also includes trade secrets, know-how, 
trademarks,  and  geographical  designations.  Trademarks  are 
valuable  for  plant  biotechnology  R&D  because  they  identify 
plant biotechnology products and distinguish them from those 
manufactured or sold by others. Registration grants the exclu-
sive right to use them for product and/or services. Trademarks 
are  awarded  by  national  governments,  and  the  protection  is 
valid only in countries in which they are issued. A significant 
part  of  the  value  of  agricultural  biotechnology  variety  often 
lies not in its agronomic characteristics per se, but rather in its 
identification and reputation, not to mention that of its pro-
ducer, among consumers. A plant biotechnology product also 
can be given a brand name that is protected as IP by register-
ing  it  as  a  trademark  with  the  appropriate  patent  office.  For 
example,  Bollgard®  cotton  contains  a  protein  encoded  by  a 
gene  from  Bt  that  protects  cotton  plants  from  specific  lepi-
dopteran  insect  pests.  Bollgard®  is  a  registered  trademark  of 
the Monsanto Company. Other trademarks, such as Roundup 
Ready® or Liberty Link® refer to specific traits imparted by a 
transgene and may be of some value in marketing to farmers, 
although the identities of such agronomic traits receive little 
attention from final consumers (Graff et al., 2004).

Trade secrets are simply described as a form of IP protec-
tion  that  assists  in  maintaining  confidentiality  by  imposing 
penalties if information held as secret is used improperly. For 
a certain period of time, a former employee who goes to work 
for a competitor is enjoined to not reveal secret information. 
Although  no  application  is  needed  to  protect  trade  secrets, 
two conditions need to be met: (1) the trade secret must have 
a commercial value; and (2) an effort must be made to keep 
it secret. In agriculture, even an F1 hybrid may be considered 
a trade secret. Importantly, trade secrets are also compatible 
with and complementary to patents used to protect transgenic 
plants.  The  glue  holding  a  patent  and  trade  secret  together, 
and jointly translating research ideas into application, is often 
the  technical  know-how,  which  is  the  grist  of  trade  secrets. 
Know-how  is  another  key  type  of  IP  produced  by  an  R&D 
program. This often occurs when research institutions do not 
enjoy  the  benefit  of  patent  protection.  Know-how  can  be  in 
the  form  of  an  aggregation  of  processes,  procedures,  proto-
cols,  a  secret  formula,  or  a  combination  of  these.  Access  to 
know-how is granted by patent licensing or under MTAs.

The  identification  of  a  product  by  the  consumer  has  an 
important bearing on its value. Thus, a registered trademark or 
geographical designation under which a plant variety or genetic 
trait  is  sold  can  provide  a  significant  means  of  protecting  the 
genetic  improvements  embodied  in  the  product  (Boettiger  et 
al.,  2004).  Geographical  designations  of  origin  give  the  right 
to prevent unauthorized parties from using misleading or false 
geographical indications for their plant varieties. Geographical 
indicators  identify  a  product  as  originating  from  the  specific 
territory, region, or locality, where a given quality, reputation, 
or other characteristics may be attributable to geographic ori-
gin. In agricultural biotechnology, geographical designations can 
also play a positive and complementary role in protecting tra-
ditionally  bred  lines  that  contain  genes  or  alleles  that  impart 
agronomic traits that may be desirable in a certain area.

Freedom-to-Operate in Agricultural 
Biotechnology: The Road from a 
Research Idea to Commercialization 
of a Biotechnologically Improved 
Plant Product

Developing  a  plant  biotechnology  product  is  often  both  capi-
tal-  and  time-intensive,  and  access  to  IP  may  present  an 
insurmountable  obstacle  for  developers.  Ownership  of  IP  in 
agricultural  biotechnology  is  highly  fragmented  (Figure  33.1) 
and has many layers of complexity. This fact leads to situations 
where no single public- or private-sector organization is able to 
provide a complete set of IP rights to guarantee FTO in a par-
ticular  jurisdiction  using  a  certain  technology.  Plant  products 
improved through genetic engineering may encapsulate several 
components,  proprietary  technological  processes,  and  know-
how, each of which may be protected under IP/tangible prop-
erty (TP) law. Therefore, it is imperative to conduct an FTO 
analysis that identifies these rights by dissecting the product’s 
IP and TP. Although it is a simple and straightforward concept, 
FTO means that for a given product or service, at a given point 
in  time,  with  respect  to  a  given  market  or  geography,  no  IP 
from any third party is infringed. Translating this concept into 
a productive strategy for companies and for public-sector insti-
tutions alike is not always straightforward (Krattiger, 2007).

The  advantages  of  incorporating  FTO  considerations  into 
plant biotechnology product development strategies are mani-
fold. For public-sector organizations, they may include bene-
fits such as greater prestige, the ability to bring about cultural 
change,  or  the  forging  of  strong  partnerships  with  providers 
of  IP  and  technology  (Krattiger,  2007).  On  the  other  hand, 
an integrated FTO that relies not only on technical and legal 
skills,  but  also  on  strategic  business  development  planning, 
becomes a tactical component in a private organization’s risk-
management strategy.

Scientific  research  advancements  are  frequently  nurtured 
by a highly synergistic environment, as was evidently the case 
for  deducing  the  mechanism  by  which  RNA  interference 
(RNAi)  mediates  gene  suppression  (Chi-Ham  et  al.,  2010). 
Because  of  its  potential  commercial  application,  an  increas-
ing number of patent applications are seeking exclusive rights 

532

Intellectual property rights of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 3

a

b

Private sector

2.7%

Public sector

24%

Monsanto

14%

Unknown

2%

Public sector

97.3%

Rest of private sector

33% 

DuPont

13%

Syngenta

7%

Bayer

4%

Dow
3%

Source: Graff et al. 2003. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner (Nature Publishing Group). 
The original figure includes additional data on public-sector agricultural biotechnology patents.   

Figure 33.1 l Distribution of assignment for U.S. patents granted from 1982 to 2001. l  (a) All U.S. patents. (b) U.S. agricultural 
biotechnology patents (Graff et al., 2003).

to  RNAi-based  discoveries.  However,  when  claiming  pat-
ent  rights,  patent  law  favors  clear  and  well-defined  invention 
boundaries.  Failure  to  design  around  existing  IP  or  to  license 
technologies claimed in patents may trigger legal repercussions, 
which  may  prevent  product  commercialization  (Chi-Ham 
et  al.,  2010).  Thus,  due  diligence  when  evaluating  poten-
tial  legal  risks  associated  with  IP  is  an  important  step  in  the 
commercialization  of  products,  and  requires  both  technical 
and  legal  expertise  (Fenton  et  al.,  2007).  Assessing  the  FTO 
to determine whether a product under development infringes 
third-party  IP  rights  is  a  vital  step  in  strategic  risk-manage-
ment. Because of the prevalence of national jurisdictions over 
patents, together with IP laws, which can vary between coun-
tries, it is crucial to carry out an FTO analysis for each coun-
try in which a product will be developed and commercialized. 
Such  a  process  necessarily  involves  engaging  IP  attorneys  in 
each jurisdiction where product marketing is desired.

It  is  essential  that  an  FTO  analysis  be  planned  and  exe-
cuted  before  starting  a  new  project.  A  schematic  represen-
tation  of  this  process  is  shown  in  Figure  33.2.  A  simplified 
listing  of  IP  used  to  develop  a  plant  biotechnology  prod-
uct  is  presented  in  Table  33.2.  Concerns  about  FTO  remain 
throughout the product development process, and beyond. A 
set of 10 strategies for managing potential IP infringement are 
proposed by Krattiger et al. (2007). In practice, typically two 
or more of these strategies will be adopted, with the specific 
mix of strategies varying by project. Which strategies will be 
appropriate depend on, for example, how advanced the prod-
uct is, the type of organization that develops the product, and 
relevant market dynamics. Not all of the listed strategies are 
feasible for public-sector institutions.

Another  concern  lies  in  the  efficiencies  of  accessing  IP, 
which appears to be hampering valuable R&D related to hor-
ticulture  and  the  development  of  ornamental  crop  varieties, 
as well as forest trees. Horticultural and ornamental markets 

are  fragmented  and  provide  little  incentive,  discouraging 
large, multi-national corporations with strong IP positions and 
FTO  from  pursuing  product  development  in  these  sectors. 
Because of its weak IP position and in order to secure FTO, 
the  public  sector  often  joins  forces  with  industry  to  support 
horticultural,  floriculture,  and  forest  projects.  This  can  be 
mutually advantageous, as has been the case with cross-licens-
ing  deals  struck  by  leaders  in  the  private  sector.  As  a  result 
of FTO issues in the public and non-profit sectors, the Public 
Intellectual  Property  Resource  for  Agriculture  (PIPRA),  a 
coalition  of  American  universities  and  foundations  that  are 
committed to this strategy, was formed (Graff et al., 2004). 
PIPRA attempts to mobilize collaborative support from a wide 
range  of  public-sector  institutions  worldwide.  In  addition  to 
this  broad  base  of  institutional  support,  PIPRA’s  molecular 
biology  labs  and  its  network  of  pro  bono  IP  attorneys  coor-
dinate  the  scientific  and  legal  resources  needed  to  support 
agricultural  advances  in  developing  countries  (Boettiger  and 
Bennett,  2007).  Implicit  in  PIPRA’s  mission  is  finding  ways 
to provide access to technologies, such as PIPRA’s plant trans-
formation  vector,  which  is  comprised  of  numerous  patented 
components (owned by PIPRA members).

There is also concern that the private sector may be block-
ing access to IP in developing countries. According to Pardey 
et  al.  (2003),  this  concern  is  exaggerated  and  largely  misdi-
rected.  They  showed  that  international  and  national  agri-
cultural  research  centers  currently  have  far  greater  FTO 
in  agricultural  research  on  food  crops  for  the  developing 
world  than  is  commonly  perceived.  A  plausible  example  of 
this  is  the  public-private  partnership  between  the  African 
Agricultural  Technology  Foundation  (AATF)  that  is  devel-
oping  drought-tolerant  varieties  of  maize  for  Africa.  The 
partnership,  known  as  Water-Efficient  Maize  for  Africa 
(WEMA),  was  formed  in  response  to  a  growing  call  by 
African  farmers,  political  leaders,  and  scientists  to  address 

533

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

•Germplasm: cv, 
variety, etc.
• Expression vector 
• Promoters
• Terminators 
• GOIs
• Selectable markers
• Excision marker

IP identification/inventorship/

ownership/assignment

• Patent and IP search
• Licenses search
• Scientific literature search

• Promoter 1: 2 U.S. patents; 
1 PCT patent application
• Promoter 2: 1 U.S. patent 
application 
• Gene 1: 1 provisional patent
application
• Gene 2: 1 U.S. patent; 
1 continuation in part 
application
• Gene 3: 2 U.S. patents; one 
divisional patent application
• Selectable marker: public 
domain
• Transformation methods: 2 
U.S.; 5 international patents

Identification of 

components 

required to develop 

the product

Identification of 

methods 

for making and 
using the product

• Agrobacterium-

mediated genetic 
transformation 

• Particle bombardment
• EXACTTM technology

Product 

deconstruction

Product clearance

TP identification/inventorship/

ownership/assignment

• TP search
• Contract agreement 
search

• Genotype: (Owner: 
U of X; MTA with first right of 
refusal license on modifications)
• pBI121 (Owner: Y Institute; 
no MTA)
• pBin19 (Owner: Company Z; 

MTA research use only)

Action 

Identification
to obtain FTO

Strategic FTO decisions
• Legal/IP management strategies
• Research and development
strategies
• Business strategies

Figure 33.2 l Schematic representation of the steps needed for FTO analysis of a transgenic plant product. l  The freedom to 
operate (FTO) analysis has three main steps, beginning with product deconstruction, leading to product clearance (PC), and concluding with 
FTO decisions. The product deconstruction starts in the very early stages of FTO analysis and involves the identification of all components, 
processes, enabling technologies, and methods required to develop the product. It is done by intensive discussions with researchers and 
review of the scientific literature to identify key players involved in the development of related technologies. PC analyzes the intellectual 
property (IP) and tangible property (TP) landscape of the product using extensive patent and literature searches, allowing the identification of 
the potential patents, MTAs, and license agreements related to the proposed product. In addition, it involves studying the patent literature, 
issued patents, and patent applications published or publicly available via patent offices such as the United States Patent and Trademark 
Office (USPTO), the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), The European Patent Office (EPO), Japan Patent Office (JPO), etc. PC 
can also determine if the patent is still in force. An issued utility patent remains active for 20 years from the date of filing. Claims in an expired 
patent are in the public domain, and the proposed product is free to operate based on those features. PC also provides information on patent 
inventor, assignee, and licensee(s). Finally, the various components and methods required for making and using the product and their IP/TP 
issues are used to make strategic FTO decisions that help reduce the risk of IP litigation. An example of PC output is presented in Table 33.2.

the devastating effects of drought on farmers and their fami-
lies.  Marker-assisted  breeding  and  biotechnology  will  be 
used  to  develop  African  maize  varieties,  with  the  long-term 
goal  of  making  drought-tolerant,  royalty-free  maize  avail-
able to small-scale African farmers. The AATF will work with 
the  International  Maize  and  Wheat  Improvement  Center 
(CIMMYT)  and  Monsanto.  CIMMYT  will  provide  conven-
tionally developed, drought-tolerant, high-yielding maize vari-
eties  that  are  adapted  to  conditions  in  Africa,  and  expertise 
in  conventional  breeding  and  testing  for  drought  tolerance. 
Monsanto  will  provide  proprietary  germplasm,  advanced 
breeding  tools,  and  other  needed  expertise.  Additionally, 
Monsanto  and  BASF  will  provide  drought-tolerance  genes 
that  they  developed  collaboratively.  The  national  agricultural 
research  systems,  farmers’  groups,  and  seed  companies  who 

are participating in this project will contribute their expertise 
with  breeding  and  regulatory  issues,  and  will  be  responsible 
for  country-specific  implementation,  including  project  gov-
ernance,  testing,  germplasm  evaluation,  and  seed  production 
and distribution. The Bill and Melinda Gates and Howard G. 
Buffet Foundations are funding this partnership.

Technology Transfer as a Means 
to Facilitate the Development of 
Biotechnology-Based Agriculture

Academic  institutions  excel  at  research,  but  often  need  col-
laborations  with  industry  to  turn  science  into  commercial 

534

Intellectual property rights of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 3

Table 33.2  Intellectual property used to assemble a plant genetic transformation vector: An example used to develop transgenic turfgrassa.

Components

Rice actin promoter

Octopine synthase (ocs) and mannopine synthase (mas) super 
promoter

Four copies of an ABA-responsive complex sequence (4ABRC) 
promoter

No. of patents

No. of assignees

1 U.S.

1 U.S.

1 U.S.

1 (Cornell Research Foundation)

2 (Biotechnology Research and Development 
Corporation and Purdue Research Foundation)

2 (Cornell Research Foundation and Washington 
University)

Cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S terminator

None found

None found

A gene that confers resistance to the herbicide bialaphos (bar)

2 (1 U.S. and 1 EP)

1 (Bayer Crop Sciences)

Neomycin phosphotransferase type II

2 U.S.

2 (Monsanto & Rockefeller Foundation)

Arabidopsis thaliana white-brown complex homolog 19 gene 
(Atwbc19 ) gene for antibiotic resistance

2 U.S. and 1 WO

1 (University of Tennessee Research Foundation)

Duplicated CaMV 35S enhancer sequences

5 U.S., 1 CA, 1 Brazil

2 for U.S. patents (University of British Columbia 
and Monsanto)

Cotton leaf curl virus (CLCuV) promoter

PureIntro TechnologyTM

PureIntro Turfgrass (Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of 
turfgrass)

1 U.S. (family patents: 1 AU, 3 CN,  
1 U.S., 1 WO)

1 (Institute of Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Science)

4 (2 U.S., 1 EP, 1 AU)

1 (Japan Tobacco)

6 (1 WO, 2 U.S., 2 EP)

1 (Rutgers)

Agrobacterium tumefaciens transformation of stolons

1 U.S. and 1 WO

1 (The Samuel Roberts Nobel Foundation)

aData are taken from the CAMBIA’s patent lens (http://www.patentlens.net/) and the USPTO (http://www.uspto.gov/) Web sites.

products.  Universities  in  many  countries,  as  well  as  research 
institutions,  are  under  increasing  pressure  from  government 
agencies  to  partner  with  industry  to  be  eligible  for  public 
funding. This is being done both to leverage public money and 
to  propel  new  inventions  from  discovery  to  the  commercial 
development stage.

The  U.S.  has  a  long  history  of  generating  inventions  with 
commercial  value  and,  thus,  is  a  good  example  of  success-
ful  TT  (Rosenberg  and  Nelson,  1994;  Mowery  and  Sampat, 
2001; Geiger, 2004). Countries in the EU are now following 
the same pattern. In the U.S., the establishment of TT offices 
(TTOs)  and  the  biotechnology  industry  are  often  linked  to 
the passage of the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980, which, for the first 
time,  allowed  universities  to  take  ownership  of  patent(s)  on 
discoveries  made  as  a  result  of  federal  funding  (University 
and  Small  Business  Patent  Procedures  Act,  1980).  Prior  to 
this  Act,  IP  ownership  remained  with  the  federal  govern-
ment,  and,  as  a  consequence,  relatively  few  inventions  were 
licensed. Thus, the Bayh-Dole Act signaled U.S. government 
support  for  commercialization  of  research  products.  There 
were  two  motivations  behind  this  Act:  (1)  patents  result-
ing  from  federally  funded  research  were  unexploited  due 
to  uncertainty  regarding  their  ownership  (Eisenberg,  1996; 
Mowery  et  al.,  2004;  Berman,  2008)  and  (2)  a  belief  that 
universities  are  a  source  of  innovation  that  can  be  used  to 

strengthen  the  U.S.  economy  and  maintain  its  preeminence 
(Brooks, 1993; Stevens, 2004; Berman, 2008).

There is now a growing consensus that although the Bayh-
Dole  Act  has  been  beneficial,  improvements  are  needed.  At 
most  universities,  TTOs  will  be  in  the  best  position  to  pro-
tect and transfer the IP through commercialization, a service  
that  is  increasingly  appreciated  by  university  inventors. 
However, it is in those cases where there is a significant dif-
ference of opinion between the TTO and the inventor regard-
ing  the  process  of  commercialization,  or  where  the  TTO  is 
not capable of providing the needed services, that difficulties 
occur. Thus, in discussing modifications to the current Bayh-
Dole regime, a system where the inventor holds the IP could 
resolve  most  of  these  difficulties  (Kenny  and  Patton,  2009). 
But, if the Act is eliminated, many new technologies with the 
potential to save lives, benefit society, and stimulate the econ-
omy are less likely to make it out of the laboratory. It would 
also put the universities at risk for liabilities surrounding the 
product in the marketplace.

Further,  some  university  TTOs  have  reputations  for  being 
difficult to deal with, while others can play an important role 
in  the  knowledge  translation  and  commercialization  proc-
esses by promoting public-private collaboration. In fact, many 
biotechnology  companies  originated  as  university  start-ups, 
and  many  prominent  biotechnology  clusters  are  located  near 

535

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

universities. Although TT can also occur through licensing to a 
third-party, a new paradigm was recently proposed by Renault 
et  al.  (2007).  Instead  of  measuring  the  success  of  TT  by 
counting numbers of patents and licensing deals, they suggest 
measuring knowledge flows (e.g., training of students, building 
of knowledge infrastructure, and supporting a creative milieu) 
between universities and their localities. This approach should 
reveal a more accurate picture of the full impact that univer-
sities  have  on  their  regions  (Renault  et  al.,  2007).  Recently, 
interviews with professionals at Canadian TTOs have revealed 
that,  at  their  best,  TTOs  support  the  social  and  academic 
missions of their institutions by facilitating knowledge mobi-
lization and research relationships with other sectors, includ-
ing  industry;  however,  this  does  not  always  produce  obvious 
or  traditional  commercial  outputs.  Thus,  the  existing  met-
rics  used  to  measure  the  success  of  TTOs  do  not  capture 
this  reality  and,  as  such,  realignment  is  needed  (Bubela  and 
Caulfield, 2010).

In plant biotechnology, TT is especially important given the 
close relationship in many countries between research centers 
and the agricultural industry. The fact that the variety of inven-
tions  in  plant  biotechnology  from  universities  is  far  greater 
than  those  of  any  private-sector  firm,  might  indeed  offer  a 
platform  of  technologies  adequate  to  facilitate  the  develop-
ment of new plant varieties through genetic engineering.

Agricultural  biotechnology  has  become  a  priority  area  for 
TT  in  developing  countries,  where  production  of  food,  feed, 
and  fiber  is  of  vital  concern.  Crops  grown  for  subsistence  in 
developing  countries  and  the  technologies  that  are  used  to 
develop such crops are clearly of little commercial interest to 
the private sector. Thus, promoting TT of plant biotechnolo-
gies to develop such crops for humanitarian purposes is of par-
amount importance. Developing countries frequently lack the 
required  IP  management  capacity  and  resources  to  perform 
product clearance (PC) analyses and evaluations that facilitate 
the  legitimate  import,  use,  and/or  export  of  technologically 
advanced products (Tripp et al., 2007). For maximum impact, 
researchers  in  developing  countries  must  strengthen  their  IP 
rights  knowledge  and  management  capacity.  Also,  interna-
tional regulations and IP rights need to be tailored to promote 
discovery-oriented research to help meet the needs of devel-
oping nations.

Finally,  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  IP  management  and 
commercialization of university research products still occurs 
in  the  absence  of  legislative  frameworks,  but  in  the  devel-
oping  countries  TT  is  beginning  to  occur.  For  example,  the 
Philippines recently launched a new law to encourage TT. The 
TT Act of 2009, largely inspired by the Bayh-Dole Act, ena-
bles R&D institutions to be the owner of IP rights arising from 
the results of government-funded research.

Conclusion and Future Needs

Protecting  IP  in  agricultural  biotechnology  helps  accelerate 
economic and social development. While the private sector pri-
marily focuses on classical cash crops, where markets are large, 
the  public  sector  (e.g.,  universities,  national  research  insti-
tutions,  and  non-profit  organizations)  is  often  left  to  develop 

biotechnologies for small, specialty crops that are important to 
developing countries. However, there are IP concerns in devel-
oping countries and a need for greater protection and access.

Intellectual  property  rights  are  sometimes  viewed  as  bar-
riers  to  access  to  innovations  in  health  and  agriculture. 
However, it is not IP per se that raises barriers, but rather how 
IP is used and managed, particularly by public-sector institu-
tions (Lei et al., 2009). The literature offers almost no direct 
evidence of scientists’ views of the trade-offs associated with 
protecting  research  tools.  A  recent  survey  conducted  by  Lei 
et  al.  (2009)  showed  that  scientists  attributed  problems  of 
delayed or blocked access to needed research tools to MTAs. 
Another major challenge for management of public-sector IP 
is  the  fragmentation  of  technology  ownership  and  the  need 
for  many  technology  components  to  provide  FTO  in  trans-
genic crops (Graff et al., 2003). Recently, a model of public-
sector  collaboration  has  been  suggested  that  could  directly 
address  this  issue  by  including  data  sharing  and  patent  pool-
ing  —  the  equivalent  of  an  IP  clearinghouse  (Graff  and 
Zilberman, 2001; Atkinson et al., 2003). Graff et al. (2003) 
believed  that  using  this  model,  IP  patented  by  the  public 
sector  might  provide  a  platform  of  technologies  sufficient  to 
enable  the  development  of  new  transgenic  varieties  and  cul-
tivars. This approach may promote sharing access to enabling  
technologies  (gene  delivery  methods,  marker-gene  excision 
techniques,  selectable  markers,  promoters,  etc.)  that  play 
a  key  role  in  early  transgenic  plant  product  development. 
Besides,  it  will  solve  the  problem  caused  by  a  technology 
owner  trying  to  delay  or  hinder  a  competitor’s  development 
program.  Furthermore,  considerable  research  effort  is  spent 
to design around existing enabling technology patents, and to 
search for ways to invent bargaining tools.

These  issues  help  to  explain  why  plant  biologists  have 
been  pushing  for  open-source  biology  (Biological  Innovation 
for Open Society, BiOS; Jefferson, 2007) and the creation of 
institutional collaborations to facilitate access to crucial, ena-
bling  technologies  (PIPRA;  Atkinson  et  al.,  2003).  An  open-
access patent database could be used to collect IP data from 
several national patent offices and, thus, improve the ability to 
interpret and filter IP with overlapping and competing rights 
(Patently transparent, 2006).

Increasing  access  to  fundamental  innovations  in  agricul-
tural  biotechnology  for  developing  countries  will  require 
capacity  building,  active  engagement,  and  wide  participa-
tion.  These  factors  must  also  be  coupled  with  improved 
institutional  IP  management  and  stewardship  capabilities.  In 
addition,  developing  countries  urgently  need  to  implement 
IP  legislation  modeled  after  what  has  been  created  by  more 
advanced  economies,  albeit  some  may  be  of  little  relevance, 
given  their  needs  and  stages  of  development  (Huete-Perez, 
2003). Strengthening of IP protection and access necessitates 
a strong collaboration between the public and private sectors, 
with the public sector pursuing IP protection as vigorously as 
the private one. The public sectors in these developing coun-
tries need to become generators of IP. Other sound strategies 
that could be adopted include: worldwide harmonization of IP 
rights; identification of areas of common interest and opportu-
nity between the private and public sectors; and an increase in 
R&D investments.

536

Intellectual property rights of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 3

Recently,  clear  evidence  of  accelerating  IP  protection  in 
developing  countries  was  provided  by  China,  where  patent 
applications  for  agricultural  biotechnology  innovations  are  on 
the  rise.  China  is  now  fifth  among  countries  that  signed  the 
Patent  Cooperation  Treaty  (PCT),  an  agreement  by  which 
patents  can  be  simultaneously  lodged  in  different  countries. 
Although guiding policies still need to be improved, this exam-
ple demonstrates an interest in competing internationally.

Liberalized  TT  and  increased  foreign  investment  are  ways 
in which developing countries will benefit from the harmoni-
zation  of  IP  management  and  enforcement.  Ultimately,  har-
monization  will  improve  the  world’s  capacity  to  innovate,  so 
that  the  whole  will  be  greater  than  the  sum  from  its  parts. 
The  World  Intellectual  Property  Office’s  (WIPO)  proposed 
Substantive Patent Law Treaty (SPLT) is an exploratory step 
in the right direction (Bera, 2009).

One variant of the harmonization of plant IP legislation was 
the  formation  of  Europe’s  Community  Plant  Variety  Office 
(Koo et al., 2004). Another example is the recent EU political 
breakthrough on an enhanced patent system that will lead to a 
single EU patent, and establish a new patent court. This move 
has been seen as a very strong signal from the Council that the 
EU is committed to achieving a single market for patents. A 
new U.S. IP enforcement strategy was even recently released. 
Among other things, it is an attempt to increase transparency, 
and to encourage public participation in policy-making for IP 
enforcement and international negotiations.

Last, but not least, a number of improvements are needed 
for patent laws and licensing agreements. Broad patent claims 

or claims on gene sequences without a true invention should 
not  be  allowed.  In  addition,  patent  filings  should  be  delayed 
until  there  is  an  actual  reduction  to  practice  of  the  claimed 
biotechnology.  A  provisional  patent  application  procedure 
could also be used to promote earlier disclosure of novel sci-
entific  knowledge  (Bentwich,  2010).  On  the  other  hand, 
TTOs  need  to  become  more  transparent  in  their  licensing 
agreements  and  other  activities  related  to  managing  publicly 
funded  research  outputs  (Pressman,  2006).  Such  transpar-
ency should involve reporting not only the value and number 
of  licenses,  but  also  whether  the  licenses  are  exclusive  or 
non-exclusive, whether research rights have been retained for 
academic  and  not-for-profit  institutions,  and  provisions  that 
enable  widespread  access  (e.g.,  for  researchers  in  developing 
countries).  In  effect,  this  amounts  to  reporting  on  whether 
they  are  adhering  to  broadly  recognized  best  practices  for 
licensing university research (AUTM, 2007). Making agricul-
tural biotechnologies available to the poor via a broad, human-
itarian license system will have huge impacts and improve an 
untold number of lives.

Acknowledgments

AH  is  supported  by  the  Brain  Gain  Program  (Rientro  dei 
cervelli)  of  the  Italian  Ministry  of  Education,  University 
and Research (MIUR). We would like to thank Dr. J. Derek 
Mason for his valuable contributions during the editing of this 
chapter.

References

Article 52(b) EPC. In Convention on the Grant 

of European Patents of October 5, 1973 
(European Patent Convention) (10th ed. 
2000), European Patent Office, Germany, 
ISBN 3-89605-038-9.

Article 53(b) EPC. In Convention on the Grant 

of European Patents of October 5, 1973 
(European Patent Convention) (10th ed. 
2000), European Patent Office, Germany, 
ISBN 3-89605-038-9.

Adams, D. J., Beniston, L. J., & Childs, P. R. N. 
(2009). Promoting creativity and innovation 
in biotechnology. Trends in Biotechnology, 
27, 445–447.

Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) 
World Intellectual Property Office (WIPO) 
Publication No. 223(E) (1996). ISBN 92-
805-0640-4.

Article 14. Scope of the Breeder’s Right. In Union 
International pour la Protection des Obtentions 
Végétales (UPOV) International Convention 
for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants 
of December 2, 1961, as revised in Geneva on 
November 10, 1972, on October 23, 1978, and 
on March 19, 1991. UPOV Publication No. 
221(E), ISBN 92-805-0332-4.

Article 14(5)(c). In Union International pour 

la Protection des Obtentions Végétales 
(UPOV) International Convention for the 
Protection of New Varieties of Plants of 
December 2, 1961, as revised in Geneva on 

November 10, 1972, on October 23, 1978, 
and on March 19, 1991. UPOV Publication 
No. 221(E), ISBN 92-805-0332-4.

Article 15. Exceptions to the breeder’s right. In 

Union International pour la Protection des 
Obtentions Végétales (UPOV) International 
Convention for the Protection of New 
Varieties of Plants of December 2, 1961, as 
revised in Geneva on November 10, 1972, 
on October 23, 1978, and on March 19, 
1991. UPOV Publication No. 221(E), ISBN 
92-805-0332-4.

Article 27(1). In Agreement on Trade Related 

Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS), World Intellectual Property Office 
(WIPO) Publication No. 223(E) (1996). 
ISBN 92-805-0640-4.

Article 27(2). In Agreement on Trade Related 

Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS), World Intellectual Property Office 
(WIPO) Publication No. 223(E) (1996). 
ISBN 92-805-0640-4.

Article 27(3)(b). In Agreement on Trade 

Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
Rights (TRIPS), World Intellectual Property 
Office (WIPO) Publication No. 223(E) 
(1996). ISBN 92-805-0640-4.

Article 7. In Agreement on Trade Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS), World Intellectual Property Office 
(WIPO) Publication No. 223(E) (1996). 
ISBN 92-805-0640-4.

Article 8. In Agreement on Trade Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS), World Intellectual Property Office 
(WIPO) Publication No. 223(E) (1996). 
ISBN 92-805-0640-4.

Atkinson, R., Beachy, R., Conway, G., Cordova, 

F., Fox, M., & Holbrook, K., et al. (2003). 
Public sector collaboration for agricultural 
management. Science, 301, 174–175.

AUTM. (2007). In the Public Interest: Nine 
Points to Consider in Licensing University 
Technology (http://www.autm.net/Nine_
Points_to_Consider.htm/).

Bent, S. A. (2006). History of patents and 

their use in Europe and the United States of 
America. Patent Protection of Plant-Related 
Innovations: Facts and issues. Copenhagen: 
International Seed Federation International 
Seminar.

Bentwich, M. (2010). Changing the rules of the 
game: Addressing the conflict between free 
access to scientific discovery and intellectual 
property rights. Nature Biotechnology, 28, 
137–140.

Bera, R. K. (2009). Harmonization of  

patent laws. Current Science, 96, 
457–458.

Berman, E. P. (2008). Why did universities 

start patenting? Institution-building and the 
road to the Bayh-Dole Act. Social Studies of 
Science, 38, 835–871.

537

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

Boettiger, S., & Bennett, A. (2007). PIPRA: 
A resource for collaborative intellectual 
property management in agriculture. Journal 
of Intellectual Property Rights, 12, 86–91.

Boettiger, S., Graff, G., Pardey, P. G., van 

Dusen, E., & Wright, B. D. (2004). 
Intellectual property rights for plant 
biotechnology: International aspects. In  
P. Christou & H. Klee (Eds.), Handbook of 
plant biotechnology (Vol. 2, pp. 1089–1113). 
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Brooks, H. (1993). Research universities and 

the social contract for science. In L. M. 
Branscomb (Ed.), Empowering technology: 
Implementing a U.S. Strategy (pp. 202–234). 
Boston: MIT Press.

Bubela, T. M., & Caulfield, T. (2010). Role and 

reality: Technology transfer at Canadian 
universities. Trends in Biotechnology, 
28 (9), 447–451.

Chi-Ham, C. L., Clark, K. L., & Bennett, A. 

(2010). The intellectual property landscape 
for gene suppression technologies in plants. 
Nature Biotechnology, 28, 32–36.

Cohen, J. I., Falconi, C., Komen, J., &  

Blakeney, M. (1998). Proprietary 
biotechnology inputs and international 
agricultural research. ISNAR Briefing Paper 
No. 39. The Hague: International Service  
for National Agricultural Research. www.
isnar.cgiar.org/publications/briefing/BP39.
htm/.

Cullet, P. (1999). Revision of the TRIPS 
agreement concerning the protection 
of plant varieties – lessons from India 
concerning the development of a sui generis 
system. Journal of World Intellectual 
Property, 2, 617–656.

Diamond v. Chakrabarty 447 U.S. 303, 206 

USPQ 193 (1980).

Donnenwirth, J., Grace, J., & Smith, S. (2004). 

Intellectual property rights, patents,  
plant variety protection and contracts:  
A perspective from the private sector. IP 
Strategy Today, 9, 19–34.

Eisenberg, R. S. (1996). Public research and 

private development: Patents and technology 
transfer in government-sponsored research. 
Virginia Law Review, 82, 1663–1727.

European Directive 98/44/CE on the 

protection of biotechnological inventions of 
July 6th, 1998, (1998) OJEC L213/13.
Ex parte Hibberd, (1985) 227 USPQ 443 
(USPTO Board of Patent Appeals and 
Interferences.

Ex parte Thomson, (1992) 24 USPQ2d 1618 

(USPTO Board of Patent Appeals and 
Interferences.

Fenton, G. M., Chi-Ham, C., & Boettiger, 
S. (2007). Freedom to operate: The law 
firm’s approach and role. In A. Krattiger, 
R. T. Mahoney, L. Nelsen, J. A. Thomson, 
A. B. Bennett, K. Satyanarayana, G. D. 
Graff, C. Fernandez & S. P. Kowalski (Eds.), 
Intellectual property management in health 
and agricultural innovation: A handbook 
of best practices (pp. 1363–1383). Oxford: 
MIHR. and PIPRA, Davis. Available online 
at www.ipHandbook.org/.

Fleck, B., & Baldock, C. (2003). Intellectual 

property protection for plant-related 
inventions in Europe. Nature Biotechnology, 
4, 834–838.

538

Friedman, Y. (2009). Intellectual property 

and biotechnology innovation: To protect 
or not protect? Journal of Commercial 
Biotechnology, 15, 285–286.

Geiger, R. (2004). Knowledge and money: 

Universities and the paradox of the 
marketplace. Stanford: Stanford University 
Press.

Graff, G., & Zilberman, D. (2001). Towards 
an intellectual property clearinghouse for 
agricultural biotechnology. IP Strategy 
Today, 3, 1–13.

Graff, G. D., Cullen, S. E., Bradford, K. J., 
Zilberman, D., & Bennett, A. B. (2003). 
The public-private structure of intellectual 
property ownership in agricultural 
biotechnology. Nature Biotechnology, 
21, 989–995.

Graff, G. D., Wright, B. D., Bennett, A. B., & 

Zilberman, D. (2004). Access to intellectual 
property is a major obstacle to developing 
transgenic horticultural crops. California 
Agriculture, 58, 120–126.

Harfouche, A., Grant, K., Selig, M., Tsai, D., 

& Meilan, R. (2010). Protecting innovation: 
Genomics-based intellectual property for 
the development of feedstock for second-
generation biofuels. Recent Patents on DNA 
& Gene Sequences 4 (2), 94–105.

Harvard College v. Canada (Commissioner of 
Patents) 4 S.C.R. 45, 2002 Supreme Court 
of Canada 76 (2002).

Heckenberger, M., Bohn, M., Klein, D., & 

Melchinger, A. E. (2005). Identification of 
essentially derived varieties obtained from 
biparental crosses of homozygous lines: II. 
Morphological distances and heterosis in 
comparison with simple sequence repeat and 
amplified fragment length polymorphism 
data in maize. Crop Science, 45, 1132–1140.
Huete-Perez, J. A. (2003). Agricultural IP and 

the public sector. Science, 302, 781–783.
In re LeGrice, 301 F.2d 929, 133 USPQ 365 

(U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals 
1962).

J.E.M. Ag Supply, Inc. v. Pioneer Hi-Bred 

International, Inc., 60 USPQ2d 1865, (2001).

Jayaraman, K. (2004). Illegal seeds overtake 

India’s cotton fields. Nature Biotechnology, 
22, 1333–1334.

Jefferson, R. (2007). Science as social 

enterprise: The CAMBIA BiOS Initiative. 
Innovations: Technology, Governance, 
Globalization, l, 13–44.

Kenny, M., & Patton, D. (2009). Reconsidering 

the Bayh-Dole Act and the Current 
University Invention Ownership Model. 
Research Policy, 38, 1407–1422.

Kock, M. A., Porzig, S., & Willnegger, E. (2006). 
The legal protection of plant-biotechnological 
inventions and plant varieties in light of the 
EC biopatent directive. International Review 
of Intellectual Property and Competition Law, 
37, 135–244.

Koo, B., Nottenberg, C., & Pardey, P. G. 

(2004). Plants and intellectual property: 
An international appraisal. Science, 306, 
1295–1297.

Kowalski, S. P., Ebora, R., Kryder, R. D., 
& Potter, R. (2002). Transgenic crops, 
biotechnology and ownership rights: What 
scientists need to know. The Plant journal, 
31, 407–421.

Krattiger, A. (2007). Freedom to operate, 

public sector research and product-
development partnerships: Strategies and 
risk-management options. In A. Krattiger, 
R. T. Mahoney, L. Nelsen, J. A. Thomson, 
A. B. Bennett, K. Satyanarayana, G. D. 
Graff, C. Fernandez & S. P. Kowalski (Eds.), 
Intellectual property management in health 
and agricultural innovation: A handbook 
of best practices (pp. 1317–1327). Oxford: 
MIHR. and PIPRA, Davis. Available online 
at www.ipHandbook.org/.

Le Buanec, B. (2004). Protection of plant-

related innovations: Evolution and current 
discussion. IP Strategy Today, 9, 1–18.

Le Buanec, B. (2005). Plant genetic resources 

and freedom to operate. Euphytica, 146, 1–8.

Lei, Z., Juneja, R., & Wright, B. D. (2009). 

Patents versus patenting: Implications 
of intellectual property protection for 
biological research. Nature Biotechnology, 
27, 36–40.

Lence, S. H., Hayes, D. J., McCunn, A., 

Smith, S., & Niebur, W. S. (2005). Welfare 
impacts of intellectual property protection 
in the seed industry. American Journal of 
Agricultural Economics, 87, 951–968.

McConnell, R. (2004). Developing genetic 

resources for the future: The long look back. 
Bio-Science Law Review, 7, 57–60.

Monsanto Canada, Inc. v. Schmeiser 1 S.C.R. 

902, 2004 Supreme Court of Canada 34 
(2004).

Mowery, D. C., Nelson, R. R., Sampat, B. N., 
& Ziedonis, A. A. (2004). Ivory Tower and 
Industrial Innovation. University-Industry 
Technology before and after the Bayh-Dole 
Act. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Mowery, D. C., & Sampat, B. N. (2001). 

Patenting and licensing university inventions: 
Lessons from the history of the Research 
Corporation. Industrial and Corporate 
Change, 10, 317–355.

Mowery, D. C., & Ziedonis, A. A. (2007). 
Academic patents and material transfer 
agreements: Substitutes or complements? 
Journal of Technology Transfer, 32, 157–172.
Official Journal of the European Patent Office 

(1999) 573.

Pardee, W. D. (2007). Protecting new plant 

varieties through PVP: Practical suggestions 
from a plant breeder for plant breeders. In 
A. Krattiger, R. T. Mahoney, L. Nelsen, J. A. 
Thomson, A. B. Bennett, K. Satyanarayana, 
G. D. Graff, C. Fernandez & S. P. Kowalski 
(Eds.), Intellectual property management 
in health and agricultural innovation: A 
handbook of best practices (pp. 981–987). 
Oxford: MIHR. and PIPRA, Davis. Available 
online at www.ipHandbook.org/.

Pardey, P. G., & Beintema, N. M. (2001). Slow 

magic: Agricultural R&D a century after 
Mendel. Washington, DC: Food Policy 
Report, International Food Policy Research 
Institute.

Pardey, P. G., Wright, B. D., Nottenburg, C., 
Binenbaum, E., and Zambrano, P. (2003). 
Intellectual property and developing 
countries: Freedom to operate in agricultural 
biotechnology. Biotechnology and Genetic 
Resource Policies, Brief 3, pp. 1–6. 
International Food Policy Research Institute, 
Washington, DC.

Intellectual property rights of biotechnologically improved plants

C H A P T E R   3 3

Patently transparent,  Nature Biotechnology, 

24, 474.

Pressman, L. (2006). The licensing of DNA 
patents by US academic institutions: An 
empirical survey. Nature Biotechnology, 
24, 31–39.

Price, S. C. (1999). Public and private plant 
breeding. Nature Biotechnology, 17, 938.

Qaim, M., & Traxler, G. (2005). Roundup 

Ready soybeans in Argentina: Farm level 
and aggregate welfare effects. Agricultural 
Economics, 32, 73–86.

Renault, C. S., Cope, J., Dix, M., & Hersey, K. 

(2007). A new technology transfer paradigm: 
How state universities can collaborate with 
industry. AUTM, 14, 13–26.

Rosenberg, N., & Nelson, R. R. (1994). 

American university and technical advance 
in industry. Research Policy, 23, 323–348.
Rule 23(c) EPC. In Convention on the Grant 
of European Patents of October 5, 1973  
and revised on December 9, 2004  
(European Patent Convention) (10th ed.), 
European Patent Office, Germany.  
ISBN 3-89605-038-9

Sechley, K. A., & Schroeder, H. (2002). 

Intellectual property protection of plant 

biotechnology inventions. Trends in 
Biotechnology, 20, 456–461.

Singh, A., Hallihosur, S., & Ranga, A. (2009). 

Changing landscape in biotechnology 
patenting. World Patent Information, 
31, 219–225.

Smith, J. S. C., Hussain, T., Jones, E. S., 

Graham, G., Podlich, D., & Wall, S., et al. 
(2008). Use of doubled haploids in maize 
breeding: Implications for intellectual 
property protection and genetic diversity  
in hybrid crops. Molecular Breeding, 
22, 51–59.

Smith, S. (2008). Intellectual property 

protection for plant varieties in the 21st 
century. Crop Science, 48, 1277–1290.

Smolders, W. (2005). Plant genetic resources 

for food and agriculture: Facilitated access or 
utility plants on plant varieties. IP Strategy 
Today, 13, 1–17.

Sterckx, S. (2010). Is the non-patentability 

of “Essentially Biological Processes” under 
threat? Journal of World Intellectual Property, 
13, 1–23.

Stevens, A. J. (2004). The enactment of Bayh–

Dole. Journal of Technology Transfer, 29, 
93–99.

Tripp, R., Louwaars, N., & Eaton, D. (2007). 

Plant variety protection in developing 
countries. A report from the field. Food 
Policy, 32, 354–371.

Union International pour la Protection des 

Obtentions Végétales (UPOV) International 
Convention for the Protection of New 
Varieties of Plants of December 2, 1961, as 
revised in Geneva on November 10, 1972, 
on October 23, 1978, and on March 19, 
1991. UPOV Publication No. 221(E). ISBN 
92-805-0332-4.

University and small business patent procedures 

Act, 35U.S.C. § 203 (1980).

Utility Guidelines. (2001) 66 Federal Registry 

1093.

Wright, B. D., Pardey, P. G., Nottenburg, 

C., and Bonwoo, K. (2007). Agricultural 
innovation: Investments and incentives, In 
R. Evenson & P. Pingali (Eds.), Handbook of 
agricultural economics, (Vol. III, pp. 2533–
2603). Amesterdam: Elsevier. (Chapter 48)

Written Description Guidelines. (2001) 66 

Federal Registry 1099.

539

Prospects for increased food production 
and poverty alleviation: What plant 
biotechnology can practically deliver  
and what it cannot

35

Martina Newell McGloughlin
Director, University of California Systemwide Biotechnology Research and Education  
Program (UCBREP), University of California Davis, California

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 551
Progress to Date  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 552
The Next Generation   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 554
Barriers to Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 557

Introduction

During  the  coming  decades,  food  and  agricultural  produc-
tion systems will need to be significantly enhanced to respond 
to a number of remarkable changes, such as a growing world 
population; increasing international competition; globalization; 
shifts  to  increased  meat  consumption  in  developing  coun-
tries  and  rising  consumer  demands  for  improved  food  qual-
ity,  safety,  health  enhancement,  and  convenience.  New  and 
innovative  techniques  will  be  required  to  ensure  an  ample 
supply of healthy food by improving the efficiency of the glo-
bal  agriculture  sector.  Innovation  is  essential  for  sustaining 
and  enhancing  agricultural  productivity.  This  involves  new, 
science-based products and processes that contribute reliable 
methods for improving quality, productivity, and environmen-
tal sustainability. Biotechnology has introduced a new dimen-
sion  to  such  innovation,  offering  efficient  and  cost-effective 
means to produce a diverse array of novel, value-added prod-
ucts and tools. It has the potential to improve qualitative and 
quantitative  aspects  of  food,  feed,  fiber,  and  biofuel  produc-
tion; reduce the dependency of agriculture on chemicals and 
fossil  fuels;  diminish  over-cultivation  and  erosion;  and  lower 
the cost of raw materials, all in an environmentally sustainable 
manner.  Commercialization  of  the  first  generation  of  prod-
ucts of recombinant DNA technology was another facet in a 
long  history  of  human  intervention  in  nature  for  agricultural 
and food production purposes. As such, the same parameters 
of  risk-based  assessment  should  apply.  Commercialization 
of  products  must  be  undertaken  within  a  regulatory  frame-
work  that  ensures  adequate  protection  of  the  consumer,  the 

environment,  and  alternate  production  systems,  while  not  
stymieing innovation.

In  a  world  whose  population  is  increasing  disproportion-
ally  in  disadvantaged  regions,  it  is  hard  to  envisage  feeding 
and  sustaining  these  numbers  in  a  livable  environment  with-
out the use of biotechnology. From 1800 onward, more food 
was  simply  produced  by  plowing  up  virgin  land  and  forest. 
The land area used for farming increased about five-fold up to 
the middle of the twentieth century in step with population 
increases.  The  Green  Revolution  put  a  brake  on  this  expan-
sion, increasing yields three-fold with limited need for further 
expansion. Since 1950, the proportion of the land devoted to 
farming has barely increased, even though the world popula-
tion doubled over the same period. We currently use at least 
half  the  available  good  quality  soil  for  agriculture,  with  the 
remainder  under  tropical  forests.  Couple  this  with  the  ever-
diminishing,  non-renewable  resources  and  the  compounding 
effects of climate change on the limitation of land usage and 
this leads to an obvious dilemma. Unless we can pull off a sec-
ond Green Revolution, increasing yield but limiting it to land 
currently used for farming, there will be further deterioration 
of  natural  habitats  and  biodiversity  that  may  threaten  more 
than our lifestyles.

During  the  global  food  crisis  in  2008,  which  was  errone-
ously  laid  disproportionately  on  the  shoulders  of  biofuel 
production  and  most  especially  grain  ethanol,  the  Gates 
Foundation  announced  $306  million  in  grants  to  boost  agri-
cultural yields in the developing world, with nearly $165 mil-
lion to replenish depleted soils in Africa. These efforts are not 
without  controversy:  critics  charge  that  western  philanthro-
pists  are  violating  African  “food  sovereignty”  and  promoting 
American  at  the  expense  of  peasant  farmers  knowledgeable 
about local practices. But local practices have yielded scarcity. 
A farmer in India grows three to four times as much food on 
the same amount of land as a farmer in Africa, and a farmer in 
China, roughly seven times as much.

The Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) reports that 
global  demand  for  food  could  easily  double  between  2000 

2012

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
DOI: 

10.1016/B978-0-12-381466-1.00035-3

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

and 2050, with a two-and-a-half- to three-fold increase in the 
poorest  countries  (FAO/WHO,  2004).  They  found  that  bio-
technology and genetic engineering of crops hold great promise 
for  agriculture  in  developing  countries.  The  report  noted  that 
more than 70% of the world’s poor still live in rural areas and 
depend  directly  on  agriculture  for  their  survival.  The  World 
Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 800 million people 
worldwide suffer from malnutrition. It is difficult to imagine a 
promising  alternative  to  biotechnology  and  industrial  agricul-
ture that will sustain such numbers without catastrophic conse-
quences. As far back as 2004 the Economic and Social Council 
of the United Nations (ECOSOC) noted that most developing 
countries  are  unlikely  to  meet  the  Millennium  Development 
Goals without a clear political commitment to making science 
and technology among the top priorities in their development 
agenda (Economic and Social Council Resolution, 2004). FAO 
members  called  for  strengthening  efforts  in  maximizing  the 
benefits  and  minimizing  the  potential  adverse  consequences 
of  biotechnology,  through  the  development  of  a  multidiscipli-
nary, cross-sectoral program in conjunction with the committee 
on Agriculture and the council. In response, the Biotechnology 
Applications  in  Food  and  Agriculture,  Forestry,  and  Fisheries 
Priority  Area  for  Interdisciplinary  Action  (Biotech-PAIA) 
was  established  and  an  Interdepartmental  Working  Group 
on  Biotechnology  was  set  up  to  oversee  its  planning  and 
implementation.  Prior  to  that  the  U.S.  National  Academy  of 
Sciences, joined by six other academies from around the world 
(Royal Society of London, Third World Academy of Sciences, 
and  national  academies  of  Brazil,  China,  India,  and  Mexico) 
issued a report in 2000 declaring that biotechnology should be 
used to increase the production of main food staples, improve 
the efficiency of production, reduce the environmental impact 
of agriculture, and provide access to food for small-scale farm-
ers. Without question agricultural research of all forms holds an 
important key to meeting these needs, as the FAO noted bio-
technology can accelerate conventional breeding programs and 
may  offer  solutions  where  conventional  methods  fail.  That  is 
a  positive  for  growers,  consumers,  and  clearly  contributes  to 
environmental sustainability.

Progress to Date

Modifications  of  crop  plants  can  be  organized  into  two 
broad-based,  non-mutually  exclusive  categories:  those  that 
benefit  the  producer;  and  those  that  benefit  the  consumer. 
Modifications that protect the crop from either biotic or abi-
otic stress (biotic stress is damage by predators such as insects 
and nematodes, and disease agents such as viruses, fungi, bac-
teria, and weeds; abiotic stress comes in the form of drought, 
cold, heat, and poor soils) or increase total crop yield benefit 
the  producer,  and  are  called  “input  traits.”  The  majority  of 
modified crops in commercial use fit in this group. Scientists 
have  just  begun  to  tap  the  large  potential  of  biotechnology 
to  produce  varieties  of  plants  that  confer  a  wide  spectrum 
of  advantages  to  consumers.  These  varieties  are  modified 
with  “output  traits.”  Developing  and  commercializing  plants 
with  these  improved  traits  involves  overcoming  a  variety  of 
technical,  regulatory,  and  perception  challenges  inherent  in 

perceived and real challenges of complex modifications. Both 
the  panoply  of  traditional  plant  breeding  tools  and  mod-
ern  biotechnology-based  techniques  are  required  to  produce 
plants with the desired quality traits. In addition to the older 
gene  transfer  technology  where  mostly  single  genes  were 
modified, newer techniques such as the use of RNA interfer-
ence to manipulate endogenous genes, and especially the use 
of transcription factors to modulate whole suites of genes and 
metabolic networks will become increasingly important tools 
in the effort to introduce valuable traits. The latter approach 
is already a major focus in multigenic and quantitative traits, 
such as developing stress tolerance crops and modifying paths 
for improving nutritional characteristics.

Since  the  first  biotech  crop  was  commercialized  in  1996, 
genetically  modified  (GM)  crops  have  grown  commercially 
by 15.4 million farmers in 29 countries on 366 million acres 
(James, 2011). More than half of the 63 countries engaged in 
biotech research, development, and production are developing 
countries. Whereas North America still leads with U.S. acre-
age accounting for about 45% of the total acreage worldwide, 
19  of  the  29  countries  are  developing  countries,  and  of  the 
15.4  million  farmers  that  grew  these  crops,  a  full  14.4  mil-
lion (90%) are resource-poor LDC farmers. The most recent 
countries joined this group in 2009 including South America 
(Uruguay,  Paraguay,  and  Bolivia)  and  Africa  (Egypt  and 
Burkina  Faso).  In  2010,  three  countries  planted  approved 
biotech crops for the first time and Germany resumed plant-
ing. Pakistan planted Bt cotton, as did Myanmar, and notably 
Sweden  (the  first  Scandinavian  country  to  plant  a  biotech 
crop)  planted  “Amflora,”  a  potato  with  high  amylase  starch 
for industrial applications. Germany also resumed adoption of 
biotech crops by planting Amflora for a net gain of four coun-
tries in 2010 (James, 2011). The first generation of such crops 
focused largely on input agronomic traits; the next generation 
will focus more on value-added output traits. In the next dec-
ade  some  studies  estimate  the  global  value  of  biotech  crops 
will increase nearly five-fold to $210 billion.

Agricultural  biotechnology  has  helped  farmers  around  the 
world boost their productivity and grow crops in more ecologi-
cally healthy fields while allowing much more efficient use of 
resources.  This  technology  allows  reduced  tillage,  which  cuts 
down  on  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  water  runoff,  machinery 
use, and soil erosion. Meanwhile, the benefits experienced by 
larger  scale  farmers  in  both  industrialized  nations  and  lesser 
developed  countries  are  already  considerable.  Research  by 
Brookes  and  Barfoot  (2005,  2008)  shows  that  in  the  first  11 
years of GM crop cultivation, global net farm income increased 
by $33.8 billion — the environmental footprint associated with 
pesticide use was reduced by 15.4%, and there was a reduction 
in carbon dioxide emissions in 2006 equivalent to taking nearly 
6.6  million  cars  off  the  road  for  a  year.  More  recent  assess-
ments indicate a 35% reduction in the footprint for corn and 
25% in the footprint for cotton.

An  earlier  study  by  researchers  at  Denmark’s  National 
Environmental Research Institute (NERI) monitored fields of 
conventional and Glyphosate-tolerant sugar beet. They found 
that  the  GM  plots  supported  more  plant  species  and  insects 
than the conventional plots, thus providing more food for birds 
and other types of wildlife. Use of transgenic crops increased 

552

Prospects for increased food production and poverty alleviation

C H A P T E R   3 5

biodiversity  compared  to  traditional  herbicide  treatments 
(Elmegaard  and  Pedersen,  2001).  Proper  measurements  in 
the  UK  indicate  that  no-till  (directly  compared  with  plowed 
organic  fields  on  the  same  farm  and  using  the  same  farmer) 
uses only one-third the fossil fuel, uses land much more effi-
ciently, reduces nitrate (and pesticide) runoff by at least half, 
and increases soil carbon that is lost when plowed. In addition, 
bird  territories  are  orders  of  magnitude  higher;  soil  erosion 
almost  vanishes;  soil  invertebrates  such  as  earthworms  soar 
in  numbers,  as  do  predatory  arthropods  to  keep  pests  down. 
Organic fields in the UK see a three-fold rise in weeds on con-
version that necessitates use of the plow (Trewavas, 2001).

Therefore  reduced-till  agriculture  means  healthier  soil 
with reduced erosion and far less carbon dioxide release. Soil 
carbon  sequestration  will  be  an  important  part  of  any  inter-
national strategy to mitigate the increase in atmospheric CO2 
concentrations.  By  adopting  more  sustainable  management 
practices,  agriculture  may  play  a  large  part  in  enhancing  soil 
carbon  sequestration  across  the  globe.  One  way  is  by  reduc-
ing  the  amount  of  conventional  tillage;  after  long-term  till-
age  soil  carbon  stocks  are  depleted.  In  general,  cultivation  is 
not  a  sustainable  practice.  It  is  energy  intensive  and  exposes 
soil to wind and water erosion. It allows rain to compact the 
soil, increasing the oxygen content and allowing organic mat-
ter to oxidize away. In turn, lower organic matter in the soil 
allows more compaction and more nutrient loss. Additionally, 
in  warmer  and  drier  climates  evaporative  water  loss  may  be 
reduced as residue remains on the soil surface creating a wet-
ter and cooler soil microclimate.

The  2008  Brookes  and  Barfoot  study  indicated  that,  with 
the adoption of Br cotton and maize, pesticide use fell by over 
286 million kg (7.8%; which is equivalent to about 40% of 
the  annual  volume  of  pesticide  active  ingredient  applied  to 
arable  crops  in  the  EU).  Less  spraying  means  fewer  tractor 
passes, contributing to lower carbon dioxide emissions. Insect-
resistant  Bt  maize  also  has  a  collateral  effect  —  less  insect 
damage results in much less infection by fungal molds, which 
reduces  mycotoxins  that  are  known  health  risks  that  may 
result in the development of liver cancer in humans and ani-
mals. Bt corn resulted in a 90% reduction in mycotoxin fun-
gal fumonisins. In addition to the obvious health benefits, the 
total U.S. economic benefit is estimated to be approximately 
$23  million  annually  (Wu,  2006).  The  only  “natural”  way  to 
control those fungi is the use of copper sulfate, which has one 
of the highest toxic hazard ratings of acceptable pesticides and 
selects for antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the soil.

A 2005 paper from the Royal Society suggested that inten-
sive  high-yield  farming  on  less  land  is  better  for  wildlife  than 
“wildlife  friendly,”  less  efficient  farming  (Green  et  al.,  2005). 
The  paper  provided  convincing  evidence  that  without  yield 
increase land use will double by 2050, and this effect will be 
especially  significant  in  developing  countries  like  China  and 
India where, without greater productivity, they will need four 
times  the  land  area  to  support  their  expanding  populations. 
They show that in Latin America where increased productivity 
was achieved there was a significant decrease in deforestation; 
those producers with greatest yield increase had lower land use.
While  North  America  remains  the  epicenter  for  cutting 
edge GM research, other regions, such as China, are emerging 

as contenders on the global stage. Agricultural science is now 
China’s  fastest  growing  research  field,  with  China’s  share  of 
global publications in agricultural science growing from 1.5% 
in  1999  to  5%  in  2008  (James,  2011).  China’s  early  experi-
ence  with  Bt  cotton  demonstrated  the  direct  and  indirect 
benefits of its investment in plant biotechnology research and 
product  development.  In  2002,  Bt  cotton  was  grown  in  2.1 
million hectares by around five million farmers. At that time 
the average Bt cotton farmer had reduced pesticide sprayings 
for the Asian bollworm from 20 to 6 times per year. Pesticide 
applications  were  reduced  by  59–80%  compared  to  conven-
tional cotton (assessed in 3 years of use) and Bt cotton farm-
ers produced a kilogram of cotton for 28% less cost than the 
farmers  using  non-Bt  varieties.  Net  revenues  increased  by 
$357–549 ha compared to conventional cotton (assessed in 3 
years  of  use;  Huang  et  al.,  2002).  Ultimately,  however,  it  is 
the social benefits from reducing exposure to insecticides and 
saving lives that is the real payoff.

The  demand  for  productivity-enhancing  technologies  by 
farmers and for cost savings by consumers, the rate of increase 
in  research  investments,  and  success  with  Bt  cotton  suggest 
that  products  from  China’s  research  program  will  one  day 
become widespread inside China. Indeed, China is emerging as 
one  of  the  trendsetters  in  the  adoption  of  novel  traits  as  the 
country  is  setting  the  pace  for  new  approvals  for  Bt  rice  and 
phytase  maize  that  were  accepted  on  November  27,  2009 
(James,  2011).  Rice  is  the  principal  staple  for  much  of  the 
world and maize is the largest animal feed source. Bt rice has 
the potential to increase yields up to 8%, decrease pesticide use 
by 80% (17 kg/ha), and generate $4 billion in benefits annually. 
The phytase approval is a major step forward in approvals as it 
is the first since the Flavr Savr tomato focusing on a “quality” 
trait. However, it is far more than this both literally and figura-
tively since this single trait addresses several issues from nutri-
tional to environmental, as will be expanded on later.

The  first  GM  crop  to  be  released  for  commercial  cultiva-
tion  in  India  was  Bt  cotton,  which  was  developed  by  the 
Maharashtra  Seed  Company  (Mahyco)  in  partnership  with 
Monsanto.  The  approval,  given  in  2002,  came  after  several 
years  of  field  trials  following  the  biosafety  procedures  laid 
down by the government. Three cotton hybrids were granted 
permission  for  field  sowing  in  six  states  for  three  years.  For 
the  first  season,  farmer  demand  for  Bt  cotton  seed  was  very 
high; it is estimated that 44,500 hectares of certified Bt cot-
ton were planted by nearly 55,000 farmers. However, the ini-
tial events thrived in regions that resembled the area in which 
they were originally developed, but did not perform as well in 
growing regions with disparate climate challenges. It was not 
until  the  trait  was  introgressed  into  locally  adapted  varieties 
that  Bt  cotton  thrived  in  all  growing  regions.  Between  2005 
and  2006  the  biggest  impact  of  this  approach  was  realized. 
From  3  Bt  cotton  hybrids  in  2002  to  62  in  2006  the  rapid 
deployment of Bt cotton hybrids based on different agro-cli-
matic  conditions  resulted  in  decreased  insecticide  sprays  by 
39%, and increased yield by 31%, resulting in increased profit 
per hectare of 88% or $250. Over this period of rapid deploy-
ment  the  average  cotton  yields  increased  from  308  kg/ha  to 
450 kg/ha of lint (of this increase 50% could be attributed to 
Bt technology). Also over this period raw cotton exports rose 

553

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

from 0.9 million bales in 2005 to 4.7 million in 2006 and 5.9 
by 2007 (Huang et al., 2002). By 2009 5.6 million resource-
poor farmers in India planted 8.4 million hectares of Bt cot-
ton,  equivalent  to  87%  of  the  9.6  million  hectare  national 
cotton crop. The increase from 50,000 hectares when Bt cot-
ton was first commercialized in 2002 to 8.4 million hectares 
in  2009  represents  an  unprecedented  168-fold  increase  in  8 
years. Between 2002 and 2008, Bt cotton generated economic 
benefits for farmers valued at $5.1 billion, halved insecticide 
requirements, contributed to the doubling of yield, and trans-
formed  India  from  a  cotton  importer  to  a  major  exporter. 
Choudhary  contends  that  the  deployment  of  Bt  cotton  over 
the last eight years has resulted in India becoming the number 
one exporter of cotton globally, as well as the second largest 
cotton producer in the world (Choudhary and Gaur, 2010).

However,  despite  the  success  of  Bt  cotton,  the  expected 
successful  commercialization  of  Bt  eggplant  never  mate-
rialized  as  an  effective  opposition  managed  to  scupper  its 
approval.  Bt  eggplant,  or  brinjal  as  it  is  referred  to  in  India, 
was found to be effective against fruit and shoot borer (FSB), 
with 98% insect mortality in shoots and 100% in fruits com-
pared  to  less  than  30%  mortality  in  non-Bt  counterparts. 
The  multi-location  research  trials  confirmed  that  Bt  brinjal 
required, on average, 77% less insecticides than non-Bt coun-
terparts  for  control  of  FSB,  and  42%  less  for  the  control  of 
all insect pests of brinjal. The benefits of Bt brinjal translate 
to an average increase of 116% in marketable fruits over con-
ventional hybrids, and a 166% increase over popular open-pol-
linated  varieties  (Choudhary  and  Gaur,  2008).  Furthermore, 
the significant decrease in insecticide usage reduced the farm-
ers’  exposure  to  insecticides  and  resulted  in  a  substantial 
decline in pesticide residues on brinjal fruits. Scientists have 
estimated that Bt brinjal will deliver farmers a net economic 
benefit ranging from $330 to 397 per acre with national ben-
efits  to  India  exceeding  $400  million  per  year.  However,  in 
February  2010,  the  environmental  minister  announced  a 
moratorium  citing  that  “There  is  no  overriding  food  security 
argument for Bt brinjal. Our objective is to restore public con-
fidence  and  trust  in  Bt  brinjal”  (Bricknel,  2010).  This  state-
ment  clearly  demonstrated  that  the  decision  was  not  based 
on scientific analysis or risk assessment but rather on unsup-
ported and ill-defined concerns which should never form the 
basis of regulatory oversight.

A  number  of  other  multi-institutional  projects  have  also 
been  launched  in  India,  including  the  development  of  trans-
genics  for  resistance  to  geminiviruses  in  cotton,  mung  bean, 
and tomato; resistance to rice tungro disease; development of a 
nutritionally enhanced potato with a balanced amino acid com-
position; and development of molecular methods for heterosis 
breeding. Other transgenic crops that are awaiting approval for 
commercial  cultivation  include  transgenic  herbicide-tolerant 
mustard  hybrids  and  nutritionally  enhanced  potato  varieties. 
Despite  the  resounding  success  of  Bt  cotton,  and  given  the 
experience with Bt brinjal, it is difficult to be optimistic about 
the prospects for commercialization of food crops.

A  somewhat  similar  but  even  more  insidious  situation 
was  experienced  by  Egypt.  In  2008,  Egypt  became  the  first 
country  in  the  Arab  world  (and  only  one  of  three  in  Africa) 
to  commercialize  biotech  crops  by  planting  700  hectares  of 

Bt  yellow  maize.  The  variety  commercialized,  Ajeeb-YG, 
is  a  cross  between  MON  810  and  an  Egyptian  maize  variety 
with resistance to three corn borer pests. The reason that the 
amount was so low can in part be attributed to the fact that 
France’s  President  Sarkozy  had  intimated  that  Egypt’s  deal 
with France may be in jeopardy if they pursued growing their 
approved Bt maize.

The Next Generation

The  vast  majority  of  products  approved  to  date  are  in  the 
area  of  agronomic  traits,  most  specifically  biotic  stress.  The 
principal focus in the immediate future will remain on agro-
nomic traits, especially in the area of pest control, but with an 
increasing interest in abiotic stress tolerance, which is gaining 
prominence as external pressures from climate change to land 
use change are rising.

On  the  biotic  stress  tolerance  side  the  focus  is  expanding 
to multitiered control systems. This, in theory, serves a dou-
ble  advantage:  primarily  expanding  the  effectiveness  of  the 
broad based resistance events, but also allowing more effective 
management of the resistance trait since there is less selective 
pressure  when  genes  are  stacked.  SmartStax,  an  eight-trait 
event  developed  through  collaboration  between  Monsanto 
and Dow, takes advantage of multiple modes of insect protec-
tion and herbicide tolerance against above- and below-ground 
insects  and  provides  broad  herbicide  tolerance,  including 
Yieldgard  VT  Triple  (Monsanto),  Herculex  Xtra  (Dow), 
RoundUp  Ready  2  (Monsanto),  and  Liberty  Link  (Dow). 
SmartStax is currently available for corn, but cotton, soybean, 
and specialty crop variations are to be released. It is estimated 
that  this  should  require  only  5%  refuge  acres  as  opposed  to 
the  20%  required  of  older  technologies  to  mitigate  against 
pest tolerance (Monsanto News Release, 2010).

On  the  second  area  of  agronomic  traits,  namely  abiotic 
stress,  there  is  a  meta-issue  that  overlays  much  of  the  indi-
vidual efforts — climate change. This poses a real challenge in 
terms of available agricultural land and fresh water use. Apart 
from  the  obvious  effects,  the  decline  of  crop  yields,  ocean 
acidification, poor nutrition and abiotic stress, population dis-
placement, and threatened ecosystems are effects underlined 
by the Stern Report (Stern, 2006) as potential consequences 
of  climate  change.  In  addition  there  are  also  broader,  more 
systemic  effects  of  drought  beyond  food  insecurity,  such  as 
decreased household income, the loss of assets due to slaugh-
ter  of  livestock,  health  threats  due  to  the  lack  of  water  for 
hygiene  and  household  uses,  environmental  degradation,  and 
less sustainable land management .

These effects should be considered in the light of growing 

population levels.

To feed the overall population, the world will have to dou-
ble its rate of agricultural production over the next 25 years, 
despite  having  already  quadrupled  it  in  the  last  50  years. 
Severe  drought  accounts  for  half  of  the  world’s  food  emer-
gencies  annually  (World  Bank,  2007).  In  2003,  the  World 
Food  Program  spent  $565  million  in  response  to  drought  in 
Sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA).  In  this  context  solutions  must 
be  developed  to  adapt  crops  to  existing  but  also  evolving 

554

Prospects for increased food production and poverty alleviation

C H A P T E R   3 5

conditions, such as marginal soils or harsher conditions (cold, 
heat,  drought,  and  salinity).  The  agriculture  sector  is  both  a 
contributor  and  provider  of  potential  solutions  to  this  phe-
nomenon.  It  impacts  two  of  the  principal  components  of 
climate  change:  greenhouse  gases  and  water.  Agriculture 
is  a  major  source  of  the  former  emissions.  Practices  such  as 
deforestation,  cattle  feedlots,  and  use  of  fertilizer  currently 
account  for  about  25%  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  When 
broken down — this amounts to 14% of total carbon dioxide 
emission, 48% of methane, and 52% of all nitrous oxide emis-
sions  (Stern,  2006).  In  addition  this  sector  uses  a  significant 
amount of available fresh water; approximately 70% of water 
currently consumed by humans is used in agriculture, and this 
is likely to increase as temperatures rise. The impact between 
resource-poor  LDCs  and  developed  countries  is  likely  to  be 
asymmetrical.

Given the potential impacts of climate change on the range 
and extent of agricultural productivity and the impact of agri-
cultural  practices  on  global  warming,  techniques  should  play 
a  substantial  part  in  mitigating  against  climate  change.  This 
is  especially  relevant  in  emerging  countries  where  producers 
and consumers are subjected more to the vagaries of climate 
fluctuations than in the west, where there is a greater ability 
to  respond  to  the  effects  and  manage  resources.  Green  bio-
technology offers a set of tools that can help producers limit 
greenhouse gas emissions as well as adapting their agricultural 
techniques to shifting climates. The three major contributions 
of green biotechnology to the mitigation of the impact of cli-
mate  change  are  greenhouse  gas  reduction,  crop  adaptation 
(environmental  stress,  changing  niches),  and  protection  and 
yield increase in less desirable and marginal soils.

On  the  first  of  these  issues,  greenhouse  gas  reduction  in 
addition  to  carbon  dioxide  agriculture  contributes  to  two  of 
the  other  major  gases;  indeed,  one  of  them  is  nitrous  oxide, 
which  has  a  global  warming  potential  of  about  300  times 
that of carbon dioxide. In addition, nitrous oxides stay in the 
atmosphere  for  a  considerable  period.  Nitrous  oxide  is  pro-
duced  through  bacterial  degradation  of  applied  nitrogen  fer-
tilizer. In addition, fertilizer can contribute to eutrophication 
at ground level so its reduction is desirable on several levels. 
However,  nitrogen  is  essential  for  crop  production,  because 
it  is  quantitatively  the  most  essential  nutrient  for  plants  and 
a  major  factor  limiting  crop  productivity.  One  of  the  criti-
cal  steps  limiting  the  efficient  use  of  nitrogen  is  the  ability 
of  plants  to  acquire  it  from  applied  fertilizer.  Therefore,  the 
development of crop plants that absorb and use nitrogen more 
efficiently  can  serve  both  the  plant  and  the  environment. 
Arcadia Biosciences of Davis, California, developed nitrogen-
efficient  crops  by  introducing  a  barley  AlaAT  (alanine  ami-
notransferase)  into  both  rice  and  canola.  Arcadia’s  Nitrogen 
Use Efficiency (NUE) technology produces plants with yields 
that  are  equivalent  to  conventional  varieties,  but  require  sig-
nificantly  less  nitrogen  fertilizer  because  the  AlaAT  gene 
allows more efficient use. Compared with controls, transgenic 
plants  also  demonstrated  significant  changes  in  key  metabo-
lites  and  total  nitrogen  content,  confirming  increased  nitro-
gen  uptake  efficiency.  This  technology  has  the  potential  to 
reduce the amount of nitrogen fertilizer that is lost by farm-
ers every year from leaching into the air, soil, and waterways. 

In  addition  to  environmental  pressures,  nitrogen  costs  can  
represent  a  significant  portion  of  a  farmer's  input  costs  and 
can  significantly  impact  farmer  profitability.  Farmers  spend 
$60  billion  annually  for  150  million  tons  of  fertilizer.  This 
technology  has  been  licensed  to  DuPont  for  maize  and  to 
Monsanto for application in canola.

The  second  area  where  green  technology  can  help  in  a 
changing  climate  is  crop  adaptation  to  environmental  stress 
and  changing  niches.  Under  stress  plants  will  divert  energy 
into  survival  instead  of  producing  biomass  and  reproduc-
tion, so addressing this impact should have substantial effect 
on  yield.  In  addition,  improved  stress  tolerance  allows  an 
expanded growing season (especially earlier planting) and fur-
ther  reduces  yield  variability  and  grower  financial  risk.  The 
most critical of these stresses is water. One of the most effec-
tive methods of addressing water limitation problems (irriga-
tion)  unfortunately  is  also  one  of  the  major  causes  of  arable 
land  degradation.  It  is  estimated  that  24.7  million  acres  of 
farmland worldwide is lost each year due to salinity build-up 
resulting from over irrigation. Crops are now limited by salin-
ity  on  40%  of  the  world's  irrigated  land  (25%  in  the  United 
States).  To  address  the  extreme  end  of  irrigation  impact 
Eduardo  Blumwald  at  University  of  California  Davis  used 
AtNHX1, the most abundant vacuolar Na/H antiporter in 
Arabidopsis  thaliana,  which  mediates  the  transport  of  Na 
and  K  into  the  vacuole.  By  over-expressing  this  vacuolar 
Na/H  antiporter,  transgenic  tomatoes  were  able  to  grow, 
flower, and produce fruit in the presence of 200 mM sodium 
chloride (Sottosanto et al., 2007). Arcadia Biosciences intro-
duced this gene into economically important crops.

Even  at  a  more  moderate  level  of  impact  it  is  estimated 
that  about  70–80  million  acres  in  the  United  States  suffer 
yield  losses  due  to  moderate  water  stress.  The  most  critical 
time for water stress is near pollination and flowering, where 
yields with or without irrigation can vary by up to 100%. This 
effect  is  clearly  demonstrable  in  dry  land  production  where 
yields  can  be  cut  in  half  in  the  absence  of  irrigation.  At  this 
time about 15% of U.S. maize acres are irrigated. Given the 
negative  effective  and  cost  of  irrigation,  it  is  estimated  that 
20  million  acres  in  the  United  States  would  benefit  from 
a  drought  tolerance  gene  that  gives  a  10%  yield  increase.  It 
would also allow shifting of high-value crops into production 
on more marginal land.

One of the first commercialized products to have included 
a  “yield  gene”  is  Monsanto’s  second  generation  Roundup 
Ready  2  Yield®  soybeans,  which  include  the  Glyphosate-
tolerant  trait  and  was  developed  using  extensive  gene  map-
ping  to  identify  specific  DNA  regions  that  segregated  with 
yield  increase.  It  is  a  perfect  example  of  the  power  of  com-
bining  recombinant  DNA  technology  with  genomics  tools. 
Monsanto claims that following four years of field trials across 
six  states  in  the  United  States  showed  7–11%  higher  yields, 
compared to the first generation of Roundup Ready soybeans. 
At  the  National  Technical  Biosafety  Committee  (CTNBio) 
meeting  in  Brazil  in  August  2010,  the  committee  approved 
the Bt-enhanced version of this product for planting in Brazil 
(Monsanto News Release, 2010).

As noted, transcription factors are some of the most versa-
tile  tools  employed  in  developing  stress-tolerant  plants.  One 

555

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

of the most versatile classes of transcription factors regarding 
environmental  response  is  the  dehydration-responsive  ele-
ment  binding  (DREB)  protein  transcription  factors,  which 
are  involved  in  the  biotic  stress  signaling  pathway.  They  can 
also  activate  as  many  as  12  resistant  functional  genes  rely-
ing  on  DRE  members  of  cis-regulation  under  adverse  condi-
tions (e.g., rd29, cor15, and rd17) and cause proline content 
to  rise  enabling  plants  to  improve  in  many  traits  such  as 
drought,  freezing,  and  salt  tolerance.  It  has  been  possible  to 
engineer stress tolerance in transgenic plants by manipulating 
the expression of DREBs (Agarwal et al., 2006). One DREB 
isolated  from  Arabidopsis  has  improved  drought  tolerance 
by  increasing  productivity  by  at  least  two-fold  during  severe 
water  stress.  In  Monsanto  field  trials  using  this  approach, 
maize yields have increased under water stress by up to 30%.

Other  approaches  include  modification  of  individual  genes 
involved  in  stress  response  and  cell  signaling.  For  example, 
drought-tolerant  canola  engineered  to  reduce  the  levels  of 
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), a key stress-related pro-
tein in many organisms, shows relative yield increases of up to 
44% compared to control varieties. A subset of the transcrip-
tion  factor’s  homeodomain  leucine  zipper  proteins  (HDZip) 
plays a role in regulating adaptation responses including devel-
opmental  adjustment  to  environmental  cues  such  as  water 
stress in plants (Deng et al., 2006). One of these effectors is 
abscisic  acid  (ABA),  an  important  plant  regulator  controlling 
many  environmental  responses  including  stomata  movement, 
which  is  modulated  by  the  DREB  elements.  Some  work  is 
being done on modifying HDZip directly and others are work-
ing indirectly such as downregulating farnesyltransferase, a sig-
naling  system  in  the  production  of  abscisic  acid  and  stomata 
control that results in stomata closure and water retention.

that  delayed  drought-induced 

Eduardo  Blumwald  is  also  working  on  modifying  basic 
acid  to  enhance  the  tolerance  of  plants  to  water  deficiency 
by  delaying  the  drought-induced  leaf  senescence  and  abscis-
sion during the stress episode. Using tobacco plants express-
ing an isopentenyltransferase (IPT) gene under the control of 
a  stress-  and  maturation-induced  promoter  (PSARK),  they 
showed 
leaf  senescence 
resulted  in  remarkable  drought-tolerant  phenotypes,  as  well 
as  minimal  yield  loss  when  plants  were  watered  with  only 
30%  of  the  water  used  under  controlled  conditions  (Rivero 
et  al.,  2009).  This  is  now  being  introduced  into  rice  among 
other  crops.  This  work  is  done  in  conjunction  with  Arcadia 
Biosciences. In addition Bayer CropScience, Pioneer Hi-Bred, 
BASF,  and  Dow  among  others,  are  conducting  research  on 
maize,  cotton,  canola,  and  rice  to  develop  a  new  generation 
of  stress-tolerant,  high-performance  crop  varieties.  Clearly 
stress-tolerant  traits  are  of  paramount  importance  in  LDCs, 
especially  in  SSA  and  Asia.  Major  efforts  are  already  under-
way on this front. The partnership, known as Water Efficient 
Maize for Africa (WEMA), was formed in response to a grow-
ing call by African farmers, leaders, and scientists to address 
the  devastating  effects  of  drought  on  small-scale  farmers. 
Frequent  drought  leads  to  crop  failure,  hunger,  and  poverty. 
Climate  change  can  only  aggravate  this  situation  (African 
Agricultural Technology Association, 2007).

On the other end of the spectrum of climate change impact 
is flooding due to changing rain patterns and rising sea levels. 

This is already a major cause of rice crop loss. It is estimated 
that 4 million tons of rice, which is sufficient to feed 30 mil-
lion  people,  are  lost  every  year  because  of  flooding.  Rice  is 
not grown in flooded fields by necessity but to control weeds; 
however,  most  rice  varieties  die  after  more  than  three  days 
of  complete  submergence.  FR13A  is  one  rice  variety  that 
researchers  know  can  tolerate  flooding  for  longer  periods, 
but  conventional  breeding  failed  to  create  an  event  that  was 
acceptable  to  farmers.  The  Ronald  laboratory  at  University 
of California Davis cloned the submergence tolerance (Sub1) 
locus  from  this  resistance  variety  using  a  map-based  cloning 
approach. The Sub1 locus encodes three putative transcription 
regulators, one of which increases dramatically in response to 
oxygen  deprivation  in  Sub1  seedlings;  whereas  Sub1C  levels 
decrease.  Transgenic  lines  over-expressing  the  Sub1A-1  gene 
have been introgressed into a submergence intolerant line and 
display enhanced submergence tolerance (Ki-Hong, 2010).

There is also some research in the final abiotic stress focus 
area,  namely  expansion  of  crops  into,  and  increased  yield 
from,  less  desirable  and  marginal  soils.  For  example,  a  gene 
that produces citric acid in roots can protect plants from soils 
contaminated  with  aluminum  as  it  binds  to  the  contaminant 
preventing  uptake  by  the  root  system  (Lopez-Bucio  et  al.,  
2000).  Genes  such  as  these  allow  crops  to  be  cultivated  in 
hostile  soils  and  temperatures,  increasing  geographic  range 
while reducing potential impact on fragile ecosystems.

All  of  this  is  exciting  and  very  relevant,  but  research  in 
abiotic  stress  tolerance  is  still  an  input  trait.  The  first  gen-
eration of biotechnology crops focused largely on those input 
agronomic traits, and the next generation will focus more on 
value-added  output  traits.  This  will  include  identifying  and 
isolating  genes  and  metabolites  that  will  make  the  enhance-
ment of valuable traits possible, with some of the later com-
pounds  produced  in  mass  quantities  for  niche  markets.  Two 
of  the  more  promising  markets  are  improved  nutrition 
including  nutraceuticals,  or  so-called  “functional  foods,”  and 
plants developed as bioreactors (production factories) for the 
commercial  level  production  of  valuable  proteins  and  com-
pounds,  a  field  known  as  plant  molecular  farming  (Newell-
McGloughlin,  2005).  Functional  foods  are  defined  as  any 
modified  food  or  food  ingredient  that  may  provide  a  health 
benefit beyond the traditional nutrients it contains. Scientific 
evidence is accumulating to support the role of phytochemi-
cals and functional foods in the prevention and treatment of 
disease.  Epidemiological  research  has  shown  a  positive  asso-
ciation  with  dietary  intake  of  food  components.  Developing 
plants with improved quality traits involves overcoming a vari-
ety of technical challenges inherent to metabolic engineering 
programs.  Both  traditional  plant  breeding  and  biotechnology 
techniques are needed to produce plants carrying the desired 
quality  traits.  Examples  include  improvement  of  nutritional 
quality  at  the  macro-  (protein,  carbohydrates,  lipids,  fiber) 
and  micro-level  (vitamins,  minerals,  phytochemicals),  and 
amelioration  of  anti-nutrients,  allergens,  and  toxins  (Newell-
McGloughlin,  2008).  Examples 
include  pro-vitamin  A 
enhanced  rice,  improved  protein  content  maize  and  sweet 
potato, and increased vital minerals in rice and maize.

In  addition  to  functional  foods,  this  area  has  the  poten-
tial  to  address  both  nutritional  and  environmental  impact.  A  

556

Prospects for increased food production and poverty alleviation

C H A P T E R   3 5

good  example  of  this  is  the  addition  of  transgenic  phytase 
enzymes to crops to reduce the need to add phosphate to feed 
(James, 2011). Most of the phosphate is added to counteract 
the  non-bioavailability  of  phosphorus  in  phytic  acid  and  the 
sequestering  effect  of  phytic  acid  on  uptake  of  divalent  min-
eral ions such as iron, calcium, and zinc. Unfortunately, excess 
phosphate  is  excreted  causing  major  environmental  impact 
through  eutrophication  and  fish  kills  in  regions  with  intense 
pig  and  poultry  farming  (Zhang  et  al.,  2000;  Lucca  et  al., 
2002).  In  addition,  in  humans  such  mineral  deficiencies  due 
to  phytate  binding  are  estimated  to  afflict  2–3  billion  people, 
primarily in the developing world. Several studies have shown 
that  Aspergillus-derived  phytases  can  be  produced  in  large 
quantities in a range of plants including cereals, with clear-cut 
positive effects on phytate degradation and phosphate and min-
eral bioavailability in animal-feeding trials (Zhang et al., 2000; 
Lucca et al., 2002). It is thus conceivable that genetic engineer-
ing of staples for increased phytase expression could potentially 
improve  iron  and  zinc  bioavailability,  alleviating  the  need  for 
supplementation in all monogastrics and consequent reduction 
in polluting run-off in non-ruminant animals. As noted earlier, 
China leads the way in approval of this “output” trait in maize 
as the first country to approve commercialization in November 
2009  (James,  2011).  Continuing  improvements  in  molecular 
and  genomic  technologies  are  contributing  to  the  acceleration 
of  such  product  development.  One  estimate  states  that  foods 
used for functional purposes made up 10% of the $503 billion 
total U.S. retail food market.

In addition to being a source of nutrition, plants have been 
a  valuable  wellspring  of  therapeutics  for  centuries.  During 
the  past  decade,  however,  intensive  research  has  focused 
on  expanding  this  source  through  rDNA  biotechnology  and 
essentially using plants and animals as living factories for the 
commercial  production  of  vaccines,  therapeutics,  and  other 
valuable  products  such  as  industrial  enzymes  and  biosyn-
thetic  feedstocks.  More  pressingly,  with  the  increasing  costs 
in economic and environmental terms of our dependency on 
fossil fuels, biotechnology offers innovative means to improve 
plant material for biomass conversion and enzymes to do the 
converting.

Barriers to Introduction

Most  of  the  crops  approved  to  date  appear  to  support  the 
notion that the deregulation process is prohibitive for any but 
well-financed  companies  whose  focus  is  primarily  the  large 
commodity crops that were previously discussed. Worldwide 
there is clear asymmetry and lack of consensus in regulatory 
systems. This discourages research on anything but the most 
mundane of crops and traits, and is a real disincentive to cre-
ative  research.  For  all  intents  and  purposes  there  is  just  one 
trait  from  a  public  institution  that  has  successfully  traversed 
the  regulatory  minefields  and  been  translated  into  a  com-
mercially  viable  commodity  —  the  viral  coat  protein  protec-
tion  system  initially  developed  for  the  papaya  ringspot  virus 
(PRSV) pandemic in Hawaii. Papaya is a major tropical fruit 
crop in the Asian region; however, production in many Asian 
countries is set back by the prevalence of the PRSV disease, 

as  well  as  postharvest  losses.  The  PRSV-resistant  papaya, 
based  on  RNAi  suppression  of  the  coat  protein  expression, 
literally  saved  the  $17  million  economy  in  Hawaii  and  is  of 
significant  importance  in  Taiwan  and  other  southeast  Asian 
countries. Coat-protein-based resistance is a demonstration of 
what is known as post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS). 
RNA  interference  (RNAi)  in  animals  and  basal  eukaryotes, 
quelling in fungi, and PTGS in plants are examples of a broad 
family  of  phenomena  collectively  called  RNA  silencing.  This 
system  has  now  been  applied  to  many  species.  A  five-year 
effort to combat plum pox virus disease through PTGS resist-
ance  paid  off.  In  1990,  USDA/Agricultural  Research  Service 
(ARS)  scientists  began  their  efforts  with  a  PRSV  coat  pro-
tein gene obtained from Dennis Gonsalves (1998). This gene 
shows 70% homology to the plum pox gene and has been used 
to  control  other  viruses  similarly  related  to  papaya  ringspot. 
However, irrespective of the mechanism, it is important that 
resistance  based  on  a  single  gene  is  managed  well  and  alter-
nate control mechanisms are introduced to reduce pressure on 
the development of viral resistance. Other approaches include 
expression  of  the  RNA  replicating  enzymes  of  the  virus, 
expression  of  satellite  RNA,  replicating  RNA  molecules  that 
are  molecular  parasites  of  the  virus,  or  the  use  of  protease 
inhibitors to interfere with processing of the viral proteins.

Rather  interestingly,  it  has  been  reported  anecdotally  that 
organic  papaya  growers  now  surround  their  plots  with  the 
transgenic  rainbow  variety  as  the  PTGS  system  proves  to  be 
a  most  effective  method  to  reduce  the  viral  reservoir,  thus 
protecting  susceptible  varieties  through  a  mechanism  similar 
to  herd  immunity  in  mammalian  systems.  A  recent  paper  by 
Hutchison et al. (Potrykus, 1999) demonstrated a variation of 
this halo effect for Bt maize. As noted, to mitigate against the 
evolution of resistance to the cry protein growers are required 
to maintain a 20% refugia of non-Bt maize. Despite predictions 
that  this  single  gene  protection  may  select  for  the  develop-
ment of resistance in corn borer larvae on maize or bollworm 
in cotton, it has proven to be remarkably resilient. Some resist-
ance has arisen, most specifically in the latter, where a muta-
tion  in  the  cadherin  receptor  has  led  to  resistance,  but  it  is 
much lower than might be expected given the extent of usage 
of  the  Bt  phenotype.  Mutations  providing  small  decreases  in 
susceptibility to Bt proteins are relatively common, but those 
conferring  sufficient  resistance  to  enable  survival  on  some 
types  of  Bt  corn  are  exceedingly  rare.  Hutchison  demon-
strated that this has led to cumulative benefits over 14 years 
of between $3.2 and $3.6 billion with between $1.9 and $2.4 
billion  of  this  total  accruing  to  non-Bt  maize  growers.  They 
postulate  that  these  results  affirm  theoretical  predictions  of 
pest population suppression, and highlight economic incentives 
for  growers  to  maintain  non-Bt  maize  refugia  for  sustainable 
insect  resistance  management  (Potrykus,  1999).  Whereas  ini-
tially these refugia were required to be in specified plots, it has 
been determined that mixing Bt and non-Bt maize grain dur-
ing planting may be an equally effective management strategy. 
Again, enforcement of these requirements had been relatively 
easy in the developed world, but to do so in some regions may 
prove more challenging.

While  translation  of  biotech  research  into  value-added 
products  for  producers  and  consumers  is  a  challenge  in  the 

557

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

United  States,  it  is  exponentially  more  difficult  in  LDCs.  
A problem facing Africa in particular is the lack of a dynamic 
private  sector  to  take  technologies  to  the  farmer.  It  has  also 
been  estimated  that  regulatory  costs  might  exceed  the  costs 
of  research  and  experimentation  needed  to  develop  a  given 
GM  crop,  which  is  a  major  problem  in  releasing  such  crops 
to the market. A way to reduce the costs of generating food 
and  environmental  safety  data  is  to  develop  regional  “cent-
ers  of  excellence”  with  complementary  facilities  where  food 
safety testing can be done reliably and regulatory costs could 
be  reduced.  The  economic  gains  from  using  GM  crop  tech-
nology  in  SSA  are  potentially  large  according  to  the  World 
Bank Group. The results suggest that welfare gains are poten-
tially very large, especially from golden rice and nutritionally 
enhanced GM wheat, and that those benefits are diminished 
only  slightly  by  the  presence  of  the  EU’s  current  ban  on 
imports of GM foods.

The authors of this chapter used the global economy-wide 
computable general equilibrium model known as GTAP. They 
specifically  noted  that  if  SSA  countries  impose  bans  on  GM 
crop imports in deference to EU market demand for non-GM 
products, the domestic consumer loss net of that protection-
ism boost to SSA farmers would be more than the small gain 
derived from greater market access to the EU.

Problems  cited  for  the  slow  passage  of  GM  crops  from 
experimental,  to  trial,  to  the  commercial  stage  include  the 
lack of capacity to negotiate licenses to use genes and research 
techniques  patented  by  others,  especially  for  crops  with 
export potential. In addition, there are difficulties in meeting 
regulatory  requirements  and  a  lack  of  effective  public  com-
mercialization  modalities  and  working  extension  networks. 
Biosafety  regulation  and  intellectual  property  rights  (IPR) 
still  have  to  be  enforced  in  many  countries  for  an  effective 
and safe use of genetically engineered crops, especially if their 
production is meant for the export market.

As  noted,  intellectual  property  constraints  continue  to 
be  a  significant  barrier  in  some  regions  and  for  some  tech-
nologies.  At  the  research  level  this  is  usually  not  of  major 
import  in  developing  regions,  but  at  the  commercialization 
stage  this  has  the  potential  to  be  a  significant  barrier  to  ini-
tial adoption and most specifically enforcement. In the United 
States,  Technology  Use  Agreements  (TUAs)  have  been  used 
to prohibit replanting patented seed by farmers. So far, there 
is  no  indication  that  Fine  Seeds  International  will  be  selling 
seed  under  a  TUA.  Furthermore,  the  vast  majority  of  farm-
ers  in  Egypt  have  very  small  farms  (less  than  2  acres),  mak-
ing enforcement of a TUA more difficult than in the United 
States where farm land holdings are typically quite large and 
accessible. In addition, it is unclear whether a TUA would be 
upheld by an Egyptian court. Until more information is avail-
able, this criticism is unfounded. Without a TUA farmers are 
able to save and use seed for their own consumption.

In summary, Egyptian plant variety protection law does not 
put farmers at the mercy of private industry commercializers, 
either multi-national or domestic companies. Besides, farmers 
must ultimately decide whether or not to spend their money 
on this new variety.

Scientific,  civic,  and  religious  opinion  leaders  from  all 
over  the  world  have  expressed  support  for  the  value  of  this 

technology. Florence Wambugu of Kenya states that the great 
potential of biotechnology to increase agriculture in Africa lies 
in its “packaged technology in the seed,” which ensures tech-
nology benefits without changing local cultural practices. For 
example,  over  120  million  children  worldwide  are  deficient 
in vitamin A. The Potrykus (1999) group has engineered rice 
to accumulate provitamin A (beta carotene). Incorporation of 
this trait into rice cultivars and widespread distribution of this 
packaged technology in the seed could prevent 1 to 2 million 
deaths each year. She observes that in the past many foreign 
donors funded high-input projects, which have not been sus-
tainable  because  they  have  failed  to  address  social  and  eco-
nomic issues such as changes in cultural practice (Wambugu, 
1999).  In  concurrence  with  this,  Ismail  Serageldin,  former 
Chairman  of  the  Consultative  Group  on  International 
Agricultural Research (CGIAR) noted that, a priori, biotech-
nology  could  contribute  to  food  security  by  helping  to  pro-
mote sustainable agriculture centered on smallholder farmers 
in developing countries.

American  consumer  attitudes  also  tend  to  be  relatively 
positive about agricultural biotechnology. In a 2010 IFIC sur-
vey  consumers  were  determined  to  be  largely  familiar  with 
the  term  “biotechnology”  (International  Food  Information 
Council,  2010):  More  than  two-thirds  of  surveyed  consum-
ers  (69%)  have  read  or  heard  at  least  “a  little”  about  the 
concept. Half (51%) of surveyed consumers say they are favo-
rable toward farmers using biotechnology to grow more crops 
that would help meet food demand. In addition, significantly 
more  consumers  this  year  (28%  vs.  23%  in  2008)  believe 
foods  produced  through  biotechnology  are  available  in  the 
supermarket  today,  although  this  figure  is  still  relatively  low. 
Certain  benefits  of  biotechnology  are  found  to  resonate  bet-
ter with consumers than others. These tend to be consumer-
facing  qualities  such  as  improved  health  or  better  taste.  For 
example,  the  majority  of  consumers  say  they  are  somewhat 
or very likely to purchase foods produced through biotechnol-
ogy  to  provide  more  healthful  fats  like  Omega-3s  (76%),  to 
avoid trans fat (74%), and to make foods taste better/fresher 
(67%). This is consistent from 2008. Additionally, more than 
three-quarters  (77%)  of  surveyed  consumers  say  they  would 
be  likely  to  purchase  foods  produced  through  biotechnology 
for  their  ability  to  reduce  pesticide  use,  and  73%  of  those 
consumers said they would be likely to purchase bread, crack-
ers, cookies, cereal, or pasta made with flour from wheat that 
had  been  modified  by  biotechnology  to  use  less  land,  water, 
and/or  pesticides.  Of  the  18%  who  would  like  to  see  addi-
tional information on the FDA label, only 3% mentioned any-
thing about biotechnology.

But  what  of  the  context  in  which  these  crops  are  grown? 
Can  all  cropping  systems  coexist  in  harmony?  According  to 
Brookes  and  Barfoot  (2004,  2008)  it  is  important  to  deter-
mine  the  relative  importance  of  different  crop  production 
systems  based  on  planted  area,  production,  and  economic 
value to the region in question. The issue is what, if any, are 
the  economic  consequences  of  the  adventitious  presence  of 
material  from  one  crop  system  within  another  based  on  the 
notion  that  farmers  should  be  able  to  freely  cultivate  the 
crops of their choice using the production system that works 
best  in  any  given  context  (GM,  conventional,  or  organic).  It 

558

Prospects for increased food production and poverty alleviation

C H A P T E R   3 5

is  never  a  food  or  environmental  safety  issue;  instead  it  is  a 
production  and  marketing  matter.  The  heart  of  the  issue  is 
assessing the likelihood of the adventitious presence of mate-
rial  from  one  production  system  affecting  another  and  the 
potential impact. This requires consistency when dealing with 
the  adventitious  presence  of  any  unwanted  material  includ-
ing, but most definitely not limited to, biotechnology-derived 
material. Adventitious presence is simply the unintended inci-
dence of something other than the desired crop such as small 
quantities of weed seeds, seeds from other crops, dirt, insects, 
or  foreign  material  (e.g.,  stones).  It  is  unrealistic  to  expect 
100%  purity  for  any  crops,  or  products  derived  from  them, 
so  thresholds  that  are  consistent  across  all  materials  should 
be  set  and  should  not  discriminate  (e.g.,  thresholds  for  the 
adventitious presence of biotech material should be the same 
as  those  applied  to  thresholds  for  other  unwanted  material 
and  vice  versa).  All  measures  should  be  proportionate,  non- 
discriminatory, and science-based.

The  issue  of  economic  liability  provisions  that  compensate 
growers  for  the  adventitious  presence  of  biotech  material  is 
often raised. Historically, the worldwide market has adequately 
addressed economic liability issues relating to the adventitious 
presence  of  unwanted  material  in  any  agricultural  crop.  For 
example,  for  certified  seed  the  onus  is  on  the  producers  who 
require  isolation  from  undesired  pollination  for  the  purity  of 
their  product  to  ensure  such  purity.  This  is  not  their  neigh-
bor’s problem. By extension the onus is on growers of any spe-
cialty crops to take action to protect the purity of their crops, 
since these are self-imposed standards for and by that market. 
Growers who have chosen a more stringent standard than that 
established  in  EU  legislation  should  not  expect  their  neigh-
bors  to  bear  the  special  management  costs  of  meeting  that 
self-imposed  standard;  to  do  so  would  reverse  fundamental 
freedoms of economic activity and would establish a dangerous 
precedent. To allow specialty operators to formulate unrealistic 
standards for GM in their own produce would impose impossi-
bly high standards on neighbors and would effectively impose a 
ban on the choice of other producers. Such growers are usually 
rewarded  by  higher  prices  and  niche  markets  for  taking  such 
actions. Their neighbors enjoy no such advantage.

Existing  legislation  in  North  America  and  the  EU  is  more 
than  adequate  to  protect  all  grower  and  consumer  interests, 
but  if  new  regulations  were  considered  to  address  economic 
liability  provisions  for  any  negative  economic  consequences 
of  the  adventitious  presence  of  unwanted  material,  the  same 
principle  should  apply  to  all  farmers  regardless  of  their  cho-
sen production methods. On equity grounds, biotech growers 
should have equal access to compensation for the adventitious 
presence of material from conventional or organic crops (such 
as fungal contamination) as conventional and organic producers 
have  from  biotech  growers.  No  one  sector  should  be  able  to 
unfairly prohibit another — access and choice work both ways. 
All  coexistence  measures  should  be  based  on  legal,  practical, 
and scientific realities and not on commercial or niche market-
ing objectives. Where unintended presence has occurred such 
as  the  presence  of  minute  levels  of  Bayer  CropScience  regu-
lated material LLRICE 604 found in Clearfield 131 (CL131) 
rice seed in 2007 and Mycogen’s event “32” in maize in 2008, 
the agencies cooperated and determined that these events did 

not  prove  any  risk  as  they  carried  similar  constructs  to  those 
already having achieved non-regulated status.

According  to  Brookes  and  Barfoot  (2004,  2008),  biotech 
crops  coexist  successfully  with  conventional  and  organic 
crops in North America (where biotech crops account for the 
majority  of  acreage  of  important  arable  crops  like  soybeans, 
cotton,  and  maize),  Spain,  and  more  recently  in  the  Czech 
Republic. The market has developed practical, proportionate, 
and  workable  coexistence  measures  without  new  regulations 
or  any  government  intervention.  Where  isolated  instances 
of  the  adventitious  presence  of  biotech  material  have  been 
found  in  conventional  or  organic  crops,  they  have  usually 
been  caused  by  inadequate  implementation  of  good  coexist-
ence practices (e.g., inefficient segregation of crops in storage 
and  transport,  and  non-use  of  tested,  certified  seed).  Under 
civil liability (i.e., tort damages) and for intellectual property 
infringement  (except  for  the  unauthorized  StarLink),  there 
have been no lawsuits brought by any parties for adventitious 
presence. Every case brought by a seed company for infringe-
ment  has  involved  a  claim  that  the  farmer  charged  with 
infringement  was  an  intentional  infringer  (i.e.,  adventitious 
presence was not the issue). To date, each of these cases was 
upheld  by  the  courts.  Indeed,  all  except  one  notable  excep-
tion in North America has conceded to this claim.

Virtually  all  EU  member  states  have  transcribed  EU 
Directive 2001/18 and implement EU regulations on traceabil-
ity and labeling. Within the EU, provision has been made for 
a  de  minimis  threshold  for  the  unavoidable  presence  of  GM 
organizations, but no actual threshold has been set. Therefore 
the default state of the 0.9% on labeling and traceability is the 
one enforced. In the United States, organic products cannot be 
(legally)  downgraded  or  the  producer  decertified  by  uninten-
tional presence when all required measures and best practices 
are adhered to, and no producer has been so impacted to date.
Going forward there are four major stanchions to the fur-
therance  of  coexistence,  and  all  of  them  are  incumbent  on 
cooperation.
1. Monitoring: Verify the models and predictions about cost, 

isolation standards, and generally learn how the farming 
community copes with the requirements for keeping the 
product streams separated.

2. Dialog: Strategy development takes place in a dialog 

between the scientific and technical community and all 
relevant stakeholders (Denmark).

3. Stewardship: Stewardship programs should take into 

account the interests of both GM and non-GM farmers. 
Existing product stewardship programs for non-GM 
crops in farming should be a starting point for developing 
stewardship schemes for GM crops.

4. Research: The scientific community should be encouraged 

to fill the knowledge gaps that have been identified. 
Projects are needed to validate models and guidelines, 
including long-term studies. Building up mechanistic, 
probabilistic, and predictive models of gene flow as well 
as methods for restricting gene flow by eliminating the 
fertility of pollen or seeds (apomixis, cytoplasmic male 
sterility, plastid transformation, Genetic Use Restriction 
Technology (GURT), etc.) is necessary.

559

S E C T I O N   G

Commercial, legal, sociological, and public aspects of agricultural plant biotechnologies

The World Trade Organization ruled in 2006 that a six-year 
European ban on genetically engineered crops violates interna-
tional trade. The three-person panel issued its decision ruling 
in favor of the three countries — United States, Canada, and 
Argentina — on a large majority of the 25 crops under dispute 
in the case and issued mixed rulings on a few crops. The panel 
also ruled in favor of challenging national bans on specific bio-
tech crops issued by Austria, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, 
and  Luxembourg.  The  EU  had  argued  that  it  did  not  have  a 
moratorium but that it just took more time to weigh the pos-
sible risks to health and the environment posed by genetically 
engineered foods. It said it needed to take a “precautionary” 
approach to regulation, which is different from what it called 
Washington’s “laissez-faire” stance.

The  trade  organization  panel  appears  not  to  have  chal-
lenged Europe’s regulatory process for biotech crops. Rather, 
it  said  Europe  failed  to  follow  its  own  procedures,  resulting 
in  undue  delay  of  decisions.  Interestingly,  one  of  the  most 
comprehensive  assessments  on  the  technology  was  con-
ducted by EU scientists. An  EU Commission Report (2001) 
that  summarized  biosafety  research  of  400  scientific  teams 
from  all  original  15  EU  countries  conducted  over  15  years 
stated  that  research  on  biotechnology-derived  plants  and 
-derived  products  so  far  developed  and  marketed,  follow-
ing  usual  risk  assessment  procedures,  had  not  shown  any 
new  risks  to  human  health  or  the  environment  beyond  the 
usual  uncertainties  of  conventional  plant  breeding.  Indeed, 
the  use  of  more  precise  technology  and  the  greater  regu-
latory  scrutiny  probably  make  these  plants  and  products 
even  safer  than  conventional  plants  and  foods.  If  there  are 
unforeseen  environmental  effects  —  none  have  appeared  as 
yet — these should be rapidly detected by existing monitor-
ing  systems.  This  analysis  was  repeated  in  a  2008  EU  Joint 
Research Centre (JRC) Report commissioned by Members of 
the European Parliament conducted by world experts includ-
ing  the  European  Food  Safety  Authority  (EFSA)  and  WHO 
(European Union Joint Research Council, 2008). Their report 
concluded that there is no evidence that GM foods have any 
harmful  effects;  a  declaration  signed  by  over  3500  scientists 
including 25 Nobel Laureates reiterates this position.

While  biotech  research  and  development 

in  Europe 
slowed  significantly  following  the  EU’s  1998  de  facto  mora-
torium  on  approvals  and  individual  countries  such  as  France 
and Germany bowing to internal minority pressure, Europe’s 

stance  on  biotech  crops  cannot  prevent  biotech  adoption 
in the rest of the world and, as noted, Asia is forging ahead. 
According  to  a  study  by  Runge  and  Ryan  (2005),  as  the  EU 
becomes increasingly isolated, it will discourage its young sci-
entists and technicians from pursuing European careers. They 
opine that if, on the other hand, the EU engages biotech in an 
orderly regulatory framework harmonized with the rest of the 
world, then it will encourage a more rapid international diffu-
sion of the technology. More nations will join the top tiers of 
commercial production, and emerging nations will continue to 
expand the sector.

The  challenges  going  forward  are:  (1)  technical,  as  we 
strive to modify intricate metabolic pathways and networks as 
opposed to single genes, the scientific challenges are not triv-
ial; (2) intellectual property restrictions that may limit transla-
tion of public research if not managed judiciously; (3) liability 
concerns  over  abuse  or  misuse  of  constructs;  (4)  prohibitive 
and  asymmetric  biosafety  regimes;  and  finally,  public  accept-
ance. The last is often predicated on how much of the former 
challenges  are  perceived,  and  how  positions  are  presented 
by  the  opposing  factions.  Indeed,  the  actual  commercializa-
tion of biotech products may have little to do with technical 
limitations  and  more  to  do  with  these  external  constraints, 
primarily  the  process  of  regulatory  approval.  The  flagship  of 
improved nutritional varieties, such as beta carotene enhanced 
rice commonly referred to as golden rice, despite being under 
consideration since the late 1990s and subject to a barrage of 
risk assessments is unlikely to be approved until 2012 at the 
earliest.  Ingo  Potrykus,  the  developer,  says  an  unreasonable 
amount  of  testing  has  been  required  without  scientific  justi-
fication.  In  a  recent  Nature  article  (Potrykus,  2010)  he  lays 
the blame largely on the regulatory process, which he consid-
ers  excessive,  observing  that  unjustified  and  impractical  legal 
requirements  are  stopping  genetically  engineered  crops  from 
saving millions from starvation and malnutrition.

In the final analysis resources are finite, true sustainability 
can come only from an enlightened philosophy that promotes 
the  development  of  resource-enhancing  technologies.  The 
only sure way to protect the planet’s resources is not to set-
tle  into  the  complacency  of  maintaining  the  status  quo,  but 
to engage in continual, constructive change based on scientific 
knowledge. Biotechnology is not a panacea for all the world’s 
ills; it is one of many sets of tools and technologies that will 
be required to ensure such sustainable development.

References

African Agricultural Technology Association. 

(2007). Combining Breeding and 
Biotechnology to Develop Water Efficient 
Maize for Africa (WEMA)   http://www.
aatf-africa.org/userfiles/Wema-Concept-
Note.pdf .

Agarwal, P. K., Agarwal, P., Reddy, M. K., &  

Sopory, S. K. (2006). Role of DREB 
transcription factors in abiotic and biotic 
stress tolerance in plants. Plant Cell Reports, 
25(12), 1263–1274.

Bricknel, T. (2010). India delays Bt brinjal decision. 

Fruitnet.com  http://www.fruitnet.com/

content.aspx?cid  5731&rid  2  accessed 
August 8, 2010.

Brookes, G., & Barfoot, P. (2004). Co-existence 

of GM and non-GM arable crops: The non-
GM and organic context in the EU. PG 
Economics Ltd  http://www.pgeconomics.
co.uk.

Brookes, G., & Barfoot, P. (2005). GM crops: 

The global economic and environmental 
impact — the first nine years 1996–2004. 
AgBioForum, 8(2&3), 187–196. (Available 
at:  http://www.agbioforum.missouri.edu/
v8n23/v8n23a15-brookes.htm).

Brookes, G., & Barfoot, P. (2008). Co-existence 

of GM and non-GM arable crops: The non-
GM and organic context in the EU. PG 
Economics Ltd.

Choudhary, B., & Gaur, K. (2008). The 

development and regulation of Bt brinjal in 
India (Eggplant/Aubergine), ISAAA Brief 
No. 38. Ithaca, NY: ISAAA.

Choudhary, B., & Gaur, K. (2010). Bt Cotton 
in India: A country profile. ISAAA Series of 
Biotech Crop profiles. Ithaca, NY: ISAAA.

Deng, X., Phillips, J., Bräutigam, A., Engström, 

P., Johannesson, H., & Ouwerkerk, P. B.,  

560

Prospects for increased food production and poverty alleviation

C H A P T E R   3 5

et al. (2006). A homeodomain leucine zipper 
gene from Craterostigma plantagineum 
regulates abscisic acid responsive gene 
expression and physiological responses. Plant 
Molecular Biology, 61(3), 469–489.

Economic and Social Council Resolution. 

(2004). 68. Science and Technology for 
Development (E/2004/31).

Elmegaard, N., & Bruus Pedersen, M. (2001). 
Flora and fauna in roundup tolerant fodder 
beet fields. National environmental research 
institute. 40 pp. Technical Report No. 349.

EU Commission Report. (2001). EC-sponsored 

research into the safety of Genetically 
Modified Organisms. Fifth Framework 
Programme — External Advisory Groups 
“GMO research in perspective” Report of a 
workshop held by External Advisory Groups 
of the “Quality of Life and Management 
of Living Resources” Programme  http://
europa.eu.int/comm/research/quality-of-
life/gmo/index.html http://europa.eu.int/
comm/research/fp5/eag-gmo.html.
European Union Joint Research Council. 

(2008). Scientific and technical contribution 
to the development of an overall health 
strategy in the area of GMOs  http://
ec.europa.eu/dgs/jrc/downloads/jrc_ 
20080910_gmo_study_en.pdf 

FAO/WHO. (2004). The State Of Food 

and Agriculture 2003–2004, Agricultural 
Biotechnology Meeting the needs of the 
poor? Food and agriculture organization of 
the United Nations Rome, 2004.  http://
www.fao.org/documents/show_cdr.asp?url_
file  /docrep/006/Y5160E/Y5160E00.
HTM  (accessed March 23, 2011).
Gonsalves, D. (1998). Control of papaya 

ringspot virus in papaya: A case study. Annual 
Review of Phytopathology, 36, 415–437.

Green, R. E., Cornell, S. J., Scharlemann, J. P. W., &  

Balmford, A. (2005). Farming and the fate 
of wild nature. Science, 307, 550–555.

Huang, J., Rozelle, S., Pray, C., & Wang, Q. 

(2002). Plant biotechnology in China. 
Science, 295, 674–677.

International Food Information Council. (2010). 

2010 “Consumer Perceptions of Food 
Technology”. Survey conducted by Cogent 
Research of Cambridge, Massachusetts for 
the International Food Information Council, 
Washington, DC.  http://www.foodinsight.
org/Content/3843/Final_Executive%20
Summary%20Food%20Tech%20Report_
Website%20version_7-7-10.pdf. 

James, C. (2011). Global status of 

commercialized biotech/GM crops: 
2010. ISAAA briefs 42-2010. Ithaca, NY: 
ISAAA.  http://www.isaaa.org/resources/
publications/briefs/42/executivesummary/
default.asp  (accessed March 23, 2011).

Ki-Hong, J., Seo, Y. -S., Walia, H., Cao, P., 

Fukao, T., Canlas, P. E., et al. (2010). The 
submergence tolerance regulator Sub1A 
mediates stress-responsive expression 
of AP2/ERF transcription factors. Plant 
Physiology, 152, 1674–1692.

Lopez-Bucio, J., Nieto-Jacobo, M. F., Ramirez-

Rodriguez, V. V., & Herrera-Estrella, L. 
(2000). Organic acid metabolism in plants: 
From adaptive physiology to transgenic 
varieties for cultivation in extreme soils. 
Plant Science, 160(1), 1–13.

Lucca, P., Hurrell, R., & Potrykus, I. (2002). 
Fighting iron deficiency anemia with iron-
rich rice. Journal of the American College of 
Nutrition, 21, 184S–190S.

Monsanto News Release. (2010). Insect-

protected Roundup Ready 2 yield soybeans 
achieve important milestone toward 
commercialization in Brazil  http://
monsanto.mediaroom.com/index.
php?s  43&item  875.

Newell-McGloughlin, M. (2005). “Functional 
Foods” and biopharmaceuticals: The next 
generation of the GM revolution (pp. 163–
178). In: Let them eat precaution. American 
Enterprise Institute.

Newell-McGloughlin, M. (2008). Nutritionally 
improved agricultural crops. Editor’s choice 
series on the next generation of biotech 
crops. Plant Physiology, 147, 

939–953.   http://www.plantphysiol.org/
cgi/content/full/147/3/939. 

Potrykus, I. (1999). Vitamin-A and iron-

enriched rices may hold key to combating 
blindness and malnutrition: A biotechnology 
advance. Nature Biotechnology, 17, 37.

Potrykus, I. (2010). Regulation must be 

revolutionized. Nature, 466(7306), 561.
Rivero, R. M., Shulaev, V., & Blumwald, E.  

(2009). Cytokinin-dependent 
photorespiration and the protection of 
photosynthesis during water deficit. Plant 
Physiology, 150(3), 1530–1540.

Runge, C. F., & Ryan, B. (2005). The 

global diffusion of plant biotechnology: 
International adoption and research in 
2004. http://www.apec.umn.edu/faculty/
frunge/globalbiotech04.pdf.

Sottosanto, J. B., Saranga, Y., & Blumwald, E.  

(2007). Impact of AtNHX1, a vacuolar 
Na/H  antiporter, upon gene expression 
during short and long term salt stress in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Plant Biology, 
7, 18.

Stern, N. (2006). Review on the economics of 

climate change. HM Treasury.

Trewavas, A. (2001). Urban myths of organic 

farming. Nature, 410, 409–410.

Wambugu, F. (1999). Why Africa needs 

agricultural biotech. Nature, 400, 15–16.

World Bank. (2007). World Development 

Report 2008 Agriculture for Development, 
Overview (No. ISBN 978-0-8213-7297-5).

Wu, F. (2006). Mycotoxin reduction in Bt corn: 

Potential economic, health, and regulatory 
impacts. Transgenic Research, 15(3), 
277–289.

Zhang, Z. B., Kornegay, E. T., Radcliffe, J. S.,  

Wilson, J. H., & Veit, H. P. (2000). 
Comparison of phytase from genetically 
engineered Aspergillus and canola in 
weanling pig diets. Journal of Animal 
Science, 78, 2868–2878.

561

Index

A
ABA, see Abscisic acid
Abscisic acid (ABA)

induction of microspore embryos, 147
stress signaling, 280, 290
temperature extreme signaling, 298

Abscission

abscission zone development, 430
ethylene role, 431
gene regulation, 430–431
manipulation, 431
overview, 429–430

ACD6, 202
ACO, 413–414, 426, 429, 433
ACR2, 313
ACS, 413–414, 416, 426, 429
ADCS, see Aminodeoxychorismate synthase
AF2-LIKE, 218
AFB genes, 189
AFD1, 246
AFEX, see Ammonia fiber expansion
AFLP, see Amplified fragment length 

polymorphism

AG, 208
AGL15, 249
AGL80, 248
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation

Agrobacterium strains, 105–106
applications, 104–106
host factors and proteins, 100, 103–104
novel selection methods and restriction 

enzymes to control T-DNA 
integration, 109–110

overview, 99
plant genome manipulation for optimization, 

108–109
prospects, 110
steps, 99–100, 102
T-DNA, 99–100, 102–106, 109–110

vectors, 99, 101, 105–108

AHK3, 428
ALA1, 433
ALV, see Artichoke latent virus
AM1, 246
Amino acids, essential amino acid synthesis by 

plants, 444–446

Aminodeoxychorismate synthase (ADCS), 448
Ammonia fiber expansion (AFEX), biofuel 

generation, 499

AMP1, 334
Amplified fragment length polymorphism 

(AFLP), marker-assisted selection, 
167

AMS, 187
Angiosperm Phylogeny Group, 5
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 

(APHIS), 545–546

ANP1, 290
ANT, 244, 250
Anther, male sterility mutant studies of 

development, 187

Anthocyanins, quality improvement, 452
Antimicrobial peptides, pathogen resistance 

ovule development

apomictic reproduction,  

244

sexual reproduction, 244
parthenogenesis, 248–250
prospects for crop utilization, 251
types, 243

Arabidopsis thaliana

genetic variation, 197–198
proteomics, 59–61
ARGONAUTE4, 211
ARGONAUTE9, 245
ARI, 246
ARR2, 428
Arsenic

food contamination and health implications, 

311–312

phytoremediation, 312–313
pollution and toxicity, 311
uptake and detoxification mechanisms in 

plants, 312

uptake prevention in crops, 313–314

Artichoke latent virus (ALV), elimination with 

in vitro techniques, 238

engineering, 334–335

Asexual crops, transgene flow containment, 

APETALA1, flowering time regulation, 390
APETALA2, flowering time regulation, 

389–390

APETALA3, 187–188
APHIS, see Animal and Plant Health 

Inspection Service

Apoplast, protein accumulation, 40
Apoximis

apomeiosis, 246–247
definition, 243
endosperm development, 250
epigenetic regulation, 251
gamete specification, 247–248
germline specification, 244–246
megagametogenesis, 247

513

ASY1, 246
ATAF1, 279
ATH1, 391
ATX1, 220
Auxin

male reproduction regulation, 189
somatic embryogenesis induction, 142–143

Avidin, insect resistance engineering, 353
AVP1, 278

B
ba1, 199
BABY BOOM, 250

Index

BAC, see Bacterial artificial chromosome
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt)
benefits of Bt crops, 349
Bt brinjal, 347–348
Bt cotton, 346–347, 567–568
Bt maize, 344–346, 568
Bt rice, 348
Bt soybean, 348
concerns about Bt crops, 349–350
Cry proteins, 344
developing country utilization, 567–568
discontinued crops, 347
historical perspective, 343–344
prospects, 350

Bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC), genome 

sequencing, 84–85

BADH, 278
Banana, micropropagation and beneficial 

microorganism inoculation, 234–238

BBM, 249
bell8.1, 408
Bioactive beads, principles of transformation, 

118

Biodiversity, see also Conservation
conservation strategies, 255–256
DNA markers for conservation, 174
plant genomes, 83–84

Bioenergy

biochemical conversion to biofuels

comminution, 498–499
fuel synthesis, 500–501
overview, 497–498
pre-treatment, 499–500
saccharification, 500

prospects, xxxiii–xxxiv, 503
rationale for production, 495–497
thermochemical conversion

gasification, 502–503
pyrolysis, 501–502
Biolistic transformation
advantages, 121–122
applications, 122–125
electric discharge particle acceleration, 

120–121
gene guns, 121
historical perspective, 120
papaya case study
ring spot virus

infection, 122, 125
resistance transfer, 125–126

testing, deregulation, and 

commercialization, 127

transgene characterization, 127
Bioplastics, see Polymer expression
BONSAI, 211
BR, see Brassinosteroids
Brassinosteroids (BR), male reproduction 

regulation, 188–189

BRI1, 245
Brinjal, Bt brinjal, 347–348
BRUTUS, 378

578

BRX, 198
Bt, see Bacillus thuringiensis
BTEX chemicals, phytoremediation, 320

Conservation, see also Biodiversity

collecting in vitro, 257–258
cryopreservation

C
CAD, 436
CAL, 390
Calcium flux, temperature extreme response 

signaling, 289–290, 298

Catalase, 279–280
Catechins, quality improvement, 452
CAX1, 289
CBF genes, 288, 292–293, 295, 434
CBL1, 289
CDF, 394
CDKA, 186
CDPK, 290
CEL genes, 418
Cellulose, biosynthesis, 482–483
CHIP, 296
ChIP, see Chromatin immunoprecipitation
Chitinase, insect resistance  

engineering, 353

Chlorophyll, degradation in senescence, 429
Chloroplast

protein accumulation, 40
transformation, 459

Chlorpyrifos, phytoremediation, 322
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), 

epigenomics

ChIP-chip, 212
ChIP-seq, 213

CIPK3, 290
CK, see Cytokinins
CLV1, 245
CMO, 278
CMPG1, 338
CMS, see Cytoplasmic male sterility
CMT3, 208, 222
CMV, see Cucumber mosaic virus
Cnr, 410
COL1, 292
Colchicine, induction of microspore  

embryos, 146

Cold response, see Temperature
Comparative genomics

overview, 24–25
syntenic map

applications, 91
definitions, 88
interspecies comparison with  

cytogenetics, 89

intraspecies comparison, 88
limitations, 91
macro-versus microsynteny, 89
nature of differences, 89–91
sequence comparison, 89
tools, 91

transcriptome profiling, 25–26

COMPASS, 392

classical techniques, 259–260
large-scale utilization for germplasm 

conservation, 262–263

novel techniques, 260
prospects, 263–264
recalcitrant seed species, 261–262
vegetatively propagated species,  

260–261

slow growth storage, 258–259
storage and ex situ conservation technologies, 

256–257

CONSTANS, flowering time regulation, 389, 

394

Consumer acceptance, genetically-modified 

food

developed versus developing  

countries, 572

factors influencing, 572–573

COR15A, 292, 295
COR27, 292
Cotton, Bt cotton, 346–347, 567–568
Cowpea trypsin inhibitor

insect resistance engineering, 350–351
nematode resistance engineering, 354
Cry proteins, see Bacillus thuringiensis
Cryopreservation, see Conservation
Cryotherapy, 263
CTR1, 415
CUC2, 279
Cucumber mosaic virus (CMV), 347–349
Cyanophycin, transgenic crop production, 

488–489

CYC, 209
Cytokinin (CK)

senescence retardation, 428
stress response, 280

Cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS)

fertility restoration, 189–190
genetic engineering, 191
hybrid seed production, 189, 191
implementation in agricultural systems, 

191–192

mitochondrial mutations, 189
natural occurrence, 190
organelle metabolism influence on pollen 

development, 190–191

overview, 189
stability of trait, 190
transgene flow containment,  

512–513

2,4-D

induction of microspore embryos, 147
phytoremediation, 322–323

D
DArT, see Diverse arrays technology
DDB1, 412

Decision matrix, plant bioproduction system, 

Domestication

35–37

DEG10, 295
Dehydration-responsive element (DRE), 278
Dehydrins, chilling sensitivity protection, 434
DELLA, 188, 291, 299, 392
Department of Agriculture, 545–546
DET1, 412
Developing countries

agricultural biotechnology

barriers to introduction, 557–560
consumer acceptance, 572
crops, traits, and farmers, 565
environmental impact, 571–572
geographic distribution of genetically-

modified crops, 565–566

nutritional benefits and impact of 

biofortification, 570–571

poverty and inequality impact, 568
progress to date, 552–554, 563–564
prospects, 554–557, 565–567
regulation, 573–574
safety concerns, 569–570

economic impact of transgenic crops

Bt cotton, 567–568
Bt maize, 568
farmer income impact, 568–569
herbicide-tolerant crops, 568
macro level impacts, 569
overview, xxxvi, 567
poverty and inequality impact, 568

food crisis, 551–552, 564
undernutrition and poverty, 564–565

DFD, 412–413, 435
DHDPS, see Dihydrodipicolinate synthase
DHS, 427
DICER, 346
Dihydrodipicolinate synthase (DHDPS),  

444, 446

biofuel development, 9–10
ecosystem services, 10–11
genetic limits of evolving domesticated 

crops, 196–197

genome features, 11, 14
hybrid species and new polypoids, 8
key features of selected model species, 

10–15
legumes, 7–8
lost crops, 9
maize, 7
post-domestication selection, 8–9
processes

domestication syndrome genes, 6
early domestication and wild  

relatives, 5

genetic control, 6–7
genetic variation, 6

species abundance, 4, 9
superdomestication, 14–16
trees, 9
yield traits, 8

DRE, see Dehydration-responsive element
DREB genes, 278–279, 291, 295, 434, 

555–556

Drought, see Stress tolerance
DRR206, 338
Dwarf8, 200
Dwarfing, transgene mitigation, 518–519
DYT1, 187

E
EFR1, 103
EIL genes, 415
Electrophoretic transfection, principles of 

transformation, 117–118

Electroporation, principles of transformation, 

Diverse arrays technology (DArT), genotyping 

118

for marker-assisted selection, 168

Diversity, see Biodiversity
DME, 209
DML2, 209
DML3, 209
DNA markers, see Marker-assisted selection
DNA methylation, see Epigenetics; 

Epigenomics

DNA sequencing, see also Genome sequencing

data handling, 24
marker-assisted selection, 169–170
next-generation sequencing
overview of tools, 21–22
Roche 454 pyrosequencing, 23, 170
SMRT, 23, 170
SOLiD sequencing, 213

root system architecture analysis with high-

throughput sequencing, 381

Sanger sequencing, 23
third generation sequencing, 23–24

DOG1, 165, 198

EMS, 187
EMS1, 244
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), protein 

accumulation, 38–39

Endosperm

apoximis and development, 250
epigenetics in development and parental 

imprinting, 220–222

Energy, see Bioenergy
Environment, see Phytoremediation; Transgene 

flow

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 

546–547

EPA, see Environmental Protection Agency
EPC, see European Patent Convention
Epigenetics

cold response regulation, 296–297
cytosine methylation, 208–209
endosperm development and parental 

imprinting, 220–222
flowering control, 219–220

Index

flowering time regulation by histone 

modification, 391–392

histone modifications, 209–211
inheritance mechanisms, 207–208
RNA-directed DNA methylation, 211–212
vegetative development control, 217–219

Epigenomics

chromatin immunoprecipitation

ChIP-chip, 212
ChIP-seq, 213

databases, 213–216
methylated DNA immunoprecipitation, 213
overview, 27–28
scale and complexity, 212
transposable elements, 216–217
Zea mays, 217–218

ER, see Endoplasmic reticulum
ERECTA, 201
ERF genes, 279, 415–416
ERS1, 428
Escherichia coli, seed-based expression system 

for Lt-B expression, 41, 43

Ethics, xxxvi–xxxvii, 359
Ethylene

abscission role, 431
biosynthesis, 413, 426
genetic intervention in ripening, 416–417
perception and signal transduction, 414–416, 

426–427

postharvest quality of fresh produce, 

426–427

ripening role, 413

ETP genes, 415
ETR genes, 414–417
ETR1, 411
European Patent Convention (EPC), 528
EVR, 430
Expansins, fruit texture role, 418
Expression systems

comparison of approaches, 474–476
fibrous protein polymers, see Polymer 

expression

leaf expression systems

overview, 44–46
stable versus transient expression, 44, 

46–47

Zera system, 47

nuclear transformation, 466, 468, 475
overview, 466–469
pharmaceutical proteins

advantages of plant expression, 471–472
downstream issues of plant-based 

manufacturing, 473–474

industry, 465–466
transgene mitigation, 520

plastid transformation, 469, 475–476
post-translational modification, 472–473
prospects, 475
protein routing
apoplast, 40
chloroplast, 40

579

Index

Expression systems (Continued)

endomembrane system, 37–38
endoplasmic reticulum protein 

accumulation, 38–39

oil body, 41
overview, 37
protein bodies, 39
vacuoles, 39–40

seed-based expression systems, 41–44
transient expression systems

advantages and limitations, 475–476
full virus vectors, 470
magnifection, 470–471
risk minimization, 471

Extremophiles, genetic  

resources, 29

F
FAD, see Fatty acid desaturase
FAD3, 288
Fatty acid desaturase (FAD), 298, 433
Fatty acids, essential fatty acid synthesis by 

plants, 446

FBP7, 300
FD, 389
FDA, see Food and Drug Administration
FIE, 220–221, 250
FIS2, 220–221, 250
Flavonoids, quality improvement, 452
FLC, 219–220, 389–390
FLC, flowering time regulation, 389
Florigen, flowering time regulation, 388–389
Flowering

epigenetic control, 219–220
farmer perspective, 387–388
flowering time regulation

APETALA1, 390LEAFY, 390–391, 395
circadian clock, 394
florigen, 388–389
FRUITFULL, 390
giberellic acid, 392–393
histone modification, 391–392
juvenile phase, 395
microRNA

miR156, 393
miR159, 393
miR167, 393
miR169, 393–394
miR172, 394

PENNYFOOLISH, 391
PENNYWISE, 391
regulated proteolysis, 394
seasonality

photoperiod, 395
temperature, 396–397
vernalization, 395–396

SEPALLATA3, 391
SOC1, 390
SPL, 391
sugars, 394–395

580

TFL1, 389
transcription factors regulating 
FLOWERING LOCUS T

APETALA2 repressors, 389–390
CONSTANS, 389, 394
FLC, 389
MAF, 389
SVP, 389
TEMPRANILLO, 390

plant perspective, 387
reproductive cycles and alternate bearing, 

397–398

scent/aroma compounds, 455
tissue culture and flowering in vitro, 136

Folate, biosynthesis, 447–448
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 547
Food safety, xxxv, 569–570
Food security

climate change, xxix–xxx
population changes, xxix

FPP, 456
Freedom-to-operate (FTO), 532–534
FRI, 197
FRUITFULL, flowering time regulation, 390
Fruit

classification, 405–406
development and gene regulation, 406–409
flavor compounds in fruits, 454–455
prospects for study, 418
ripening

ethylene

biosynthesis, 413
genetic intervention, 416–417
perception and signal transduction, 

414–416

ripening role, 413

mutations

nutritional mutations, 411–412
overview, 409–411
shelf life mutations, 412–413

texture

cell wall depolymerizing enzymes, 

417–418

expansins, 418
postharvest, 435–436
protein glycosylation, 418

FRY1, 289
FRY2, 295
fs8.1, 408
FT, 388, 394
FTO, see Freedom-to-operate
Fuel, see Bioenergy
FUS3, 249
FUSED, 186
fw2.2, 408
FWA, 211

G
GA, see Giberellic acid
GAI, 201

Gametogenesis, see Male reproduction
Gasification, biofuel generation, 502–503
GEM1, 186
Genetic engineering, see Expression systems; 

Insect resistance; Marker-assisted 
selection; Phytoremediation; Polymer 
expression; Secondary metabolism; 
Somatic embryogenesis; Somatic 
hybridization; Stress tolerance; 
Transformation

Genetically modified organism, see Bioenergy; 

Consumer acceptance; Developing 
countries; Transgenic plants

Genetic use restriction technology (GURT), 

transgene flow containment, 513

Genetic variation

exploitation for biotechnology, 202–203
genetic limits of evolving domesticated 

crops, 196–197

genome-wide association mapping, 202
incompatibility between natural accessions, 

201–202

overview, 195–196
prediction of variation in molecular function 

with model systems, 200–201

quantitative trait loci analysis

Arabidopsis thaliana, 197–198
maize, 199
rice, 199–200
wheat, 200

structural genome variation, 198–199
trade-offs between different beneficial  

traits, 202

Genome sequencing, see also DNA 

sequencing

assembly and alignment programs, 86–87
association mapping
definitions, 91–92
implications, 94–95
markers and marker density, 93–94
population size and structure, 92–93
bacterial artificial chromosomes, 84–85
browsers, 87–88
diversity of plant genomes, 83–84
high-throughput sequencing, 86
single molecule and real-time  

sequencing, 86

syntenic maps, see Comparative genomics

Genome-wide association (GWA)

gene identification for commercially 

important traits, 171–173

genetic variation mapping, 202
quantitative trait loci, 27

GER4c, 338
GFA1, 247
Gibberellic acid (GA)

flowering time regulation, 392–393
jasmonic acid biosynthesis regulation, 188
male reproduction regulation, 187–188
temperature extreme signaling, 298–299
Glutathione S-transferase (GST), 280, 313

Glycinebetaine, chilling sensitivity protection, 

278, 434

Golden Rice, xxxvi, 14, 426
GPAT, 433
GPDL, 297
GR-RBP, 295
GST, see Glutathione S-transferase
GURT, see Genetic use restriction 

technology

GWA, see Genome-wide association

H
Hairy root culture
advantages, 48
bioreactors and scale-up, 48–50
overview, 47–48
protein expression examples, 48–49

HAL2, 279
Haploid technology

cytological basis underlying  

induction, 145

factors affecting induction of microspore 

embryos

developmental stage of  

microspore, 146

genotype, 146
growth regulators, 147
medium, 147
stress pre-treatment, 146

ovary and ovule cultures for haploid 

induction, 147

overview, 144–145
tissue culture, 135

HAPPY, 246
HARDY, 278
HAT, see Histone acetyltransferase
HD3A, 388
HDA1, 23f
HDAC, see Histone deacetylase
HDM, see Histone demethylase
Heat stress response, see Temperature
Hepatitis B virus, seed-based expression system 

for antigen expression, 41

Heterosis, generation with marker-assisted 

selection, 174

Histone acetyltransferase (HAT), 209–210
Histone deacetylase (HDAC), 209–210
Histone demethylase (HDM), 209–210
Histone methyltransferase (HMT), 209–210
Histone modification, see Epigenetics
HKT genes, 279
HMGB genes, 297
HMS1, 250
HOS1, 296
HOS9, 293
HTA1, 108
HY5, 412
Hybrid seed, production using cytoplasmic 

male sterility, 189, 191

Hydrothermolysis, biofuel generation, 499

I
ICE genes, 293, 296
IDA, 430
IL, see Introgression line
Imprinting, see Epigenetics
Infection, see Pathogen resistance
Insect resistance

avidin, 353
Bacillus thuringiensis

benefits of Bt crops, 349
Bt brinjal, 347–348
Bt cotton, 346–347
Bt maize, 344–346
Bt rice, 348
Bt soybean, 348
concerns about Bt crops, 349–350
Cry proteins, 344
discontinued crops, 347
historical perspective, 343–344
prospects, 350

chitinase, 353
cowpea trypsin inhibitor, 350–351
microorganism-derived toxins, 351
plant-derived toxins, 351–352
recombinant insecticides, 354
RNA interference, 353
secondary metabolite manipulation, 352
vegetative insecticidal proteins, 351

Intellectual property (IP)

freedom-to-operate, 532–534
international agreements

International Treaty on Plant Genetic 

Resources, 527–528

Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights, 

527

Union International pour la Protection des 

Obtentions Végétales, 526–527

needs, 536–537
overview, xxvi
research and development promotion, 

525–526

technology transfer, 534–536
types of protection

material transfer agreement, 531–532
patents

distribution by industry, 533
gene patents, 530
plant patent, 528–529
utility patent, 529–530

plant variety protection, 528
trademark, 532

International Treaty on Plant Genetic 
Resources (ITPGR), 527–528

Introgression line (IL), gene identification 

for commercially important traits, 
170–172

Invasive species, 4–5
IOA, see Iodoacetate
Iodoacetate (IOA), protoplast fusion, 148
IP, 412

Index

IP, see Intellectual property
IPT, 428
ITPGR, see International Treaty on Plant 

Genetic Resources

J
JA, see Jasmonic acid
Jasmonic acid (JA)

gibberellic acid regulation of biosynthesis, 188
male reproduction regulation, 188

JOINTLESSS, 430

K
KDEL motif, 38–39
KIN genes, 395
Knotted1, 427
KP4, 334
KRP6, 186
KRP7, 186

L
LAX, 199, 201
LBD genes, 380
lcn loci, 408
LD, see Linkage disequilibrium
Leaf, protein expression systems

overview, 44–46
stable versus transient expression, 44, 46–47
Zera system, 47

LEAFY, flowering time regulation, 390–391, 

395

LEC genes, 249
Legal aspects, see Intellectual property; 

Regulatory framework, biotechnology 
products

Legumes, domestication, 7–8
Linkage disequilibrium (LD)
association mapping, 92–94
gene identification for commercially 

important traits, 170

LIS, 247
LOB, 248
LOS2, 294
LOV1, 294

M
MAD53, 209
MADS-box genes, 409–411, 519
MAF, flowering time regulation, 389
MAGIC, see Multiparental Advanced 

Generation InterCross

Magnifection, 470–471
Maize

Bt maize, 344–346, 568
domestication, 7
genetic variation, 199
proteomics, 61

581

Index

Male reproduction, see also Cytoplasmic male 

sterility
gametogenesis

pollen mitosis I, 185–186
pollen mitosis II, 186–187

hormonal influences

auxin, 189
brassinosteroids, 188–189
gibberellic acid, 187–188
jasmonic acid, 188

sterility mutant studies of anther 

development, 187

Male sterility, see Cytoplasmic male sterility
Marker-assisted selection (MAS)
breeding applications, 174–176
DNA markers

MeDIP, see Methylated DNA 
immunoprecipitation

MEL1, 245
Mercury

detoxification mechanisms in plants, 

314–315

hyperaccumulation, 316
phytoremediation, 315–316
pollution and toxicity, 314

Meristem culture, see Micropropagation
MET1, 208, 221–222
Metabolomics

breeding and metabolite quantitative  

trait loci, 75

challenges

compartmentation of plant  

amplified fragment length polymorphism, 

metabolism, 76

high-resolution sampling, 76
metabolic flux measurement, 77–78
metabolome identification, 77
model organism application to crops, 76
primary versus secondary metabolism, 

76–77
data analysis

normalization and data transformation, 72
preprocessing, 72
statistical analysis, 72–73
visualization of data, 73

functional genomics, 75
network analysis, 68–69
overview, 26–27, 67–68
phytochemical diversity, phenotyping, and 

classification, 74

postharvest quality analysis, 74
stress response, 74–75
substantial equivalence testing, 73
tools

gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, 

70

liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry, 

70–71

nuclear magnetic resonance, 71
overview, 69

prospects, 78

Methylated DNA immunoprecipitation 

(MeDIP), epigenomics, 213

Microinjection, principles of transformation, 

118–119
Micropropagation

automation, 231–232
energy consumption and lights, 232
liquid media culture, 233
microorganisms

beneficial microorganism inoculation, 

234–238

167

breeding applications

diversity conservation, 174
heterosis generation, 174
introgression, 174
plant identification, 173
pyramiding, 174
overview, 165–166
random amplified polymorphic  

DNA, 167

restriction fragment length polymorphism, 

166–167

simple sequence repeats, 167–168
single nucleotide polymorphism, 168

DNA sequencing, 169–170
gene identification for commercially 

important traits

chemical genetics, 173
classical techniques, 170–171
expression quantitative trait loci, 173
genome-wide association, 171–173
RNA interference, 173
targeting induced local lesions in genomes, 

171
genotyping

diverse arrays technology, 168
mass spectrometry, 168–169
single nucleotide polymorphism arrays, 

168–169

historical perspective, 164
limitations, 176–177
overview, 163–164
prospects, 177–178
quantitative trait loci
abiotic stresses, 165
agronomic traits, 165
biotic stresses, 164–165

MAS, see Marker-assisted selection
Mass spectrometry, see Marker-assisted 

selection; Metabolomics;  
Proteomics

Material transfer agreement (MTA),  

531–532

MEA, 220–221, 250

582

acclimatization and hardening, 231
disinfection and start of axenic culture, 

230

elongation and promotion of shoots and 

roots development, 231

initiation of culture, 230
multiplication, 230–231

virus elimination, 238

MicroRNA

flowering time regulation

miR156, 393
miR159, 393
miR167, 393
miR169, 393–394
miR172, 394
functions, 211

Microspore embryo, see Haploid technology
Minerals, bioavailability improvement through 

metabolic engineering, 449

MLO, 335
MMK4, 290
MPK4, 334
MS1, 187
MSH1, 190
MSI1, 220, 250
MSP1, 244–245
MTA, see Material transfer agreement
Multiparental Advanced Generation InterCross 

(MAGIC), 93

MYB2, 280
MYB12, 452
MYB15, 294
MYB30, 333
MYBC1, 294

N
Nac family proteins, transgenic plants, 279
NAM, see Nested Association Mapping
NAM genes, 279
NAS, 449
Nematode resistance, engineering approaches, 

354

Nested Association Mapping (NAM), 93
NEV, 430
NHX genes, 279
Nitric oxide (NO), temperature extreme 

signaling, 299

NO, see Nitric oxide
NOS1, 429
NOZZLE, 187, 244
NPK1, 290
NPR1, 333
NRT1.1, 378
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), 

plant–microbe interactions during in vitro 

metabolomics, 71

and ex vitro stages, 233–234

overview, 229
photoautotrophic cultures, 232–233
shoot multiplication through meristem 

culture

O
ODO1, 455
Oil body, protein accumulation, 41

Onion, flavor as engineering target, 457
OSD1, 246
OVATE, 406
Ovule, development

apomictic reproduction, 244
sexual reproduction, 244

Oxidative stress

abscission role, 433
redox regulation genes, 279–280
senescence role, 429

P
P5CS, 278, 291
PAHs, see Polyaromatic hydrocarbons
Papaya, biolistic transformation case study

ring spot virus

infection, 122, 125, 347
resistance transfer, 125–126

testing, deregulation, and commercialization, 

127

transgene characterization, 127

PARP, 556
Parthenogenesis, 248–250
Patent, see Intellectual property
Pathogen resistance, see also Virus infection

genes for transgenic expression
antimicrobial genes, 334–335
elicitors of immunity, 332
immune receptors mediating pathogen 

recognition, 330–331

number of genes expressed, 335–336
pathogen virulence targeting, 335
signaling network genes, 332–334

sites and timing of transgene expression

overview, 336–337
pathogen-responsive elements, 338–339
promoters

pathogen-responsive, 337–338
synthetic, 338–339
tissue-specific, 337–338

Pathogen-derived resistance (PDR), 345–348
PB, see Protein body
PCBs, see Polychlorinated biphenyls
PDH47, 296
PDR, see Pathogen-derived resistance
Pectate lyase, 418, 431
PENNYFOOLISH, flowering time regulation, 

391

PENNYWISE, flowering time regulation, 391
Pesticides, phytoremediation, 321–323
Pgst1, 337
PHA, see Polyhydroxyalkanoate
Pharmaceutical proteins, see Expression systems
PHE1, 208–209, 221
Phenomics, root system architecture analysis, 

381–382

Photoperiod, flowering time regulation, 395
PHYA, 288
Phytoremediation

arsenic

Index

food contamination and health 

implications, 311–312
phytoremediation, 312–313
pollution and toxicity, 311
uptake and detoxification mechanisms in 

Postharvest loss, see Storage
Potato virus X (PVX), 347
Potato virus Y (PVY), 347
Proanthocyanidins, quality  
improvement, 452

plants, 312

uptake prevention in crops, 313–314

BTEX chemicals, polyaromatic 

hydrocarbons, and polychlorinated 
biphenyls, 320–321

explosives, 319–320
mercury

detoxification mechanisms in plants, 

314–315

hyperaccumulation, 316
phytoremediation, 315–316
pollution and toxicity, 314

overview, 309–311
pesticides, 321–323
prospects, 323
selenium

manipulation of metabolism, 317–318
metabolism in plants, 316–317
phytoremediation, 317

solvents, 318–319
transgene mitigation, 520a

PIPRA, see Public Intellectual Property 

Resource for Agriculture

PME, 417
Pollen-tube pathway, principles of 

transformation, 119

Pollen

male gametogenesis

pollen mitosis I, 185–186
pollen mitosis II, 186–187

organelle metabolism influence on 

development, 190–191
Pollution, see Phytoremediation
Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 
phytoremediation, 320–321

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 

phytoremediation, 321

Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA), transgenic crop 

production, 489–491

Polymer expression

bioplastics and fibers from proteins, 485
cellulose, 482–483
overview, xxx, 481–482
rubber, 483–485
starch, 482
transgenic crop production

biopolymer selection, 486–487
crop selection, 487
cyanophycin, 488–489
fibrous proteins, 487–488
polyhydroxyalkanoate, 489–491
prospects, 491–492
rationale, 485–486

POPEYE, 378
Post-translational modification (PTM), mass 

spectrometry analysis, 58–59

PROG1, 199
Propagation in vitro, see Micropropagation
Protein body (PB), accumulation of proteins, 

39

Protein expression, see Expression systems
Proteomics

advances and prospects, 26, 61–62
Arabidopsis thaliana as model organism, 

59–61

crop applications, 60–61
history of crop proteomics, 59
mass spectrometry-based proteomics

ionization techniques, 58
overview, 56
post-translational modification analysis, 

58–59

quantitative proteomics, 58
sample preparation, 56–57
spectra assignment, 58
tandem mass spectrometry, 58
workflow, 56–57

Protoplast, fusion, 148–150
PRP4, 247
PTM, see Post-translational modification
PTOV, metabolomics data visualization, 73
Public Intellectual Property Resource for 

Agriculture (PIPRA), 533

PVS3, 337
PVX, see Potato virus X
PVY, see Potato virus Y
Pyramiding, marker-assisted selection, 174
Pyrolysis, biofuel generation, 501–502

Q
QDR, see Quantitative disease resistance
QTL, see Quantitative trait loci
Quantitative disease resistance (QDR), 336
Quantitative trait loci (QTL)

abiotic stress response mappling, 

 274–275

gene identification for commercially 

important traits with expression 
quantitative trait loci, 173

genetic variation analysis

Arabidopsis thaliana, 197–198
maize, 199
rice, 199–200
wheat, 200

genome-wide association study, 27
intraspecies comparison, 88
marker-assisted selection, see Marker-assisted 

selection

metabolite quantitative trait loci, 75
positional cloning, 92
root system architecture analysis, 381

583

Index

R
Random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD)

marker-assisted selection, 167
somatic hybrid identification, 150–151

RAPD, see Random amplified polymorphic 

DNA

RD29A, 292
RDX, see Research Department Explosive
Regulatory framework, biotechnology products

commercialization aspects, 542–543
economics, 573–574
Environmental Protection Agency, 546–547
Food and Drug Administration, 547
importance, 573
needs, 547–548, 574
overview for Unites States, 543–545
regional differences, 573
standardization, 548
USDA-APHIS, 545–546

Reproduction, see Apoximis; Male reproduction
Research Department Explosive (RDX), 

phytoremediation, 319–320

Restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP), marker-assisted selection, 
166–167

Resveratrol

biosynthesis, 451
overview, 451–452

RFLP, see Restriction fragment length 

polymorphism

RGA1, 188
RGL2, 188
Rice

arsenic levels, 311
Bt rice, 348
genetic variation, 199–200
Golden Rice, xxxvi, 14, 426
proteomics, 60–61

Ripening, see Fruit
RNA interference

gene identification for commercially 

important traits, 173

insect resistance engineering, 353
insect transmission of viruses and resistance, 

346–348

nematode resistance engineering, 354

RNA-directed DNA methylation, 211–212
Roche 454 pyrosequencing, 23, 170
Root, see also Hairy root culture

crop root systems

embryonic and post-embryonic root 

systems, 379–380

evolutionary strategies and trade-offs, 380
types, 379

environmental sensing and exudation, 

376–377

microbial interactions, 377–378
micropropagation, 231
root system architecture

analysis

584

high-throughput sequencing, 381
phenomics, 381–382
quantitative analysis, 380–381

nutrient availability responses, 378–379
overview, 373
possibilities, 374–375

signaling in development, 375–376
stereotypical organization, 362
systems biology concept of cell identity, 376

ROS1, 209
RPK1, 290
RPW genes, 331
RTCS, 379
Rubber, biosynthesis, 483–485

S
SA, see Salicylic acid
SAG12, 428
SALD, see South American leaf blight
Salicylic acid (SA)

temperature extreme signaling, 299
treatment for cold stress, 291–292

Salt tolerance, see Stress tolerance
Sanger sequencing, 23
SBP, 200
SCOF1, 294
SDC, 211
SDP, 186
Secondary metabolism, specific metabolites
biosynthetic gene identification, 449–450
enhancement through genetic modification, 

445, 456–458
insect resistance, 352
organelle development modulation, 450–451
overview, 443–444
transcription factor identification, 450
volatiles

biochemistry, 453–454
flavor compounds in fruits, 454–455
flower scent/aroma, 455
overview, 452–453
vegetative organs, 455–456

Seed, see also Apoximis

hybrid seed production using cytoplasmic 

male sterility, 189, 191

protein expression systems, 41–44
repressible seed-lethal technologies for 
transgene flow containment, 514
shattering for transgene mitigation, 518
tissue culture and artificial seeds, 135–136

Selection in vitro, see Stress tolerance
Selenium

manipulation of metabolism, 317–318
metabolism in plants, 316–317
phytoremediation, 317

Senescence, see Storage
SEPALLATA, 187
SEPALLATA3, flowering time regulation, 391
Sequencing, see DNA sequencing
SERK, 249, 430

Sesamins, quality improvement, 452
SFT, 176, 388
SGR, 411
Shade avoidance, transgene mitigation, 519
Shoot, multiplication through meristem 
culture, see Micropropagation

Signal recognition particle (SRP), protein 

routing, 37

Silica carbide whisker, principles of 

transformation, 119

SIMADS genes, 409
Simple sequence repeats (SSRs), marker-

assisted selection, 167–168

Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), 

marker-assisted selection, 168–169

SINr, 411
SIPG2, 417
SIXTH, 417
SIZ1, 296
SM1, 332
SMRT sequencing, 23, 170
SNAC1, 279
SNAC2, 294
SNP, see Single nucleotide polymorphism
SOC1, flowering time regulation, 390
Soioeconomic issues, see Developing countries
SOD, see Superoxide dismutase
Softening, see Storage
SOLiD sequencing, 213
Somatic embryogenesis

factors affecting

chemical inducers, 142–143
explant and genotype, 142
histodifferentiation, 143
toxins, 143

gene expression, 144
mass propagation and somaclonal variation, 

144

maturation of plants, 143
overview, 141–142
patterns, 142
regeneration, 144
tissue culture, 135
Somatic hybridization

factors affecting regeneration, 151
identification of hybrids, 150–151
protoplast fusion, 148–150
selection of hybrids, 150
types of hybrids, 148

South American leaf blight (SALB),  

483–484

Soybean, Bt soybean, 348
SP, 389
SPL, 244
SPL, flowering time regulation, 391
SPL14, 199–200
SRP, see Signal recognition particle
SSRs, see Simple sequence repeats
Starch, biosynthesis, 482
STM, 244
Storage

abscission

abscission zone development, 430
ethylene role, 431
gene regulation, 430–431
manipulation, 431
overview, 429–430

biotechnology implications for postharvest 

quality, 436
chilling sensitivity

low-temperature response regulation, 

433–434

membrane structure effects, 432–433
overview, 431–432
oxidative stress role, 433
protective molecules, 434–435

ionic balance genes, 279
Nac family proteins, 279
osmoregulation genes, 275–278
prospects, 281
redox regulation genes, 279–280
transcriptional reprogramming, 280

STZ, 294
SUC1, 394
SUP, 208
Superdomestication, 14–16
Superoxide dismutase (SOD), 279
SVP, flowering time regulation, 389
SWI1, 246
Syntenic map, see Comparative genomics
Systems Biology Graphical Notation  

ethylene and postharvest quality of fresh 

language, 24

produce, 426–427

postharvest loss, 425
postharvest senescence of leafy vegetables 

and flowers

chlorophyll degradation, 429
overview, 427
oxidative stress role, 429
regulatory genes, 427–428
senescence-associated hormone 

biosynthesis and perception, 
428–429

slow growth storage for conservation, 

258–259

texture and appearance of fruits and 

vegetables
overview, 435
softening

cell wall hydrolysis, 435
turgor, 435

tissue lignification, 435–436

Stress tolerance

drought

breeding for tolerance, 273–275
germplasm resources for tolerance, 274
impact, 272
plant responses, 272–275

engineering importance, 29–30
hormone manipulation, 280–281
metabolomics of stress response, 74–75
need to protect plants, xxxii
productivity impact of abiotic stresses, 271
salinity

breeding for tolerance, 273–275
germplasm resources for tolerance, 274
impact, 272
plant responses, 272–275

screening and breeding using in vitro 

selection

biotic stress resistance, 152–153
overview, 151
prospects, 155
salt tolerance, 152, 154–155

T
TAGL genes, 409–410
TAM, 246
TAPG1, 431
TAPG4, 431
Targeting induced local lesions in genomes 

(TILLING)

abiotic stress tolerance breeding, 275
gene identification for commercially 

important traits, 171

tb1, 199
TBG genes, 417
TCE, see Trichloroethylene
TCH genes, 289
TD4, 410–411
TDF1, 187
TDL1A, 245
T-DNA, see Agrobacterium-mediated 

transformation

TDZ, see Thidiazuron
Technology transfer (TT), 534–536
Temperature

cross-talk between plant responses to 

extreme temperatures
calcium flux signaling, 298
gene expression regulation, 299–300
hormones, 298–299
membranes in perception, 298
model for integration of low-and high-

temperature signaling  
pathways, 300

flowering time regulation, 396–397
heat stress response, 287
low-temperature response of plants

epigenetic regulation, 296–297
gene expression

post-transcriptional control, 295–296
transcriptional control, 292–295

perception, 288–289
signal transduction

temperature extremes, see Temperature
transgenic plants

dehydration-responsive element, 278

calcium flux, 289–290
miscellaneous molecules, 290–292

postharvest chilling sensitivity, see Storage

Index

TEMPRANILLO, flowering time regulation, 

390
TERF1, 278
TERF2, 291
Terminator gene, transgene flow containment, 

513

TEV, see Tobacco etch virus
TFL1, 389–390, 397
TGA3, 109
Thidiazuron (TDZ), somatic embryogenesis 

induction, 142

TILLING, see Targeting induced local lesions 

in genomes

Tissue culture, see also Micropropagation

artificial seeds, 135–136
environmental aspects, 133
flowering in vitro, 136
goals for crop improvement, 131
haploid tissue culture, 135
laboratory setup, 131–132
media, 132–133
prospects, 136
regeneration modes, 134
somatic embryogenesis, 135
tissue preparation, 132
types, 133–134

TMV, see Tobacco mosaic virus
TNT, see Trinitrotoluene
Tobacco etch virus (TEV), 346
Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), 347, 349
Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV), 345
Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights 

(TRIPS), 527

Trademark, see Intellectual property
Transcriptome

mapping of comprehensive, genome-wide, 

treatment-specific transcript profiles, 
23

profiling, 25–26

Transformation, see also Agrobacterium-

mediated transformation; Biolistic 
transformation

bioactive beads, 118
electrophoretic transfection, 117–118
microinjection, 118–119
pollen tube pathway transformation, 119
silica carbide whisker-mediated 

transformation, 119

Transgene flow

containment of genes
asexual crops, 513
chemically-induced promoters, 513–514
gene targeting to cytoplasmic  

genome, 512

genetic chaperone, 515
genetic use restriction technology, 513
importance, 511
male sterility, 512–513
recoverable block of function, 514
repressible seed-lethal technologies, 514
trans-splicing, 514–515

585

Index

Transgene flow (Continued)

transient expression, 515–516

mitigation

biennieal and annual root crops, 520
chemical mitigation

activatable genes for susceptibility to 

chemicals, 519

herbicide hypersensitivity, 519

deleterious effects, 517–518
demonstration, 516–517
morphological trait and genes for 

mitigation

dwarfing, 518–519
secondary dormancy, 518
seed shattering, 518
shade avoidance, 519

overview, 516
pharmaceutical protein expression 

systems, 520

phytoremediation, 520

overview, xxxv–xxxvi, 509–510
relationship between crops, weeds, and wild 

species, 510–511

thresholds, 511
Transgenic plants

abiotic stress tolerance engineering

dehydration-responsive element, 278
ionic balance genes, 279
Nac family proteins, 279
osmoregulation genes, 275–278
prospects, 281
redox regulation genes, 279–280
transcriptional reprogramming, 280

crop applications, 28–29
expression systems, see Expression systems; 

Polymer expression

intellectual property rights, see Intellectual 

property

pathogen resistance engineering, see 

Pathogen resistance

Transposable elements, epigenomics, 216–217
Trehalose, 8-phosphate, 394
Trichloroethylene (TCE), phytoremediation, 

318–319

Trinitrotoluene (TNT), phytoremediation, 

transmission, 344–345

319–320

TRIPS, see Trade-related Intellectual Property 

Rights
TSF, 220, 388
TT, see Technology transfer
TYLCV, see Tomato yellow leaf curl virus

U
Union International pour la Protection des 

Obtentions Végétales (UPOV), 
526–527

UPA box, 339
UPOV, see Union International pour la 

Protection des Obtentions Végétales

V
Vacuole, protein accumulation, 39–40
VANTED, metabolomics data  

visualization, 73

Vegetative insecticidal proteins (VIPs), insect 

resistance engineering, 351

VEL1, 220
Vernalization

flowering time regulation, 395–396
genes, 200, 219–220

VIN3, 219
VIP1, 100
VIPs, see Vegetative insecticidal proteins
Virazole, virus elimination, 238
VirD2, 100
VirE2, 100
Virus infection, see also Pathogen resistance

airborne virus management, 345
insect transmission and resistance

pathogen-derived resistance, 345–348
RNA interference, 346–348

micropropagation and virus elimination, 238
phytosanitation and quarantine regulation, 344
productivity impact, 343–344
risks associated with transgenic virus 

resistance, 348–349

Vitamin A, biosynthesis, 446–447
Vitamin C, biosynthesis, 448
Vitamin E, biosynthesis, 447
Volatiles, see Secondary metabolism
VRN1, 220
VRN2, 219–220
VRN3, 388

W
Water use efficiency (WUE), 272–273
WEE1, 409
Weed

crops as, 4
definition, 4
impact on agriculture, 4

Wheat streak mosaic virus (WSMV),  

348–349

Wheat

genetic variation, 200
transgene flow containment, 515

WSMV, see Wheat streak mosaic virus
WUE, see Water use efficiency
WUS, 244, 249–250, 409

X
XTH, 435

Y
Yield

improvement, xxii–xxiii
traits in domestication, 8

Z
ZAT12, 292–293
Zea mays, epigenomics, 217–218
Zera system, 47
ZFP2, 431
ZFP252, 278

586

