Tomasz Ani´sko received his master’s degree in hor-
ticulture from the August Cieszkowski Agricultural
University in Pozna´n, Poland, and his doctorate in
horticulture  from  the  University  of  Georgia  in
Athens.  He  studied  at  the  Royal  Horticultural
Society’s Garden at Wisley in England during a sab-
batical,  and  held  an  internship  at  the  Morris
Arboretum in Philadelphia. In his role as curator of
plants  at  Longwood  Gardens,  Dr.  Ani´sko  partici-
pated in seven of the expeditions described in this
book.

Jacket front: The Love Temple resides in Peirce’s Woods, a 
7-acre woodland at Longwood Gardens. Photo by Larry
Albee. Jacket back: A view towards Doshong La, Tibet.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko. Author photograph by Anna
Ani´sko.

For details on other Timber Press books or to receive our 
catalog, please visit our Web site, www.timberpress.com. 
In the United States and Canada you may also reach us at 
1-800-327-5680, and in the United Kingdom at 
uk@timberpress.com

TOMASZ
ANI´SKO

P L A N T   E X P L O R A T I O N   F O R

$69.95

P
L
A
N
T

 

E
X
P
L
O
R
A
T
I

O
N

 

F
O
R

ISBN-13:  978-0-88192-738-2
ISBN-10:  0-88192-738-4

E
A
N

Timber Press

T O M A S Z   A N I ´S K O

L O N G W O O D G A R D E N S of Kennett Square,
Pennsylvania, enjoys a long and distinguished tradi-
tion of plant exploration, dating back to the founda-
tion of its arboretum in 1798. The arboretum was a
home for plants gathered by a number of the earli-
est  botanical  explorers  of  America,  including  John
and  William  Bartram,  Humphry  and  Moses
Marshall,  and  André  Michaux.  When  Longwood
Gardens was opened to the public in the 1950s, this
tradition of plant exploration was rekindled by the
inauguration  of  a  continuing  series  of  expeditions
around  the  world  in  search  of  plants  worthy  of
introduction into cultivation. By the time of the gar-
den’s  centennial  in  2006,  fifty  such  plant-hunting
expeditions had taken place on six continents and in
some fifty countries. These quests for plants are the
subject of Plant Exploration for Longwood Gardens,
which tells the stories of the people who participat-
ed  in  these  often  arduous  but  always  stimulating
adventures and the plants they brought back.

Illustrated with 500 photographs, more than 475
in color, and with 25 color maps, Plant Exploration
for Longwood Gardens provides a complete account
of expeditions to the Himalaya, Japan, the Korean
Peninsula, China, Australia and the Pacific, Africa,
Siberia  and  the  Caucasus,  the  Mediterranean,  the
Caribbean,  and  South  America.  Not  only  were
plants brought back to grow at Longwood Gardens,
where a number of them can be seen and enjoyed
today,  they  were  also  included  in  a  program  of
experiment and study, to determine how they could
best be propagated and introduced into the horti-
cultural trade and thus into gardens throughout the
world.

£50.00

Plant  Exploration  for

LONGWOOD  GARDENS

P L A N T   E X P L O R A T I O N   F O R

T O M A S Z   A N I ´S K O

Foreword by Christopher Brickell

T I M B E R   P R E S S

Copyright © 2006 by Longwood Gardens, Inc. All rights reserved.

Frontispiece: An opening in a hornbeam hedge provides a glimpse of a misty flower garden at Longwood.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Published in 2006 by
Timber Press, Inc.
The Haseltine Building
133 S.W. Second Avenue, Suite 450
Portland, Oregon 97204-3527, U.S.A.

www.timberpress.com

For contact information regarding editorial, sales, and distribution in the United Kingdom, 
see www.timberpress.com/uk.

ISBN-13: 978-0-88192-738-2
ISBN-10: 0-88192-738-4

Printed through Colorcraft Ltd., Hong Kong

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Ani´sko, Tomasz, 1963-
Plant exploration for Longwood Gardens / Tomasz Ani´sko ; foreword by
Christopher Brickell.

p. cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-88192-738-2
ISBN-10: 0-88192-738-4
1.  Plant collection--History. 2.  Phytogeography--History. 3.
Botanical specimens--Collection and preservation--History. 4.  Longwood
Gardens (Kennett Square, Pa.)--History.  I. Title. 
QK15.A55 2006
580'.75--dc22

2005022139

A catalog record for this book is also available from the British Library.

In memory of 

DR. RUSSELL J. SEIBERT,

the first director of 

Longwood Gardens

Contents

Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgments
Note on Plant Nomenclature

HIMALAYA AND ADJACENT REGIONS

The last of its kind      
On the trail of the Himalayan elms       
Roadless kingdom       
Racing against the monsoon       
On the fringes of Tibet         
Tibet’s gorges and mountain passes      

JAPAN        

Forested archipelago
Japan’s wild side
Treasure house

SOUTH KOREA      

Rediscovering Korean flora
In pursuit of cold-hardy camellias
Seven mountains

CHINA     

Taiwan “off-limits”
Stepping onto the mainland
Tapping the Qinling Mountains
Frontier mountains
Hemlock hunting
China’s camellia lands

AUSTRALASIA         

Down under
Indonesia’s Kebun Raya
A big lump of country
Around the Pacific
Australia’s drive-by flora

8
10
11
11

12

12
19
23
30
37
43

50

50
60
68

72

72
80
85

90

90
97
103
107
112
116

125

125
135
141
150
156

AFRICA        

Plantsman’s safari
Taking cues from Mother Nature
South Africa revisited
Reviving cornflower blue

RUSSIA AND ITS NEIGHBORS  

World’s largest country
From Siberia with plants
Return of the Argonauts
From the Caspian to the Black Sea

EUROPE  

From the Mediterranean to the North Sea
Learning from Europe
Europe’s garden flora

AROUND THE CARIBBEAN      

Dominica roots
Not enough time here
Plant hunting on Mayan grounds
Retracing Costa Rican trails
Graduates in the tropics
Costa Rican affair continues
Expanding the scope
Cloudberries and the cloud forest

SOUTH AMERICA         

Desire for daturas
Traversing the southern states of Brazil
Emissary to South America
Peruvian attraction
Chilean reconnaissance
Between the fences

Epilogue
References
Index

164

164
174
180
183

186

186
191
197
209

216

216
229
235

242

242
249
254
257
261
264
269
272

278

278
281
287
295
303
311

319
321
326

Foreword

CHRISTOPHER BRICKELL

Former director of the Royal Horticultural Society’s Garden at Wisley 

and retired director general of the RHS

Longwood  Gardens  has  long  been  valued  by  gardeners
and botanists as one of the greatest gardens in the world,
famed particularly for the magnificent displays of orna-
mental  plants  both  in  the  very  fine  conservatories  and
outdoors in the historic park and arboretum. The art and
aesthetics  of  horticulture  are  very  evident  wherever  one
goes  at  Longwood,  as  are  the  skills  of  the  gardeners  in
growing the superb collections.

Less well known, however, is the very important role
that Longwood has played in the introduction of plants
from many areas of the world, starting during the second
half  of  the  twentieth  century  and  continuing  until  the
present day.

This  quest  for  plants—plant  exploration  or  plant
hunting—has,  over  many  centuries,  intrigued  and  in
some instances captivated botanists, gardeners and other
travellers who possess an almost primaeval urge to search
for and bring back plants to their own countries for both
study and cultivation.

Much has been written about the exploits and dedi-
cation  of  such  luminaries  as  Robert  Fortune,  David
Douglas,  Ernest  H.  Wilson,  Reginald  Farrer,  Frank
Kingdon Ward and many other plant hunters of the nine-
teenth and twentieth centuries, and there is little, if any,
doubt that the scientific, economic and aesthetic value of
their introductions has been immense. But until the pub-
lication of this very comprehensive survey of plant explo-
ration,  little  has  been  written  about  the  fifty  important
expeditions  with  which  Longwood  Gardens  has  been
involved.

In  1956,  Dr.  Russell  J.  Seibert,  the  first  director  of
Longwood  Gardens,  initiated  a  plant  introduction  pro-
gramme,  as  he  realised,  soon  after  his  appointment  in
1955,  that,  while  the  collections  were  already  very

diverse, it would be essential for the future of Longwood
as a world-class public display garden to introduce “new
blood”  in  the  form  of  plant  introductions  from  many
other parts of the world so that the already fine collec-
tions  of  plants  both  under  glass  and  outdoors  could  be
greatly expanded and enhanced.

This introduction programme was followed in 1960
by  a  complementary  programme  of  scientific  research
using a new range of experimental greenhouses to carry
out  trials  and  breeding  programmes  with  newly  intro-
duced  plants.  A  considerable  number  of  the  introduc-
tions proved new to cultivation, while some were new to
science.  Other  collections  of  plants  were  reintroduced,
and, although already known in gardens and commerce,
these have provided a wider gene pool from which new
cultivars have been selected; and yet others, like the now
ubiquitous  New  Guinea  Impatiens, have  resulted  from
breeding programmes carried out at Longwood and else-
where.

The  other  very  considerable  benefits  resulting  from
the  Longwood  plant  exploration  and  introduction
scheme have been to enhance the already strong educa-
tional work of Longwood in association with the Univer-
sity of Delaware, as well as to enable selections from the
new plant introductions to be made available through the
nursery industry for the wider benefit of gardeners, par-
ticularly in the United States and Canada but also more
widely in other parts of the world.

Additionally,  authentic,  well-documented  living
plant  material  from  the  wild,  as  well  as  the  herbarium
specimens brought back by these expeditions, have been
very valuable for systematists in their taxonomic work.

While the plant introduction scheme was originally
carried out in association with the New Crops Research

8

Foreword

Branch  of  the  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture  (the
USDA-Longwood  plant  exploration  program),  a  very
wide range of other institutions in the United States has
also been involved during the fifty years this important
and  very  successful  project  has  been  established.  Such
detailed  organisation  also  demands  the  active  assistance
and cooperation of organisations and individuals in the
countries  visited,  in  itself  a  remarkable  achievement
bearing in mind the inevitable problems of finance, lan-
guage, access, and legal and political problems that have
been overcome.

As  will  be  seen  from  the  contents  page,  during  the
fifty years since this plant exploration scheme for Long-
wood Gardens was first activated, the fifty expeditions so
far undertaken have taken place on six continents and in
some fifty countries in search of plants to introduce both
for their ornamental value and for research purposes.

For  my  part,  these  tales  of  plant  exploration  bring
back  nostalgic  memories  of  my  own  past  (and,  I  trust,
future)  forays  to  some  of  the  wild  and  mountainous
regions of the world and the excitement of searching for
and finding plants in their natural habitats.

Others, I feel sure, will find this a very stimulating,
readable  and  enjoyable  account  of  the  search  for  plants
that admirably carries on the tradition of the many plant
hunters of the past two centuries who so greatly enriched
our  gardens  and  contributed  so  much  to  our  scientific
understanding of the plant world.

It  is  very  fitting  that  this  account  of  the  history  of
plant exploration at Longwood Gardens will not only cel-
ebrate  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  the  first  expedition  of
the plant introduction programme but will also mark the
centennial of Longwood Gardens itself.

9

Preface

FREDERICK E. ROBERTS, Director of Longwood Gardens

Plant Exploration for Longwood Gardens describes a tradi-
tion of plant introduction as part of Longwood history
for more than two centuries. In 1798 Samuel and Joshua
Peirce, great grandsons of George Peirce, the first Euro-
pean owner of Longwood property, started an arboretum
later to be known as Peirce’s Park. By 1830 they had one
of the finest collections of woody plants of any park or
arboretum  in  the  United  States.  Many  plants  in  the
arboretum  were  transplanted  from  the  wooded  areas  of
Pennsylvania; some were collected by the brothers as far
north as the Catskill Mountains of New York and as far
south  as  Maryland’s  cypress  swamps;  still  others  came
from the famed explorers of that time such as John and
William  Bartram,  Humphry  and  Moses  Marshall,  and
André Michaux.

The  Peirces  also  planted  numerous  species  intro-
duced from foreign lands, including Chinese ginkgo and
European  horse-chestnut.  The  early-nineteenth-century
herbarium collection of William Darlington held at West
Chester  University  in  Chester  County,  Pennsylvania,
gives  an  excellent  survey  of  plants  growing  at  Peirce’s
Park. The collection includes a large number of herbar-
ium  specimens,  along  with  a  herbarium  catalogue  that
Darlington completed in 1843. Several of the Peirce spec-
imens in the Darlington collection are of special signifi-
cance,  including  the  Franklinia  alatamaha, commonly
known  as  Franklin  tree,  collected  in  Peirce’s  Park  on  7
August  1828,  a  direct  descendant  of  the  trees  John
Bartram discovered near the Altamaha River in Georgia.
By 1906, Peirce’s Park had been under family owner-
ship  for  several  generations.  Destruction  of  the  park
seemed  inevitable  when  then-owner  Lydia  V.  Bevan
signed an agreement with a Lancaster lumber company
granting  permission  for  trees  on  the  property  to  be  cut
and  used  for  lumber.  In  an  effort  to  save  the  old  trees
from destruction, Pierre S. du Pont, future chairman of
the DuPont chemical company, bought the property in
1906. The heritage of the Peirce family and their devel-
opment of the park is now integral to the history and tra-

dition of Longwood Gardens. As Pierre S. du Pont devel-
oped Longwood Gardens as a private estate, he made a
great effort to collect plants that he personally liked and
thought  would  contribute  to  the  quality  of  his  garden.
His trips to California inspired him to plant a grove fea-
turing  many  of  the  magnificent  West  Coast  conifers,
none  grander  than  giant  sequoias.  Du  Pont  frequently
toured  Europe’s  finest  gardens,  where  he  discovered
French  and  Belgian  camellias,  which  were  imported  to
adorn newly built conservatories.

After Pierre S. du Pont’s death in 1954, Longwood
took on a new role as a public display garden, its mission
to promote the art and enjoyment of horticulture while
providing  opportunities  for  research  and  learning.  To
answer the needs of a public institution with a vision of
becoming the world’s premier display garden, Longwood
needed a greater variety of ornamental plants than were
available in the United States at that time. Beginning in
1956 and over the next half century, a series of more than
fifty expeditions were launched with a goal of finding and
introducing  new  ornamental  plants,  an  effort  unprece-
dented in the history of horticulture in America.

Plants  to  a  gardener  are  like  oils  to  a  painter.  New
plants offer new creative possibilities and aesthetic expe-
riences.  The  great  plant-collecting  expeditions  docu-
mented in this book exemplify how the introduction of
new  plants  provides  inspiration  for  the  gardening  com-
munity  and  thus  allows  the  art  of  horticulture  to  con-
tinue  to  flourish.  Many  plants  found  on  collecting
expeditions  were  successfully  introduced  to  American
nursery  growers  and  consequently  found  their  way  to
millions of American gardens. In some instances, plants
collected and introduced into cultivation have now been
preserved, while their original native stands rapidly disap-
pear. This aspect of plant conservation is critically impor-
tant to the future. From the perspective of the past half
century, dedication to plant exploration has contributed
substantially to the great success Longwood has enjoyed
in being recognized as a world-class garden.

10

Acknowledgments

TOMASZ ANI´SKO

I gratefully acknowledge the assistance of the many people
without  whom  this  book  could  not  have  been  created.
First  and  foremost,  I  am  especially  grateful  to  the  plant
explorers whose stories are told on these pages. Many of
them contributed photographs and commentaries, which
are  reproduced  and  quoted  throughout  the  book.  Some
allowed me access to their field notes, diaries, and personal
letters. Still others offered their encouragement and con-
structive  criticism  in  the  course  of  preparing  the  manu-
script.

I thank those who helped me to uncover publications,
documents, and photographs related to the explorers and
expeditions  presented  in  this  book,  particularly  Robin
Everly  and  Kevin Tunison  of  the  U.S.  National  Arbore-
tum, Susan Fraser and Stephen Sinon of the LuEsther T.
Mertz Library of the New York Botanical Garden, Susan

Fugate  and  Sara  Lee  of  the  U.S.  National  Agricultural
Library, Pauline Hubner and Joanna Wright of the Royal
Geographical Society, Michael Nash of Hagley Museum
and Library, Sandy Reber of Longwood Gardens Archives,
Holly  Reed  of  the  U.S.  National  Archives  and  Records
Administration,  Alan  Stoner  and  Karen Williams  of  the
USDA  Agricultural  Research  Service,  Enola  Teeter  of
Longwood  Gardens  Library,  Judith  Warnement  of
Harvard University Botany Libraries, and Emily Wood of
Harvard University Herbaria.

I  thank  Longwood  Gardens’  volunteers,  Richard
Bitner, David Child, Marylou Sklar, and Frances Staple-
ton, and its interns, Amy Hall, Fowzia Karimi, and Sarah
Lovinger, for their help in researching the archives and for
proofreading the manuscript.

Note on Plant Nomenclature

Because of the historical character of this book, the scien-
tific  names  of  plants  have  been  retained  as  used  at  the
time of the expeditions despite taxonomical changes that
might have affected them since. Therefore, for example,
Datura of the 1950s is retained for plants classified today
as Brugmansia.

Numbers  given  in  parentheses  after  the  scientific
names are accession numbers assigned to plants grown at

Longwood Gardens. The first two digits of the accession
number refer to the year in which a plant was received.
The  subsequent  digits  are  for  the  numerical  order  in
which plants were received during that year. Thus Den-
drobium  chrysotoxum (5751)  was  the  fifty-first  plant
received in 1957, while Buxus sempervirens (02647) was
the 647th plant received in 2002.

11

HIMALAYA AND 

ADJACENT REGIONS

THE LAST OF ITS KIND

“One can count oneself lucky to have lived in a golden
age  of  horticultural  exploration,”  wrote  Frank  Kingdon
Ward  (1956b)  upon  his  return  from  Burma,  now
Myanmar, in 1956. “Hardy plant hunting in South-East
Asia,  as  one  knew  it  in  the  first  half  of  the  twentieth
century,  is  on  a  fade-out  basis.”  The  rapidly  changing
political  situation  in  the  aftermath  of  World  War  II
seemed to herald the end of the golden era of plant col-
lecting. Kingdon Ward viewed his expedition as “among
the last of its kind.”

No one could be in a better position to voice such an
opinion than Kingdon Ward, a veteran of forty-five years
of plant exploration in Southeast Asia, with twenty-two
expeditions behind him. As Sir George Taylor, director of
the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, put it in an introduc-
tion to an annotated bibliography of Kingdon Ward, “No
one travelled more widely in the area, wrote more percep-
tively  about  it,  collected  more  discriminately  and  mar-
shalled  his  observations  so  effectively.  His  record  of
publications on the region is unsurpassed, his reputation
as  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  horticultural  collectors
secure, and his geographical discoveries and stimulating
topographical  interpretations  of  the  very  highest  order”
(Schweinfurth and Schweinfurth-Marby 1975).

Uncharted mountain
In  September  of  1955,  contemplating  his  twenty-third
expedition, Kingdon Ward wrote to Dr. Russell J. Seibert,

who  had  been  appointed  as  the  first  director  of  Long-
wood Gardens just a few months earlier. He presented an
outlook  on  an  expedition  to  Mount  Victoria  (Natma
Taung),  3053  m,  in  Burma’s  Chin  Hills:  “Practically
nothing is known of the flora of Mount Victoria. . . . There
are known to be several species of rhododendron, and I
should expect to find a number of good trees, shrubs and
herbaceous  plants,  both  new  species,  or  if  botanically
known,  not  in  cultivation.”  He  argued  that  although
Mount Victoria had been frequently visited since its dis-
covery in the late nineteenth century, very few of these
visitors were botanists. “Thus we were woefully ignorant
of the flora,” he wrote later (1958). “There is, in fact, no
literature on the botany of Mount Victoria—merely scat-
tered references to and descriptions of isolated plants col-
lected there at various times.”

Kingdon Ward was not deterred by scarcity of pub-
lished information on Mount Victoria or by the prospect
of spending nearly a year on a mountain that was “remote
from the main lines of communication,” “little known to
the people of Burma,” and lacking “even the glamour that
goes with a frontier outpost” (1958). Fortunately, neither
were  his  supporters  deterred.  He  managed  to  draw
enough financial backing from organizations such as the
British  Museum,  the  Royal  Horticultural  Society,  and
Longwood Gardens to embark on an expedition accom-
panied  by  his  wife,  Jean  Kingdon  Ward,  and  Ingrid
Alsterlund, assistant at the Gothenburg Botanic Garden.
The party left London on 5 January 1956, arriving in
Rangoon, now Yangon, Burma’s capital, in early Febru-

12

The Last of Its Kind

Myanmar occupies more than 670,000 km2 in Southeast Asia
between latitudes 10º north and 28º north. Most of the territory is
hilly and mountainous, with the mountain ranges running north
to south. The northern mountains, which include the highest peak
of Myanmar, Hkakabo Razi, 5967 m, are the source of the great
rivers Irrawaddy, Salween, Mekong, and Yangtze. The lower
western mountain ranges, of which Chin Hills are part, have peaks
2000 to 3000 m in elevation and extend southward as far as the
southern tip of the Arakan Peninsula. The eastern part of the
country is occupied by the Shan Plateau, with an average altitude
of 1000 m. Between the western ranges and the Shan Plateau is
the central basin. The climate of Myanmar is primarily determined
by the monsoon winds, although elevation and distance from the
sea also affect the temperature and rainfall. The cool dry season
lasts from October to February. It is followed by a hot dry season
from March to mid-May, and a rainy season from May to
October. While the coastal region and the mountains receive 5000
mm of rain, in the northern part of the central basin the rainfall is
only 500 to 1000 mm. Nearly twelve thousand species of plants
grow in Myanmar. The country is covered with forests of various
types. Evergreen oaks and pines dominate above the frost line at
1000 m, with forests of rhododendrons above 2000 m. Evergreen
tropical forests are found in areas with more than 2000 mm of
rain. Monsoon forests, which are deciduous during the hot season,
grow in regions receiving 1000 to 2000 mm of rain. Forest 
gradually gives way to scrubland in regions where the rainfall is
less than 1000 mm.

ary. In Rangoon it took them three weeks to comply with
all the regulations before they could fly to Kyauktu on 28
February.  Three  days  later  they  reached  Mindat  at  the
foot of Mount Victoria. There they established a base.

“Mindat  stands  on  a  pine-clad  ridge  running
east–west, at an altitude of 4800 feet [1450 m],” wrote
Kingdon Ward (1956b). “On either side is a deep valley,
that  to  the  south  separating  us  from  Mount  Victoria,
whose  summit  is  just  out  of  sight.  At  this  altitude  the
variety of trees is not great, and the vegetation owes much
to the attentions of man, cutting and burning for cultiva-
tion. Except in ravines, practically all forest is secondary,
with three-needled pines (P. insularis), Anneslea fragrans,
castanopsis  and  oak  dominant.  In  gullies,  however,  one
finds  such  trees  as  eugenia,  stereospermum,  sapindus,
Sideroxylon  hookeri, Eriobotrya  bengalensis and  Melia

azedarach—plants  which  give  a  truer  picture  of  the
climax forest.”

Arriving in the middle of the winter–spring drought,
Kingdon Ward found Mindat looking “as though it had
never  rained  since  the  beginning  of  time,  and  never
would. The haze, compounded of dust coming up from
the plains, and ashes dropping from the sky, reduced vis-
ibility to small dimensions. Sometimes the sun shone red
as a hot plate; only a strong wind—there was plenty of
that  in  March—could  clear  the  air.  However,  we  were
told to wait: we would see all the rain we wanted when
the time came” (Kingdon Ward 1956b).

A furnace of rhododendron blossom
Kingdon Ward hoped to start for Mount Victoria before
20  March,  but  it  was  only  a  week  later  that  the  first

13

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

Local children met by Kingdon Ward’s party at the river below
Mindat on the way to Mount Victoria. Photo by Frank Kingdon
Ward.

driblet of porters from the Chin Hills turned up. “Our
party needed thirty-one,” he remembered, “and the best
we  could  do  was  to  send  off  fourteen  in  advance,  with
rice,  stores,  tents,  and  so  forth,  keeping  back  only  the
irreduceable  minimum  of  everyday  requirements.  We
were promised more porters the following day; but they
never came, and we soon learnt to discount our chickens
until they were hatched” (Kingdon Ward 1956c).

It was not until 30 March that another nine porters
appeared. This  was  hardly  enough,  but  Kingdon  Ward
decided to depart anyway. First the party had to cross the
deep valley separating the Mindat ridge from Mount Vic-
toria, which meant a descent of some 700 m, followed by
a climb of 1000 m to Esakan.

On 2 April a full complement of porters arrived in
Esakan,  and  Kingdon  Ward  resumed  his  march  to

Jean Kingdon Ward was put in charge of preparing and drying
herbarium specimens. Photo by Frank Kingdon Ward.

Ranchi, high up on the eastern ridge of Mount Victoria.
While ascending along the ridge, which was covered by
dry meadows of tall grass with scattered pines, alders, and
oaks, Jean Kingdon Ward, “with a whoop of joy, noticed
a beautiful white-flowered rhododendron in full bloom,
and  returned  triumphantly  with  an  armful”  (Kingdon
Ward  1956d).  Its  distinct  sweet  smell  and  yellow  caste
mark at the base of the corolla indicated that it was R.
cuffeanum (57385),  a  little  known  epiphytic  species
named in honor of Lady Wheeler Cuffe, who introduced
it  into  cultivation.  At  an  elevation  of  about  2100  m,
many  trees  were  thickly  clustered  with  orchids,  among
them species of Dendrobium, Bulbophyllum, Vanda, and
Coelogyne. Even  higher,  above  2400  m,  arisaemas  and
primulas  became  a  common  sight  in  the  undergrowth.
After  a  long  march  the  party  reached  Ranchi  at  about

14

The Last of Its Kind

Kingdon Ward, left, assisted by Alsterlund and a Burmese officer,
organizes the day’s collections. Photo by Frank Kingdon Ward.

2700 m and found an ample clearing in the forest with
plenty of room to accommodate their tents.

The following day Kingdon Ward went on a recon-
naissance along the east ridge. The crest of the ridge was
covered with scrub and scattered trees. The north slope
sheltered evergreen and semievergreen forest. In contrast,
the  southern  slope  displayed  large  areas  of  short  grass
painted mauve with thousands of plants of Primula den-
ticulata (57379),  while  forest  occupied  only  the  gullies
and  hollows.  In  the  scrub  covering  the  ridge,  Kingdon
Ward found an attractive Cotoneaster (57347), a prostrate
shrub  hugging  large  rocks  and  displaying  large  brilliant
scarlet  fruits.  He  noticed  that,  “as  for  the  trees  which
dared  the  tempest  on  the  ridge—and  they  themselves
showed by their streamlined limbs that it blows with gale
force—they  numbered  three  only:  Pinus  insularis,
Quercus  semecarpifolia, and  Rhododendron  arboreum—
veteran warriors all. The pines best showed the direction
and persistence of the wind; their gnarled limbs pointed
like  accusing  fingers. The  oaks  never  grew  up  into  the
wind,  but  were  kept  stunted.  Rhododendron  arboreum
[57387] too, hunched itself up into a complete bundle,
bristling with short twisted branches. But the shape of the
last mattered not a jot, for every tree wore a halo of fiery
carmine-cerise,  which  glowed  with  a  luminous  quality
rarely seen in any flower. Indeed, I cannot recall ever to
come across a more magnificent sight than R. arboreum
on  the  summit  ridge  of  Mount Victoria—centuries  old

Kingdon Ward found these stunted oaks, Quercus semecarpifolia,
growing at 2700 m on Mount Victoria. Photo by Frank Kingdon
Ward.

trees  many  of  them  were,  bearing  hundreds  of  trusses”
(Kingdon Ward 1956d).

Three days later the party made a second excursion
up the mountain that did not get much further than the
first  one.  Then,  on  9  April,  they  went  straight  to  the
summit. While ascending along the ridge, Kingdon Ward
noted  Piptanthus  nepalensis (57374),  with  large,  crisp
yellow, pealike flowers, a rugged little Symplocos (57397)
with  “every  twig  thickly  encrusted  with  flowers  of  old
gold,”  and  the  ubiquitous  Prunus  cerasoides (57382),
“such  a  gorgeous  sight  throughout  the  highlands  of
Burma”  (Kingdon  Ward  1956e).  He  recalled  the  last
moments before reaching the summit: “The path, always
easy  to  follow,  diverged  from  the  embossed  ridge,  now

15

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

roof  near  at  hand  melted  away  into  those  of  the  hills,
without  a  single  jarring  note;  imperceptibly  the  near
green drifted into the far blue, and a veil of haze levelled
off the passive scene.”

Although  the  summit  appeared  to  be  covered  with
nothing  more  than  stunted  rhododendron  bushes  and
turf, “it was clear that a wealth of alpine and sub-alpine
species jostled each other here, sufficient to transform the
mountain in the rainy season,” as Kingdon Ward noted
(1956e).  “It  was  with  no  little  surprise  that  I  collected
appreciable quantities of rhododendron, iris, gentian, and
even primula seeds so late in the season as mid-April—
clear  proof  of  the  long  drought.  In  more  normal
monsoon mountain climates, winter storms, early rains,
or melting snow quickly scour out the capsules of these,
and most other alpine plants.” He spent the next several
days  exploring  the  forest  around  Ranchi,  finding  a  fair
variety  of  trees.  On  16  April  the  party  started  back  for
Esakan and continued the next day to the base in Mindat.

Racing against a monsoon
As April passed into May, increasingly frequent thunder-
storms  heralded  an  early  monsoon,  which  marked  the
beginning of the dead season for seed collecting. Kingdon
Ward remained in Mindat for the next fortnight, explor-
ing  the  surrounding  forests.  He  was  eager  to  make
another trip before the rains broke and decided to explore
a  nearby  mountain  more  than  2400  m  high,  situated
some 16 km west of Mindat. On 20 May the party set
out. They drove the first 11 km, to the end of the cart
road, in a ramshackle truck. From there they followed on
foot  an  old  bridle  path  along  the  crest  of  the  Mindat
ridge.  As  the  path  grew  steeper,  the  trees  became  laden
with moss, ferns, and orchids.

Upon reaching a suitable place at an altitude of 2100
m, the party set up camp. That night the monsoon broke,
and  the  next  morning  the  campsite  was  engulfed  in
clouds. Kingdon Ward, despite feeling unwell, decided to
stay there for a week and continue collecting. “The tem-
perate forest at 7500 feet [2300 m] included many fine
trees,” he remembered, “especially oaks, chestnuts, horn-
beam  (Carpinus  viminea),  schima,  engelhardtia,  eri-
obotrya, elaeocarpus (in flower), and a second species of
maple.  Arisaemas  were  prominent  as  undergrowth  and
along  the  paths,  with  ferns,  ophiopogon,  alpinia  and
other zingibers” (Kingdon Ward 1956g).

Kingdon Ward collecting seeds on Mount Victoria in mid-April.
Photo by Frank Kingdon Ward.

into  the  forest  on  the  north  face,  now  back  to  dry  (or
burnt) grass on the south face; then returned to the crest,
interrupted  by  gaunt  pines  and  a  furnace  of  rhododen-
dron blossom. There came a last sharp ascent, and almost
without knowing it, we stood on the summit of Mount
Victoria, 10,200 feet [3100 m] above sea level.”

From the top of Mount Victoria, they had an unin-
terrupted view to the south and west, which was “insipid
to  the  last  degree,”  as  Kingdon  Ward  described  it
(1956f).  “We  could  see,  indeed,  a  number  of  ranges,
forest-clad, with long level ridges and rounded summits.
But we looked in vain for the rugged peaks and fantastic
rock pyramids, the bold escarpments and shattered screes
of North Burma. They do not exist here; all we saw was
hills,  and  more  hills,  smooth  in  outline,  moderate  in
slope,  and  gentle  in  aspect,  with  deep  but  obviously
harmless valleys between. The flowing lines of the forest

16

The Last of Its Kind

After a week the party ran out of food supplies, so on
28  May,  Kingdon  Ward  decided  to  return  to  Mindat,
despite  the  fact  that  only  a  quarter  of  the  porters  that
were  needed  to  carry  the  loads  had  shown  up  in  the
camp.  He,  his  wife,  and  two  others  started  down  only
with essential loads, including a heavy basket of orchids,
leaving the sodden tents standing, and some of the party
in charge. “It rained in torrents the whole 10 miles [16
km],”  wrote  Kingdon  Ward  (1956g),  “and  we  reached
Mindat  tired  and  half  drowned,  our  plant  paper,  beds,
bedding, clothing, diaries—everything, soaked. . . . The
last  four  miles  [6.5  km]  along  the  cart  road  was  like
wading  along  an  orange-ocre  river.  Except  for  a  tall
ground orchid with a foot of closely packed inflorescence,
and a yellow-spiked chloranthus, we collected nothing en
route. Indeed, in that blinding rain we could hardly see
anything.”

Orchid frenzy
By  the  middle  of  June  the  first  powerful  rush  of  the
monsoon  had  exhausted  itself,  and  the  weather  settled
down to rainy spells with bright intervals. “By this time it
seemed  pretty  certain  that  we  were  not  going  to  find  a
large  number  of  new  first-class  cool  temperate  plants,”
reminisced Kingdon Ward (1957a). “Even the discovery
of two species of iris in Mindat could not make the flora
as a whole a north temperate one. . . . We decided to turn
our  attention  for  the  time  being  mainly  to  orchids.
Because  of  the  scattered  or  rare  occurrence  of  some
species, the far distance of others, it seemed advisable to
bring most of them back to base as we found them, and
plant them in likely places within easy reach; and this we
had  done  from  the  beginning,  so  that  by  June  we  had
quite a collection in Mindat.”

The growing collection faced many threats, ranging
from woodcutters insisting on lopping the very limbs on
which the epiphytic orchids were planted, to village goats
and  ponies  eating  or  trampling  the  terrestrial  species.
Nevertheless, Kingdon Ward was “much surprised to find
what an obstinate hold many species have on life, so long
as they are not actually diseased” (1957a). This was very
apparent  with  one  Gastrochilus  distichus (5755),  which
was brought down from the misty ridge of Mount Victo-
ria  to  be  planted  on  trees  1200  m  below.  “It  shrank
visibly,  like  a  leaky  balloon,  but  valiantly  continued  to
put out rootlets. Although gradually reduced to half its

Kingdon Ward inspects his day’s catch of orchids. Photo by Frank
Kingdon Ward.

original  volume,  it  refused  to  give  up  the  struggle,  and
continued to live.”

The summit revisited
On 16 June, Kingdon Ward departed for his second visit
to  Mount  Victoria.  On  the  afternoon  of  that  day,  his
party reached Esakan, and the next day they climbed to
the  Ranchi  camp.  Over  the  next  several  days  Kingdon
Ward  explored  the  grassy  slopes  of  the  ridge  leading  to
the  summit.  There  he  found  a  meadow  mottled  with
Roscoea purpurea (57389): “At first glance it looks aston-
ishingly like an orchid. It was not that, however, which
drew  my  attention  so  much  as  an  albino  form.  .  .  .
Whether it is any improvement on the rich purple flower
is a matter of opinion; at least it is different. I recalled that
many years ago, in western China, I had come across an
albino incarvillea, and passed it by. Never shall I forget

17

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

the 

first 

summit 

find  the  big  gentian,”  he
wrote,  “fearing  we  might
have  just  missed  it  in
flower.  But  even  at  the
beginning  of  November,
by  which  time  the  rains
had abated, I could see no
sign  of  it.  .  .  .  It  was  on
November  5  that,  along
the 
ridge  of
Mount Victoria, we at last
found 
shy
gentian-flowers.  What  a
moment that was! So far as
appearances  went, 
the
flowers  were  everything  I
had prayed for—large and
trumpet-shaped,  a  little
smaller,  perhaps, 
than
those of G. sino-ornata, in
shape  more  like  those  of
G. szechenyii, to which the
plant  was  obviously  related.  But  it  was  the  wonderful
colour which riveted our gaze. Slowly we took it in, from
the  wide  band  of  pure  Cambridge  blue  round  the  top,
fading towards the base, to where the corolla is speckled
with blue, green, and violet lights. The overall effect is that
of a shining China-blue goblet” (Kingdon Ward 1960).

In early December, Mr. and Mrs. Kingdon Ward left
Burma for Sri Lanka, where they stayed for a couple of
months before returning to London. In the meantime, a
shipment of orchids arrived at Longwood Gardens after a
considerable delay in transit. The orchids were dried out
and in rather poor shape, but Longwood orchid growers
managed to revive them. Soon Dr. Walter H. Hodge, the
garden’s  head  of  education  and  research,  was  able  to
report  back  to  Kingdon  Ward:  “You  will  be  pleased  to
learn that without exception all orchids sent by you are
now  in  good  condition. There  were  only  about  four  in
poor condition, but we were able to save back bulbs of
these. Even these are now throwing out new growth, the
last  one  to  break  being  Arundina  bambusifolia [5756].
Certain  of  these  orchids  have  already  come  into  flower
and one or two of them have been so good that they have
been put on display. Especially noteworthy is a species of
Dendrobium [5748]  and  Thunia  alba [5757].  Several
others will soon be in flower. From this you can realize

18

Kingdon Ward with Dendrobium chrysotoxum (5751) that he collected on Mount Victoria. Photo by
Frank Kingdon Ward.

the  astonished  chagrin  of  an  enthusiastic  rock  gardener
when  I  made  this  awful  confession”  (Kingdon  Ward
1957b).

When  Kingdon  Ward  returned  to  this  slope  three
days  later,  he  found  that  the  purple  flowers  of  Roscoea
were replaced with thousands of blue dwarf irises (57362)
as thick as the Roscoea had been earlier. The fact that no
iris flowers had been noticed only three days before, he
attributed to “the evanescence of their fragile blooms, and
to some distaste for the weather, which held them back;
for there was none on the following day either” (Kingdon
Ward 1957b). Remarkably, “with a glimpse of blue sky. .
.  a thousand dwarf irises briefly greeted the sunshine.”

Later in Mindat, as Kingdon Ward prepared the first
shipment of seeds and plants for Longwood, he wrote to
Seibert: “You may be sure that all we send you will be of
decorative value. It is only Botanical Gardens that want
to be bothered nowadays with plants of purely botanical
interest, without horticultural merit” (1956a).

Farewell to the mountain
In  the  middle  of  October,  Kingdon  Ward  returned  to
Mount Victoria for the last time. Among the most mem-
orable events of that excursion was an encounter with an
undetermined species of Gentiana (57352). “I was agog to

On the Trail of the Himalayan Elms

that although some of the plants were rather low when
they  arrived,  we  have  been  able  to  nurse  them  all  back
into good health” (Hodge 1957b). One of these orchids,
Dendrobium  chrysotoxum (5751),  can  to  this  day  be
viewed in Longwood’s conservatories where it dazzles vis-
itors with brilliant orange flowers.

This trip to Burma’s Chin Hills was to be Kingdon
Ward’s last expedition, for he died the following year. In
his introduction to Kingdon Ward’s Pilgrimage for Plants,
published posthumously in 1960, William Stearn wrote
of the author, “Scarcely a week before his sudden unex-
pected death he was discussing with me the possibilities
of  a  plant-collecting  expedition  into  the  Caucasus  or
northern Persia.” The relentless explorer,  “the last of its
kind,” he never ceased dreaming of new adventures.

ON THE TRAIL OF THE HIMALAYAN ELMS

When  researchers  working  in  the  Netherlands  in  the
1950s discovered that a clone of Himalayan elm, Ulmus
wallichiana, received  from  the  Arnold  Arboretum  of
Harvard  University  in  1929  showed  a  certain  level  of
resistance to Dutch elm disease (DED), they realized that
in  a  wild  population,  trees  with  even  greater  resistance
might  be  found.  The  tree  received  from  the  Arnold
Arboretum  was  grown  from  seeds  collected  in  1919  in
Thamba  in  the  western  Himalaya,  overlooking  the  hot
plains of Punjab, India, and proved not to be sufficiently
cold-hardy in the Netherlands.

Hans  M.  Heybroek,  plant  pathologist  and  tree
breeder  at  De  Dorschkamp  Forest  Research  Station  in
Wageningen, Netherlands, studied the tree. “We realized
that this clone was no more than a chance seedling from a
mild climate,” he explains. “Therefore, in a wider collec-
tion,  clones  with  a  higher  resistance  to  DED  might  be
found, and trees from the inner valleys of the Himalayas,
with their severe winters, should also be more cold hardy.”
Seibert  met  with  Heybroek  at  Floriade,  a  horticul-
tural  exhibition,  in  1960:  “I  had  the  opportunity  of
meeting H. M. Heybroek during my recent stay in Rot-
terdam early in June concerning his project of collecting
elms and other trees and shrubs in the Himalayas.” Con-
versation with Heybroek convinced Seibert of the need to
explore the Himalayan elms, and he agreed to support the
expedition.

19

Dendrobium chrysotoxum (5751) that was collected by Kingdon
Ward on Mount Victoria in 1956 can still be viewed in Long-
wood’s conservatories. Photo by Rondel G. Peirson.

“Preparations  were  started,”  explains  Heybroek.
“Because  of  the  tense  political  situation  at  that  time,  I
decided  to  travel  to  India  only,  and  avoid  Pakistan  and
Nepal.  One  important  decision  I  had  to  make  was
whether I should travel in late spring to collect elm seeds,
or in early fall to collect scions. The first option required
exact  timing,  because  ripe  seeds  remain  on  elms  for  a
period of only a week, and one can easily arrive too late
or too early. Scions, on the other hand, can be collected
over  a  period  of  months.  Weighing  these  options,  I
decided to start the expedition in September, which is a
better travelling season in the Himalayas anyway.”

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

Old chenar trees, Platanus orientalis, line the canal in the Mogul
gardens near Srinagar. Photo by Hans M. Heybroek.

Heybroek’s companions from the Botanical Survey of India on one
of the plant-hunting forays out of Srinagar. Photo by Hans M.
Heybroek.

public areas. The elm, however, still retained the aura of
sanctity.  In  some  places  in  Kashmir  and  in  the  valley
further east, it was the central village tree. Elms growing
in the fields often had platforms built around their base,
considered a good place for praying. This species proved
later  to  be  quite  cold  hardy  in  the  Netherlands,  and
although it is not resistant to DED, it seems to be little
bothered by it.”

The  main  goal  of  the  expedition  was,  however,  the
collection of Ulmus wallichiana. To find this tree, Hey-
broek and his team had to ascend the side valleys around
Srinagar.  “The  forests  at  the  higher  elevations  looked
strangely familiar to me,” he recalls. “The trees were of
the same genera I knew from Europe—maples, cherries,
oaks,  birches,  alders,  poplars,  pines,  firs,  spruces,  and
larches—just different species. Yew and ivy were no more
than  different  subspecies.  When  looking  down  at  the
valleys covered by a coniferous forest, I had a feeling of
being somewhere in the Alps, at least until I saw groups
of monkeys crossing the stream.”

Elm is for the cow
Heybroek remembers that his first encounter with Ulmus
wallichiana was a bit puzzling. “Instead of a fine, majes-
tic tree with a well proportioned crown, I saw a crooked
stump  devoid  of  branches.  ‘What  is  going  on?’  I  asked
myself. The answer came the next morning, when I met
a  shepherd,  trekking  with  his  flock  of  sheep  and  goats
from  the  high  pastures  to  the  lower  valleys.  He  told  us
that  he  supplemented  his  sheep’s  diet  with  elm  leaves.
When asked for a few twigs fit for grafting, he took off his

Beas was one the valleys east of Kashmir that Heybroek explored
in search of Ulmus wallichiana. Photo by Hans M. Heybroek.

Revered elms

Heybroek arrived in New Delhi on 18 August 1960.
On the ground in New Delhi, he secured help from both
the  Botanical  Survey  of  India  and  the  Forest  Research
Institute.  The  expedition  began  on  27  August  with  a
journey  northwest  from  New  Delhi  to  Srinagar  in  the
Valley of Kashmir.

“With its large Wular Lake at 1700 m, surrounded by
mountains  of  3000  m,  the  valley  was  breathtakingly
beautiful,” remembers Heybroek. “Before heading to the
mountains,  we  visited  the  famous  Mogul  gardens  near
Srinagar. But there grew no elms in the Mogul gardens,
just  the  great  chenar, Platanus  orientalis. These  trees,
favored  by  the  Moguls,  were  introduced  from  their
homeland  Persia.  Later  they  became  an  omnipresent
motif  in  Kashmir  art  and  also  supplanted  the  native
cherry bark elm, Ulmus villosa, as a revered tree for the

20

On the Trail of the Himalayan Elms

Ulmus wallichiana is lopped in late summer; its leafy twigs are
then stored in a tree’s crotch for winter. Photo by Hans M. 
Heybroek.

Between terraced fields, villagers grow many useful trees, including
elms. Photo by Hans M. Heybroek.

shoes, put a small ax in his belt, and swiftly climbed into
the top of an old elm standing in the forest, and chopped
off  at  random  several  branches  for  us.  Climbing  was
apparently  a  skill  one  needed  to  be  a  shepherd  in
Kashmir! As I was able to observe, this practice of muti-
lating  forest  trees  for  fodder  eventually  led  to  their
decline.  In  contrast,  trees  growing  along  the  fields  and
around villages were subject to a careful and sustainable
practice of lopping branches for fodder. Farmers kept a
well  balanced  framework  of  the  main  branches  and
lopping was carried out at a more or less regular rotation
of two to four years. Elm leaf hay appeared to be an essen-
tial winter fodder as grass hay was very scarce. Villagers
even planted new trees for this purpose. A farmer, who
had planted a peach, an apricot, and an elm next to his
house, explained: ‘The fruits are for the man, the elm is

for  the  cow.’  In  the  areas  where  Ulmus  wallichiana
occurred, it was the species favored for fodder, because of
its high nutritional value, although certain other species
were sometimes lopped too.”

An  elm  that  has  been  lopped  will  grow  long,  non-
flowering  shoots  for  many  years.  “As  all  elms  I  was
finding  on  this  expedition  were  lopped  in  some  way,”
Heybroek explains, “I realized how fortunate my decision
to go to the Himalayas in the fall rather than in the spring
had been. Had I gone there in the spring there would be
no  seeds  on  these  trees  at  all!  Collecting  scions  is  not
without its own challenges. Scions can easily dry out, and
when kept moist but warm, they deplete stored carbohy-
drates so that grafting fails later. Plant explorers before me
had to carry metal tins to store the scions in. I had a new
solution that revolutionized plant collecting—polyethyl-

21

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

Searching for elms, Heybroek explored several valleys in the western Himalaya, including the valley of
the river Sutlej. Photo by Hans M. Heybroek.

the 

tent  where  I  could  sleep
on a large flat crate. After
a quiet night, I discovered
that  the  crate  contained
dynamite  for  the  road-
work.  But 
finest
lodging  was  in  the  forest
resthouses.  These  were
built  for  the  forest  man-
agers  travelling  through
the  vast  forest  at  conven-
ient walking distances and
always  at  beautiful  loca-
tions.  When  the 
local
attendant  had  an  advance
warning  of  our  coming,
the  house  provided  luxu-
ries  such  as  a  warm  bath,
an  easy  chair  on  the
veranda,  a  few  hours  of
electricity, a table to work
on  herbarium  material,  a

ene bags. This material allows for gas exchange, but keeps
the moisture in.”

Sleeping on dynamite
On  22  September,  Heybroek  and  his  companions  trav-
eled  southeast  from  the  Valley  of  Kashmir  to  the  Kulu
Valley,  where  he  collected  near  the  towns  of  Kothi  and
Manali. A week later he relocated south to the next valley
of the river Sutlej. On 17 October, Heybroek continued
his  journey  southeast  to  the  region  of  Kumaun,  which
borders  Nepal  on  the  east.  There  he  spent  nearly  four
weeks  exploring  mountains  and  valleys  around  Dehra
Dun, Ranikhet, Almora, and Naini Tal.

“We  traveled  by  car,  by  bus,  in  an  open  jeep,  on
horseback, and finally on foot, with two porters,” Hey-
broek recalls. “Lodging was varied. Often it was a simple
tent with two parts—one for cooking and eating, and the
other  for  sleeping—set  up  on  a  surface  paved  with  flat
stones  on  which  we  would  put  our  bedrolls.  In  a  more
fancy shelter, in which I had a small room with a cot, I
naively  asked  about  the  restroom.  The  owner  stared,
amazed at me, then said with a broad gesture: ‘The forest
is all around, Sir.’ One time we had to spend the night at
a camp set up for construction workers widening a road
high in the mountains. My guide found me a fine clean

good meal, and a quiet night on a cot.”

Upon returning from Kumaun to New Delhi on 20
November, Heybroek arranged a short trip to Darjeeling,
east  of  Nepal.  “There,  vegetation  is  drastically  different
from the western Himalayas,” he says, “but there is one
elm, Ulmus lanceifolia, an evergreen, primitive species of
the tropical rainforest. This elm too was heavily lopped,
while  no  other  surrounding  trees  were.  Apparently,  this
species also was a preferred source of fodder, like the elms
in the west.” Heybroek made there his last collections and
on 2 December departed for the Netherlands. His collec-
tions of seeds were forwarded to the USDA Plant Indus-
try Station in Beltsville, Maryland. Grafted elms followed
some time later.

“The expedition brought back over sixty collections
of elms, including several Ulmus wallichiana that proved
to be hardy and reasonably resistant to DED,” says Hey-
broek,  summing  up  the  expedition’s  accomplishments.
“These were later used in crosses to develop DED-resist-
ant hybrids. In addition, herbarium collections permitted
recognition of three subspecies within Ulmus wallichiana.
An  elm,  which  I  found  growing  in  the  mountains  at
lower elevation than Ulmus wallichiana, was determined
to  be  a  new  species  altogether.  It  was  named  Ulmus
chumlia.”

22

Roadless Kingdom

“The expedition open-
ed  my  eyes  to  the  impor-
tance of leaf hay and of the
lopping  of  deciduous  trees
for fodder. In some parts of
Europe  this  was  practiced
until  recently.  In  earlier
centuries  it  was  the  main-
stay of husbandry in many
areas  and  in  prehistoric
times it may have played a
decisive role in agriculture.
Elm  was  always  the  pre-
ferred species as it had the
highest  nutritive  value  of
all trees.

“Seeds  of  about  sixty
other  species  of  trees,
shrubs,  and  herbs  were
also  collected,  but  their
impact  was  small.  Sur-
prisingly,  my  collections 
of  dandelion,  Taraxacum,
allowed  for  a  discovery  of
several  new  species.  As  a
result,  there  are  now  dandelions  growing  somewhere  in
the Himalayas that have been named in my honor Tarax-
acum heybroekii; a fact that people keep teasing me about.”

Following the expedition, Heybroek used the elms he collected in the Himalaya in crosses to develop
DED-resistant hybrids, as part of the broad Dutch elm breeding program. Over a period of sixty years,
more than 200,000 seedlings were screened for resistance using artificial inoculations with the
pathogen. The latest products of the program, the elm varieties ‘Columella’ and ‘Nanguen’, are fully
resistant to the disease. Photo by Hans M. Heybroek.

ROADLESS KINGDOM

In his position as Longwood’s director, Seibert recognized
the importance of plant exploration, testing, and intro-
duction. “New models of decorative plants are as much of
value to man’s welfare and economy as any other agricul-
tural  and  horticultural  plants,”  wrote  Seibert  (1970a).
On this premise, in 1956 he approached the USDA with
an  offer  of  a  cooperative  agreement  for  the  purpose  of
“encouraging  the  advancement  of  ornamental  horticul-
ture in the United States through the discovery and intro-
duction of new or little known plants of the world which
will have potential value to the future of ornamental hor-
ticulture and therefore to the rapidly increasing numbers
of home gardeners and plant hobbyists” (Seibert 1956a).
The  proposal  was  enthusiastically  received  by  Dr.
Carl  O.  Erlanson,  head  of  the  USDA  Section  of  Plant

On his expedition to the western Himalaya, Heybroek discovered
a new species of elm, Ulmus chumlia, in this forest in the Kalakhan
area near Nainital. Photo by Hans M. Heybroek.

Introduction,  and  gained  support  from  the  trustees  of
Longwood Foundation. “It was felt that this basic work
could in time benefit every homeowner, every commer-
cial and professional gardener, horticulturist, florist, and
plantsman,” wrote Seibert (1970a). “It could brighten the

23

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

Among the most rugged countries in the world, Nepal occupies
more than 145,000 km2. About three-quarters of the country is
covered by the Himalaya, which runs parallel to it for some 800
km. Only along the southern border with India is there any exten-
sive area of flat land. Although Nepal is located in the subtropical
latitude, its climate becomes progressively colder with the increase
in elevation. At about 4800 m the temperature stays below freezing
year-round. Rainfall ranges from about 1800 mm in the east to 750
mm in the west, most of it falling during the summer monsoon,
but it may be as much as 2500 mm on the southern slopes of the
Himalaya. Nepal has a rich flora comprising about seven thousand
species of vascular plants. While eastern and central Nepal is con-
sidered an extension of the Sino-Japanese floristic region, western
Nepal has strong affinities with the floras of the western Himalaya
and even the Mediterranean. Southern parts of Nepal and river
valleys of the midland hills, with an altitude below 1000 m,
support tropical vegetation. In the subtropical zone, between 1000
and 2000 m, lauraceous and fagaceous forests dominate in the
eastern and central part of the country, but in western Nepal these
are largely replaced by pine forests. Above 2000 m, temperate flora
thrives. While in eastern and central Nepal evergreen oaks, rhodo-
dendrons, and laurels are characteristic, further west, coniferous
forests of cedars, cypresses, firs, and spruces become prominent. In
the higher elevations a belt of hemlocks and rhododendrons sepa-
rates the temperate broad-leaved forest from the subalpine flora,
which develops above 3000 m. The subalpine zone supports fir
forests at the lower elevation, while birches and rhododendrons 
predominate near the timberline at about 4000 m. The alpine
scrub vegetation above 4000 m consists mostly of rhododendrons,
junipers, barberries, and dwarf willows. Beyond the alpine scrub are
rich meadows of herbs, grasses, and sedges.

outlook of the more than fifty million garden and horti-
cultural hobbyists in the United States of America and it
might even touch all but a few of the rest of the Americans
who pause and reflect when they see a beautiful flower.”
From  its  inception,  the  cooperative  program  had
ambitious and far-reaching goals. “In most cases,” wrote
Seibert (1970a), “collectors, either by nature of their indi-
vidual  preferences,  or  because  of  the  financial  sponsors’
stipulations are restrictive in the type of collections which
are made. This program, however, having as its objectives
new or potentially new as well as improved forms of exist-
ing  ornamentals,  cuts  completely  across  the  range  of
plants from abelias to zygopetalums; from desert to wet-
lands, from subarctic to torrid tropical; from seacoast to
alpine.  It  seeks  to  cumulate  into  a  United  Nations  of
ornamental  plants.  It  even  provides  for  a  continuing

exchange  of  ornamental  plant  materials  between  this
country and the countries of exploration.”

In  1962,  when  contemplating  areas  to  be  targeted
under the USDA-Longwood plant exploration program,
Seibert  wrote  to  Dr.  Howard  L.  Hyland  of  the  USDA
Agricultural Research Service, “I do feel that exploration
for ornamental plant materials in Nepal would be highly
desirable  for  American  ornamental  horticulture  and  I
would hope it would be possible for this to be arranged.”
The Himalayan kingdom of Nepal, tucked between
India  and Tibet,  remained  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the
world until 1947. At that time, the British and the Japan-
ese  made  the  first  botanical  surveys  there.  Travelers  to
Nepal coined the phrase “roadless kingdom” to reflect the
scarcity of roads and abundance of footpaths and flimsy
rope bridges throughout most of the country. Despite its

24

Roadless Kingdom

De Vos, center, with the expedition’s cargo upon their arrival to
Pokhara from Kathmandu. Photo by John L. Creech.

The expedition’s first camp was set up on the way from Pokhara to
Dana. Photo by John L. Creech.

remoteness, Nepal was particularly interesting as a desti-
nation for horticultural exploration because of its broad
range  of  temperate-zone  plants.  Although  latitudinally
located in the subtropics, most of the country is in the
high  Himalaya  and  supports  rich  temperate  flora  with
close affinity to that of China and Japan.

Dr. John L. Creech was asked to lead the expedition
to Nepal, and Dr. Francis de Vos, assistant director of the
U.S. National Arboretum in Washington, agreed to join
the team. As the most opportune time for the collection
of seeds of a wide range of woody and other species in
that  part  of  the  world  is  in  the  period  following  the
summer  rains,  Creech  and  de  Vos  decided  to  arrive  in
Nepal around the middle of September 1962.

The plan for the expedition was to make studies of
the west-central part of Nepal, including the foothills of
the  Annapurna  range,  Kali  Gandaki  and  Mardi  Khola
rivers,  and  in  the  hill  country  near  Kathmandu.  “Our
party had grown,” recorded de Vos (1963), “and included
a  young  police  trainee  who  was  to  serve  as  our  liaison
officer with the Nepalese government and two Sherpas,
the  high-altitude  porters  that  had  made  it  possible  for
others  to  climb  such  peaks  as  Everest  and  Annapurna.
Our  decision  to  hire  the  fifteen  porters  we  needed  in
Pokhara, 90 miles [145 km] to the west, rather than in
Kathmandu  where  they  were  cheaper,  was  based  on  a
simple truth about roadless Nepal that must be faced by
anyone  who  intends  to  explore  the  region  outside  the
Kathmandu  Valley.  Whenever  time  is  important,  fly  if
possible. The flying time to Pokhara is forty minutes, but
porters carrying 70 pound [32 kg] packs take ten days.”

In the shadow of Annapurna
Thus  Creech  and  de  Vos  flew  from  Kathmandu  to
Pokhara, Nepal’s second largest city, situated at the foot
of Annapurna, 8078 m, and used as the starting point for
all  expeditions  to  western  Nepal.  “The  short  flight
brought  us  to  the  beautiful  Pokhara  valley  where  we
landed on a grass airstrip and discharged our more than a
half  ton  of  cargo,”  remembers  Creech.  “A  buffalo  cart
guided by two elderly ladies transported our baggage to
the United States Operations Mission house. This would
be our base to which we would return after each trek.”

In  Pokhara,  Creech  and  de  Vos  hired  a  team  of
porters and on 11 October headed northwest to the town
of Dana. “During this trek we established our protocol,”
recalls  Creech.  “De Vos  and  I,  together  with  the  police
trainee and one of the Sherpas, would strike out at a faster
pace  in  order  to  make  side  trips  for  collecting.  The
porters, having to break camp and marching at a slower
pace,  would  follow.  About  3  p.m.  we  would  reach  the
selected camp site and the porters would arrive an hour
later,  set  up  camp,  prepare  the  evening  meal,  and  by  6
p.m. it would be dark and the evening was spent doing
notes by gas lamp. We slept in our tent while the porters
would gather under a large plastic cover for the night.”

Dana was 60 km northwest of Pokhara and about the
same distance from the Tibetan border. “The first part of
our journey was along the Ghabung Khola at an elevation
of 3300 to 5000 feet [1000–1500 m],” reported de Vos
(1963). “Since Nepal is at the same latitude as central and
northern  Florida,  the  climate  at  this  elevation  was  sub-
tropical. The native vegetation along the way except for

25

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

The first part of the trek from Pokhara to Dana led along the river Ghabung Khola. Photo by John L.
Creech.

“We  had  to  negotiate
several  landslides  of  bril-
liant  mica,  crossed  many
streams  by  fording  or
narrow bridges. The water
was  so  swift  that  fording
above 
the  knees  was
impossible. In this region,
most  slopes  to  the  east,
south and west were rather
barren.  The  cattle  which
grazed  there  in  summer
were  by  then  down  at
lower elevations. We used
their  abandoned  sites  for
our  camps  because  water,
which was scarce, could be
found there. All water we
drank  first  had  to  be  fil-
tered  because  of  the  silica
in it, which would tear out
our  stomachs,  and  then

the broad, spreading fig known botanically as Ficus ben-
jamina, was of little interest. More than once, we were to
rest ourselves and remove our packs at the porter stands so
thoughtfully built beneath the shade of this magnificent
tree. Citrus, bananas, and poinsettias were common, but
most  intriguing  were  the  frangipani  trees,  native  to
Mexico and the West Indies. This tree, with its fragrant,
white to pink flowers, is a favorite in Buddhist worship,
and  we  saw  it  frequently  on  the  grounds  of  Buddhist
temples.”

On the second day out, gradually, the hours of climb-
ing up increased over those spent going down. “With the
increase in elevation, we came into the temperate forest
region  at  7500  feet  [2300  m],”  noted  de  Vos  (1963).
“Giant rhododendron trees up to 60 feet [18 m] high and
3 feet [90 cm] in diameter were not uncommon. What a
sight  they  must  be  in  the  spring  when  covered  with
trusses of bright, red flowers. In a shady, moist glen a blue
Primula was in flower and the air was heavy with the fra-
grance  of  an  autumn-blooming  Elaeagnus. We  were
delighted with the change in the flora and collected seeds
of a number of species including a low, red-berried ever-
green Cotoneaster growing attractively over the rocks.”

“The trail to Dana crossed many passes up to 2700
m but was easy to follow and direct,” remembers Creech.

purified with iodine tablets.”

Five days after leaving Pokhara, the team arrived at
Dana and within sight of the area in which they planned
to establish their first base camp. “We camped that night
on the grounds of a Hindu temple, feeling a little guilty,
for  our  supplies  included  freeze-dehydrated  steaks,”
wrote de Vos (1963). “After two days’ delay in recruiting
new porters, we left Dana at 4300 feet [1300 m] for the
ridge  above,  so  deceptively  close  but  an  agonizing  two
days’  hike  away.  Despite  the  fact  that  we  were  carrying
only about 25 pounds [11 kg], we could not keep up with
our barefooted porters who were carrying 60 to 70 pound
[27 to 32 kg] loads.”

After  two  days  of  hard  climbing,  the  expedition
found  a  suitable  camping  site  at  about  2760  m  where
coniferous and broad-leaved forests mingled. “Each day
for  the  next  week  we  explored  a  different  area  between
7500  and  12,000  feet  [2300–3650  m],”  noted  de  Vos
(1963). “In the simple language of our youngest Sherpa,
our  hike  for  the  day  was  either  ‘up-going’  or  ‘down-
going.’ On the ridges above us we collected seeds of the
silver fir [Abies spectabilis 635], maples with long pendu-
lous clusters of bright, red fruits, viburnums, barberries,
roses, clematis, rhododendrons, iris, cotoneasters, moun-
tain-ash,  and  a  cherry.  On  the  12,000  foot  [3650  m]

26

Roadless Kingdom

The expedition’s team in their camp set up above Dana. Standing
second from right is de Vos. Photo by John L. Creech.

ridge  low-growing  willows,  dwarf  rhododendrons  and
grasses were the dominant vegetation. From this point we
had  our  first  good  look  at  the  solid  white  dome  of
Dhaulagiri  [8172  m].  Since  the  British  had  collected
extensively  in  the  alpine  meadows  above  us,  we  turned
our attention to the broad-leaved evergreen forest below
our base camp. We were amply rewarded as we found a
red-fruited  evergreen  holly,  more  maples,  and  our  first
plants of Magnolia campbellii. Our joy turned to disap-
pointment  as  we  criss-crossed  the  slopes  between  7500
and 9000 feet [2300–2750 m] looking in vain for fruit-
ing specimens of this elusive magnolia, which is treasured
in cultivation but goes unnoticed in the wild. We finally
gave up, with the hope that in the area to the south we
would find fruiting plants.”

From Dana, the explorers headed south to Beni. “We
had to hire nine extra porters for this short trip but we
sold a bag of rice to the locals to make up for it,” remem-
bers Creech. “Porters and all purchases had to be made
with coins, as paper money was not accepted, and porters
expected to be paid daily. So we had a large metal trunk
with money and porters would line up to be paid each
afternoon.  To  satisfy  auditors  back  in  Washington,  a
signed receipt was required for each payment. Since the
porters  could  not  read  or  write,  they  simply  put  their
thumb  print  on  the  form  which  must  have  caused  the
auditors fits. Furthermore, each porter expected a ration
of local cigarettes and a mug of local spirits daily, and this
did not appear on the receipt.”

As  the  team  followed  the  turbulent,  slate-gray  Kali
Gandaki River, the terrain became more rugged and the

Himalayan silver fir, Abies spectabilis (635), that Creech and de Vos
collected on a ridge above their camp in Dana is found through-
out the Himalaya at 2500 to 4000 m. Photo by Yoko Arakawa.

trails more terrifying. Creech recorded how they traveled
on a “path gouged out of the walls above this violent river,
capped off by a crossing of a one-plank bridge with cables
on either side for support—one miss and it is the Indian
Ocean” (1962a). De Vos called this bridge “a real thriller”
and  noted  how  “a  missing  board  at  mid-stream  added
interest to the crossing” (1963).

On 25 October the team reached Beni, 65 km west
of  Pokhara.  “When  we  left  Dana  and  headed  south  to
Beni, we soon found that even hills of 9000 feet [2750
m] were scarcely temperate,” wrote Creech (1962b). “A
few  rhodies  and  Pieris at  the  very  top  and  occasional
hemlocks but not nearly so rewarding as at Dana which
is  certainly  influenced  by  the  cold  coming  down  from
Dhaulagiri and Annapurna.”

In  Beni  the  explorers  had  the  first  chance  to  send
letters to the United States. “Collecting has been good,”

27

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

A pointed peak of Machhapuchhare, 7000 m, rises above Pokhara.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Crossing a suspension bridge over the Kali Gandaki. Photo by
John L. Creech.

Kancha, a Sherpa accompanying Creech and de Vos, holds Tri-
chosanthes palmata (6366), a cucurbit vine producing bright red
fruits collected on the slopes of Machhapuchhare. Photo by John
L. Creech.

Creech (1962a) wrote to Erlanson, “over 100 seed lots so
far ranging from 3000 to 12,000 feet [900–3650 m]. At
this writing we are sitting on a sandy field along the Kali
Gandaki  river.  It  is  a  grey,  torrentuous  stream,  full  of
mica. Starting place is Tibet and it ends up in the Indian
Ocean. Around us are scattered plants of Pyracantha and
low-growing  Ziziphus which  is  covered  with  fruits.  We
have to compete with our porters for fruit samples.”

Fishtail mountain
“On  the  theory  that  we  would  find  better  temperate
forests closer to the snow fields and where the cloud cover
gathered each day on the slopes of the fishtail mountain
called  Machhapuchhare,  we  headed  back  to  Pokhara  to
replenish  our  supplies,”  noted  de  Vos  (1963).  Machha-

puchhare, 7000 m, is an isolated spur of the Annapurna
range, towering over Pokhara. Arriving in Pokhara on 1
November, the team rested for a day. “This one day break
gives us a change of pace, an opportunity to deposit our
collections here at Pokhara and lighten our loads,” wrote
Creech  (1962b).  “The  weather  has  been  entirely  to  our
favor. One day of rain—yesterday, after we were in a house
for the first time in over three weeks. Very convenient.”

“As  we  ascended  the  slopes  of  Machhapuchhare,”
wrote de Vos (1963), “the forest became more luxuriant
and the thrill of expectancy heightened with each turn of
the trail. We did not have to wait long for at 6500 feet
[2000  m]  we  found  the  most  spectacular  plant  of  our
whole trip, a red-fruited cucurbit vine with fruits the size
of  large  lemons  [Trichosanthes  palmata 6366].  What  a

28

Roadless Kingdom

Creech, in red cap, and his team clean seeds of Magnolia campbel-
lii (6343) collected at about 2250 m on the slopes of Machha-
puchhare. Photo by John L. Creech.

Fruits of Magnolia campbellii (6343) found by Creech and de Vos
on Machhapuchhare. Photo by John L. Creech.

show  this  plant  would  make  when  trained  on  a  garden
trellis!

“The  following  day  was  equally  exciting,  for  we
found our first plants of Magnolia campbellii but again we
were  to  be  disappointed  as  several  fruits  were  without
seeds. The same was true for the next specimen we found.
Were we too late? We had our answer before the day was
over for near the fringe of a clearing at 7500 feet [2300
m]  a  60  foot  [18  m]  double-trunked  specimen  [6343]
still held a number of partially open fruits on its upper
most  branches.  Could  we  get  the  fruits  down  without
shattering the cone-like fruits and losing the seeds in the
dense vegetation on the forest floor? The final drama in
the quest for seeds of this species gave us some anxious
moments as we watched one of our porters saw off a fruit-
ing branch while balanced precariously on another. Our
relief  was  great  when  both  porter  and  fruiting  branch
came  down  slowly  and  intact. The  next  day  we  found
several more trees and many fruits with seeds, all on the
ground. After two days more of successful collecting, we
left Machhapuchhare with a warm feeling of accomplish-
ment but chilled to the bone from exposure to the damp
cold that prevailed on its cloud-shrouded slopes.”

Hill country
On their return to Kathmandu, Creech and de Vos quickly
reorganized and made plans for their next field trip. “We
knew  that  above  8000  feet  [2450  m]  the  nights  would
soon have temperatures below 20ºF [-7ºC] and that seeds
would be getting hard to find,” explained de Vos (1963).
“First, we spent a very profitable three days with Dr. G. A.

C. Herklots, a British botanist, who, in cooperation with
our AID [Agency for International Development] Mission
to  Nepal,  is  establishing  a  botanical  garden  for  the
Nepalese government. This remarkable man with bound-
less enthusiasm had in three years roughed out the begin-
nings  of  a  botanical  garden  that  will  be  an  asset  to  the
country and a delight to foreign botanists and horticultur-
ists that are sure to visit this mountain kingdom in increas-
ing  numbers.  Our  visit  culminated  in  his  leading  us  a
merry chase up a nearby mountain is search of orchids and
seeds of delphinium, euonymus, evergreen oaks, and holly.
Although he was more than twenty years our senior, he set
the pace and we were the most anxious to stop for lunch
and a rest. The physical agony of the day was dispelled by
the  good  feeling  of  accomplishment,  for  our  packs  were
full when we reached his home for tea and refreshments so
tastefully  prepared  by  Mrs.  Herklots.  Before  leaving,  he
added  some  choice  orchids  and  seeds  of  the  autumn-
blooming  cherry,  Prunus  cerasoides [6352],  that  we  had
seen  and  admired  on  the  hillsides  around  the  botanical
garden,  as  well  as  seeds  of  other  species  we  had  missed.
Happily, we were able to reciprocate with some of Magno-
lia campbellii that we had worked so hard to collect.”

On 16 November, Creech and de Vos planned to join
Herklots on a trip south of Kathmandu to the Mahab-
harat  range.  “For  this,  fortunately,  there  is  an  actual
road,”  wrote  Creech  (1962c)  to  Erlanson,  “so  we  will
travel by Landrover. The Nepalese have a drug garden in
the mountains and we will combine collecting with a visit
to that establishment.” Traveling along the Rajpath, the
sinuous  and  only  road  to  India  from  the  Kathmandu

29

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

One introduction from the expedition, Prunus cera-
soides, for which both explorers had high hopes, did not
live up to their expectations. “We thought this was going
to  be  a  real  find  for  the  southern  United  States,”  said
Creech in 1974. “A cherry which flowered in November
and  December  ought  to  be  one  that  would  be  great  in
Florida and along the coast, but it has never really made
it for this purpose.” Another plant, however, Cotoneaster
microphyllus (6322),  one  of  the  species  collected  above
Dana at about 3000 m, did achieve widespread popular-
ity. In the trials it proved to be an exceptionally attractive
form,  resistant  to  fire  blight,  and  well  suited  as  a  land-
scape shrub in many parts of the United States. In 1971
this  cotoneaster  was  released  to  the  public  under  the
name ‘Emerald Spray’. It quickly gained recognition and
remains widely grown.

RACING AGAINST THE MONSOON

In 1964 planning began for an expedition to Sikkim, a
little kingdom in the Himalaya, hidden from the world
between Nepal on the west and Bhutan on the east, never
before explored by American collectors. A protectorate of
India at that time, Sikkim later abolished monarchy and
became  a  state  of  India  in  1975.  The  expedition  was
intended  as  a  sequel  to  the  collecting  undertaken  in
Nepal in 1962 but encompassed the more humid regions
of the Himalaya. De Vos, who traveled to Nepal in 1962,
and Dr. Edward G. Corbett, horticulturist at the USDA
Plant Introduction Station in Glenn Dale, Maryland, led
the expedition.

Situated  in  the  eastern  wing  of  the  Himalaya,  the
hills  of  Sikkim  and  Darjeeling  constitute  the  Sikkim
Himalaya,  a  landlocked  upland  country  forming  a
drainage basin for the river Tista. While the tops of the
mountains are covered by snow, a lush tropical rain forest
flourishes  at  lower  elevations.  Home  to  more  than  five
thousand  plant  species,  the  Sikkim  Himalaya  has  long
been recognized as a center of a diverse number of orna-
mental genera of plants, Rhododendron among them. The
goal set for this expedition was to collect any promising
ornamental  species  encountered,  with  an  emphasis  on
rhododendrons.

The expedition was planned for the spring of 1965 in
order to overlap with the peak of rhododendron bloom.
This enabled Corbett and de Vos to observe the range of

A selection of Cotoneaster microphyllus (6322) collected by Creech
and de Vos in the mountains above Dana was introduced in 1971
as ‘Emerald Spray’. Photo by John L. Creech.

Valley, the explorers reached Dhaman in the Mahabharat
range. “For five days we collected in the hills surrounding
Dhaman  at  altitudes  ranging  from  7500  to  8600  feet
[2300–2600 m],” recorded de Vos (1963). “Although the
vegetation  had  been  severely  mutilated  for  fuel  and
fodder  we  made  some  interesting  collections.  Pleione
praecox [621525–6], a terrestrial orchid spread in laven-
der carpets beneath the tree rhododendrons, pieris, and
gaultheria shrubs.” Before leaving this area, they added an
unusual bittersweet, Celastrus stylosus (6319), and a large-
fruited Euonymus theaefolius (6329).

Creech and de Vos hoped to go north of Kathmandu
again on foot, but as the colder weather rapidly set in and
snow accumulated in the mountains, they had to abandon
this plan and prepare for departure. In addition, the echoes
of the border fights between India and China reached the
explorers. “To us it seems so remote and not of any cause
for  alarm,”  commented  Creech  (1962c).  “The  passes  up
there will soon close in and all will be quiet. We were con-
cerned for a while because Indian Airlines stopped flying to
Nepal and it is a long walk out of here. But the planes are
back on schedule and all is again routine.”

Creech and de Vos departed Nepal on 23 November.
“All  in  all  we  considered  it  rather  a  successful  venture,
having  made  some  250  collections  of  lots  of  seeds  and
plants,” wrote Creech (1962d) to Seibert after the trip. “I
know that a number of these have never been in cultiva-
tion in the United States and probably not even in Euro-
pean gardens. Many of these sound like they will be good
contributions to American horticulture.”

30

Racing against the Monsoon

natural hybridization among some thirty species growing
wild in that region, and to make selections of outstand-
ing types in the field. As Corbett remembers, the precise
planning  of  the  expedition  played  a  critical  role:  “The
exploration time was limited by the fact that the objective
was primarily to see certain genera, Rhododendron in par-
ticular, in flower, and the flowering occurs just before the
onset of the monsoon rains. With the beginning of the
monsoon  season  the  presence  of  large  numbers  of  land
leeches makes further exploration in the jungles imprac-
tical if not impossible.” As the explorers expected to find
only a very few seeds at that time of the year, they pre-
pared for securing vegetative material, primarily cuttings,
using plastic bags.

Sikkim on the horizon
On  4  April,  Corbett  and  de  Vos  departed  on  their
journey to the mysterious kingdom in the Himalaya, not
being  exactly  sure  what  to  expect  there  or  which  areas
they would be able to visit. Three days later they arrived
in New Delhi. There they were met by Dr. Som Pracash
Mital from the Plant Introduction Office of the Indian
Agricultural  Research  Institute,  a  botanist  who  would
accompany them on this expedition.

Corbett and de Vos wanted to head for the Singalila
Ridge  separating  Sikkim  from  Nepal  and  stay  on  the
Sikkim  side  as  they  were  moving  northward  along  the
border. “The Singalila Ridge extends from a point near
Darjeeling  north  to  the  confluence  of  the  borders  of
India,  Nepal,  and  Sikkim,  and  then  along  the  Sikkim-
Nepal border,” explains Corbett. “The ridge is at about
3000  to  4000  m  and  this  is  an  area  which  had  been
explored  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  and
found to be rich in a variety of genera with horticultural
interest.” Circumstances, however, forced the explorers to
change their plans.

Before the expedition began, access to the areas north
and east of Gangtok, the capital of Sikkim, bordering on
Tibet, was closed for security reasons, as border disputes
between China and India intensified. The expedition was
advised to instead visit western Sikkim and the neighbor-
ing  regions  of  eastern  Nepal.  Upon  arrival  in  India,
however, even these plans had to change due to the last-
minute  cancellation  of  permission  to  collect  in  Sikkim
and Nepal.

De Vos tried to enlist help from Her Highness, the
Queen  of  Sikkim.  On  his  behalf,  Elizabeth  Corning,

president of the Garden Club of America, wrote to Her
Highness  Hope  Cooke,  an  American  who  in  1963
married the crown prince of Sikkim and two years later
assumed the throne. Corning requested from Her High-
ness assistance in acquiring travel permits for the Ameri-
can explorers.

The party left New Delhi on 16 April on a flight first
to Calcutta, then to Bagdogra, some 90 km southeast of
Darjeeling,  where  they  were  met  by  Donald  McKenzie
from the nearby Bagracote Tea Estate. After being hosted
in Bagracote by McKenzie for one night, de Vos, Corbett,
and  Mital  left  early  on  the  morning  of  18  April  for  a
three-hour jeep ride to Darjeeling, elevation 2134 m.

As  Corbett  remembers,  the  difficulties  in  securing
proper  permissions  for  collecting  seemed  to  never  end:
“One  unanticipated  factor  on  the  trip  was  the  bureau-
cratic red tape. We spent six days in New Delhi meeting
people and getting final clearances which we had assumed
had already been given. It seemed to take an inordinate
amount of time to get those final permissions, and then
we  spent  six  more  days  in  Darjeeling  making  final
arrangements before we set off on the trail. Since we were
working against the time limit of the onset of the mon-
soons it was a bit vexatious to lose that time.”

“There is little hope for an excursion into Sikkim at
this time,” wrote de Vos (1965a) from Darjeeling. “This
part of India is virtually one large armed camp, and sol-
diers  are  in  evidence  everywhere.  Unless  Her  Highness
intervenes, there is little chance that we will be allowed to
cross the border. My contact, Mr. Donald McKenzie of
Bagracote Tea  Estate,  was  not  very  helpful.  We  had  an
interesting  interlude  at  his  place  during  which  he
managed to drink us under the table and then coax us out
for nine holes of golf. Even under the best of conditions,
I am a lousy golfer, but this game was a farce. There is no
question  that  Mr.  McKenzie  knows  the  right  people
around here, but he didn’t stay sober enough in the two
days with him to help us much.”

First collections
As the diplomatic efforts by Madame President and Her
Highness did not result in granting permission to travel in
Sikkim, Corbett and de Vos had to limit their activities to
the southern part of the Singalila Ridge located in the Dar-
jeeling district of India. In Darjeeling the party, consisting
of Corbett, de Vos, and Mital, was joined by Baktiman Rai,
a plant collector from the local Lloyds Botanic Garden.

31

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

Magnolia campbellii growing on Tiger Hill near Darjeeling. Photo
by Edward G. Corbett.

Camp set up by Corbett and de Vos’s team on the top of Tonglu.
Photo by Edward G. Corbett.

On  22  April,  de  Vos  (1965a)  was  finally  able  to
report back: “After three frustrating weeks, we made our
first plant collections today.” It was done on Tiger Hill,
2580 m, about 11 km southeast of Darjeeling. With the
horizon dominated by the tallest of the Himalayan peaks,
Tiger Hill appeared to de Vos to be “a mere bump on the
landscape  around  here.”  Nevertheless,  on  this  “mere
bump” they discovered a very diverse population of enor-
mous—18  to  24  m  tall—Magnolia  campbellii with
flowers  ranging  in  color  from  red  to  nearly  white. The
scions  collected  from  these  trees  were  shipped  to  the
United States by air the next day.

“Once in Darjeeling we learned that there is a road
along  the  Singalila  ridge  which  is  accessible  by  four-
wheel-drive vehicle from Darjeeling to Phalut, 3600 m,
with guest houses, formerly called inspection bungalows,
at Tonglu, Sandakphu and Phalut,” remembers Corbett.
“The party agreed to take the route from Darjeeling to
Manibhanjang, 2134 m, by bus and on foot from there
to Phalut along the ridge line, then returning by a lower
route, 1800 to 2100 m, and passing through the towns of
Rimbik, Palmajua, Ramam, and Batasi.”

Through rhododendron country
On 23 April the party finally left Darjeeling for a trek,
first to Tonglu, on the Singalila Ridge, some 60 km away,
via  Manibhanjang.  The  group  included  “our  eight
porters, the Indian botanist, Mital, and his helper, plus
Ed and myself,” recorded de Vos (1965b). “The rickety
old Chevy bus got us there [Manibhanjang] all right but
not without a few thrills. At Manibhanjang, we had the

usual  haggling  over  whose  load  was  the  heaviest  but
finally  after  an  hour,  got  going.  .  .  .  The  climb  from
Manibhanjang  6600  ft.  [2000  m]  to Tonglu  10,075  ft.
[3020 m] reminded me of the climb from Dana to our
first base camp. We made it but just barely. I am glad we
rented the bungalow for the first night for we were in no
condition to set up camp.”

Reaching Tonglu, the explorers found that the condi-
tions at 3000 m differed drastically from those in Darjeel-
ing. “The weather at Tonglu was perfectly atrocious for
the first two days,” recorded de Vos (1965b). “The skies
were clear until 8 a.m. then the clouds came rolling in on
gale winds of about 45º [7ºC]. Everyone from this area
said this was most unusual and so it was, for the next two
days have been magnificent.”

Having  the  benefit  of  clear  skies,  on  26  April  the
party made a 24 km round trip exploring the slopes of
Tonglu, down to 2300 m and then back up by a murder-
ous hike to 3000 m. On the way they collected several
rhododendrons.  “We  had  expected  that  there  would  be
white-flowered  forms  of  many  of  the  rhododendrons,
particularly  R.  arboreum and  R.  barbatum,”  remembers
Corbett. “This is precisely what we found and on one day
we came upon an extensive hillside of R. arboreum with
the color range we had hoped to find from the blood red
type to white.”

De Vos (1965b) reported on other botanical riches of
these  mountains:  “The  fruit  of  Mahonia  nepalensis is
plentiful  here  and  we  will  collect  seeds  in  about  three
weeks. Daphne cannabina is abundant between 2400 m
and  3000  m,  and  varies  from  nearly  white  to  deep

32

Racing against the Monsoon

Color variation in flowers of Rhododendron arboreum found by
Corbett and de Vos on Tonglu. Photo by Edward G. Corbett.

Corbett and de Vos found Daphne cannabina on the slopes of
Tonglu between 2400 m and 3000 m. Photo by Francis de Vos.

purple—wish  there  was  a
way to get more vegetative
propagations back. Arisae-
mas  are  very  abundant
here  in  about  six  species.
On  the  east  slope  of
Tonglu,  Corbett  and  de
Vos collected an epiphytic
orchid,  Coelogyne  corym-
bosa (65661),  which  was
spotted  growing  on  an
evergreen oak at 2550 m.
A  few  hundred  meters
higher  on  the  same  slope
they  found  Pieris  formosa
(68425),  an  evergreen
shrub  with  profuse  white
flowers  and  reddish  new
growth. The party contin-
ued  collecting  on  Tonglu
for  several  days,  often
the
wandering 
Nepalese 
the
mountain.

onto 
side  of 

Kanchenjunga, 8585 m, the third highest mountain in the world, as viewed by the expedition from
Tonglu. Photo by Edward G. Corbett.

The place of the winds
On 1 May the expedition left Tonglu and continued the
trek  toward  Sandakphu.  The  trail  led  them  first  to
Gairibas, 2620 m, then to Kali Pokahari, 2950 m, where
they stopped for a light lunch. Past Kali Pokahari a steep
climb brought the party to the top of Sandakphu, 3580

33

m, by late afternoon. While ascending Sandakphu, they
found at about 3000 m another orchid, this time Coelog-
yne cristata (65662), and more rhododendrons, including
Rhododendron falconeri (691193) and R. grande (691194).
The  Singalila  trek  took  the  expedition  through
sparsely populated areas. Corbett recalls their infrequent
encounters with the inhabitants of the country: “The vil-
lages in the mountains are rather isolated. There is a road

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

The expedition’s porters on a trail from Sandakphu to Phalut.
Photo by Edward G. Corbett.

Corbett crosses a bamboo bridge. Photo by Edward G. Corbett.

of sorts but almost everything comes in by pack animal or
porters using A-frame backpacks. Judging from the reac-
tions of the people, especially the children, we were the
first westerners who had been there in some time.”

The party spent several days on Sandakphu. Being up
early to take advantage of clear mornings, Corbett and de
Vos  hiked  down  from  the  top  of  the  mountain,  often
through nearly impenetrable thickets of roses, brambles,
and  bamboo,  then  climbed  back  to  return  to  the  base
before  the  clouds  closed  in.  Their  findings  included,
among  others,  Abies  spectabilis (7112),  Acer  pectinatum
(68565), Roscoea alpina (66256), and a wide array of rho-
dodendrons. “It has been a real treat to see the rhododen-
drons in flower,” wrote de Vos (1965c). “I am sure that
we have seen the full range of color in R. arboreum—from
nearly white to red and enough atypical plants to add fuel
to controversy over hybridization in the wild.”

In the evenings Corbett, de Vos, Mital, Rai, and their
helpers gathered around a fireplace in a smoky room of a
shabby bungalow, sipping tea and sherry, and writing up
the  day’s  collections,  while  rain,  lighting,  thunder,  and
howling winds blasted outside. “After a week of collecting
in  Sandakphu—the  place  of  the  winds—we  are  moving
on to Phalut and hopefully to better weather,” wrote de
Vos (1965c).

Through orchid country
The party left Sandakphu on the early morning of 9 May
and  reached  Phalut,  3600  m,  the  northernmost  moun-
tain  on  their  trek,  in  the  afternoon. The  next  day  they

hiked  north  along  the  Singalila  Ridge  a  few  kilometers
into Sikkim and back without seeing a soul.

Two  days  later  they  began  to  work  their  way  back
south  to  Manibhanjang,  mostly  along  the  2400  m
contour of the Singalila Ridge. First the party hiked east
from Phalut and descended to a village, Samanden, situ-
ated in a valley filled with cultivated fields. Near Saman-
den  they  collected  several  epiphytic  orchids,  including
Cymbidium  grandiflorum (65663)  and  C.  longifolium
(65667). On 14 May the expedition departed Samanden
and headed first for Shirikhola, 2115 m, then after cross-
ing a river on a suspension bridge, reached Rimbik, 2286
m. The  following  day  the  party  explored  the  hills  sur-
rounding  Rimbik,  where  they  found  more  orchids,
including  Eria  graminifolia (65669)  and  an  unknown
Bulbophyllum (65668).

On 16 May, de Vos, Corbett, and their team reached
a forest station in Palmajua. Along the trails from Rimbik
to Palmajua they collected more orchids. As the station
was completely deserted, the party pitched tents in front
of  one  of  the  bungalows.  Corbett  remembers  that  day:
“By the time we reached Palmajua the monsoon had set
in in earnest and attempts to collect or observe much of
anything  were  no  longer  possible.”  Heavy  rain  came  in
that night and the tents were put to the ultimate test. To
complicate matters even further, Mital received news that
he must return to Delhi earlier than previously planned,
so the party decided to cut short their stay in Palmajua
and  depart  for  their  next  stop,  Batasi,  the  following
morning. Along the trail leading to Batasi, they contin-

34

Racing against the Monsoon

De Vos with Rhododendron aucklandii on Phalut. Photo by
Edward G. Corbett.

Children gathered around Rai and de Vos in Rimbik. Photo by
Edward G. Corbett.

ued  collecting  orchids,  including  Dendrobium sp.
(65675) and Liparis sp. (65674). Upon reaching Manib-
hanjang a couple of days later, the expedition closed the
circle.  In  Manibhanjang  they  boarded  a  bus  that  took
them back to Darjeeling.

The party arrived in Darjeeling on 20 May. “We have
just returned to Darjeeling after trekking about 200 miles
[320  km]  through  the  Singalila  Range,”  wrote  de  Vos
(1965d)  to  Creech.  “Aside  from  our  failure  to  do  any-
thing with rhododendron cuttings, I feel that our trip has
been  well  worthwhile.  Over  a  third  of  our  present  180
collections are either plants or seeds. The rest are flower-
ing herbarium specimens.”

By that time it was apparent to de Vos that the expe-
dition’s collecting activities might be compromised. “The
spring  flowering  season  is  over  and  the  pre-monsoon
rains have begun,” he reported (1965d). “During the past
week we had rain every afternoon or evening, and with 1
to 2 inches [25–50 mm] of rain a day the leeches have
come out of hibernation. Our whole party of seventeen
had one or more leeches during our trek to Manibhan-
jang this morning.”

Corbett and de Vos spent the next several days in Dar-
jeeling organizing collections and hoping for a change in
weather. They took advantage of plant collections main-
tained in the Lloyds Botanic Garden and with the help of
Rai procured seeds of sixty additional species native to the
Darjeeling  region.  Corbett  and  de  Vos  also  made  some
purchases in a seed house of G. Ghose and Sons in Dar-
jeeling,  which  turned  out  to  be  fairly  well  stocked  with

35

The expedition’s porters in Palmajua. Photo by Edward G.
Corbett.

seeds of local plants. Unfortunately, the monsoon was set-
tling  over  Darjeeling  and  the  Singalila  Ridge  for  good.
The  explorers  decided  to  prepare  for  departure.  On  26
May the expedition left Darjeeling to return to the United
States by way of Bagdogra, Calcutta, and Delhi.

“Although we were disappointed that we did not get
permission  to  enter  Nepal  or  Sikkim  we  were  quite
pleased with the collections that we made,” said de Vos
(1965e). “Among the material brought back were 59 col-
lections of living plants comprised of cuttings, seedlings,
and  rootstock,  and  seed  of  136  species.  We  also  made
about 500 herbarium specimens.”

The Tibetan plateau occupies 2.3 million km2 in central Asia,
about half of which lies in the Tibetan Autonomous Region of
China, with the rest divided between four Chinese provinces—
Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan, and Yunnan. Although most of Tibet’s
territory is relatively level, its topography extends from the
Himalayan peaks, 8000 m in altitude, to the low-lying, deep
southeastern river gorges with elevations below 1200 m. The
Himalaya, the world’s highest range, comprises 110 peaks more
than 7300 m high and extends for nearly 2500 km from Nanga
Parbat, 8126 m, in the west to Namchak Barwa, 7756 m, in the
east. While in the western part of the plateau high plains predomi-
nate, mountain ranges and river gorges are the dominant feature of
the eastern part. Most of Tibet is subject to a severe, dry, continen-
tal climate. While the arctic air has unhindered access to Tibet
from the north, the warm, humid air masses from the south can

barely penetrate the Himalaya. As a result the annual precipitation
on the northern slopes of the Himalaya can be as low as 150 mm,
whereas on the south side it varies from 1500 to 3000 mm. The
gorges of southeastern Tibet are more accessible to the air masses
from the south, which bring a higher annual precipitation, about
500 mm. The vegetation of Tibet reflects the diversity of its cli-
mates, and the number of vascular plants exceeds six thousand.
Forests are limited to southern Tibet, with the southeast being the
most densely forested. Deserts occupy the northern part, while
grasslands are found in the northeast. The flora of the mountains
is differentiated according to the elevation. Tropical vegetation can
be found below 1200 m, subtropical vegetation between 1200 and
2200 m, and temperate vegetation from 2200 to 3500 m. Above
that, alpine vegetation develops.

On the Fringes of Tibet

ON THE FRINGES OF TIBET

Longwood  exploration  of  the  Himalayan  region  in  the
1950s  and  1960s  was  limited  to  the  areas  south  of  the
main crest of the Himalaya. Tibet, like the rest of China,
was  not  accessible  to  Western  explorers  during  that
period.  It  was  not  until  China  removed  some  of  the
restrictions on travel to Tibet in the 1990s that it became
possible to send plant-collecting expeditions to that part
of the world.

In  2000  I  joined  the  team  organized  by  Dr.  Zsolt
Debreczy and Dr. István Rácz, principal investigators of
the  International  Dendrological  Research  Institute  in
Wellesley,  Massachusetts,  to  travel  to  eastern  Tibet,  a
region  administered  by  Sichuan  and Yunnan  provinces.
In  the  early  1970s,  Debreczy  and  Rácz  had  begun  the
paramount  task  of  preparing  the Dendrological Atlas; in
the decades that followed, both traveled to nearly every
corner of the temperate climate zone to study and docu-
ment trees and shrubs. The focus of the 2000 expedition
to eastern Tibet was conifers, the subject of the first four
volumes of the atlas. Debreczy, Rácz, and I were joined by
Ethan W. Johnson of the Holden Arboretum in Kirtland,
Ohio, and a group of volunteers, including Mary Camp-
bell, Patricia A. Fox, Erhard Lorenz, Craig D. Sickel, and
Isabell Voss. Our guides during the trip were Yang Yong
and Kang Yun, researchers from the Beijing Herbarium
of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

Tali Range
Our team assembled in Beijing and departed on 23 Sep-
tember for Kunming in Yunnan. The next day we headed
to  Xi  Shan,  also  known  as  Western  Hills,  overlooking
Kunming and Lake Dian. An abundance of Cercis yunna-
nensis, growing out of sheer rock cliffs overlooking the lake,
made us realize what a spectacular site this must be in the
spring, when these trees are in bloom. Rich, mixed forest
covered the mountain with Cupressus duclouxiana, Ketelee-
ria evelyniana, and Pinus yunnanensis, the most prominent
coniferous trees in the area. One deciduous Ilex macrocarpa
(001375),  growing  along  the  road,  caught  our  attention
with its profusion of cherrylike, shiny black fruits.

On 25 September we paid a visit to the Black Dragon
Pool  Park  located  in  the  suburbs  of  Kunming,  which
offers fine examples of Taoist and Buddhist temples. The
main  reason  for  our  visit  was  a  massive  specimen  of
Cupressus  funebris, commonly  called  mourning  cypress,

Cupressus funebris, alleged to be seven hundred years old, grows 
on the grounds of a temple in the Black Dragon Pool Park in
Kunming. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

estimated  to  be  some  seven  hundred  years  old.  Other
arboreal  delights  included  aged  Chionanthus  retusus,
Cryptomeria  japonica, and  Lagerstroemia  indica, and  a
sky-high grove of Glyptostrobus pensilis, the Chinese rela-
tive of the American swamp cypress, Taxodium distichum.
The  next  morning  we  left  Kunming  and  traveled
northwest  to  the  town  of  Dali,  where  we  intended  to
explore  Diancang  Shan,  also  known  as  the Tali  Range.
This range, its highest peaks reaching 4122 m, stretches
some 50 km from north to south, overlooking Dali and
Lake Er. To expedite our ascent from the town on the lake
shore—elevation 1980 m—to the high peaks, we resorted
to a cable lift, which took us halfway to the top of the
mountain and saved a good several hours of hiking. Our
collecting began at about 3300 m. The most important
find of the day were cones of Abies delavayi, a species of

37

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

Diancang Shan, previously known as the Tali Range, rises above
Dali. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

A caravan of Tibetan horses is prepared to take our group to
Yunshan Ping on the slopes of Yulongxue Shan near Lijiang. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

toward Yunshan Ping, an alpine meadow on the east side
of the Yulongxue Shan, which would be our destination
the  next  day. To  our  delight,  at  a  turn  in  the  road  we
spotted a specimen of Abies salouenensis decorated prolif-
ically with cones. While Debreczy and Rácz climbed the
tree to collect the cones, the rest of the group surveyed
the vegetation around the site. Viburnum, Buddleja, and
Rhododendron abounded,  as  did  herbaceous  plants,
peonies, and primroses.

The  next  day  we  returned  with  the  intent  to  reach
Yunshan  Ping,  surrounded  on  three  sides  by  a  virgin
forest with thousand-year-old Abies forrestii (001396) and
Picea likiangensis. A small caravan of Tibetan horses was
hired  to  carry  us  to  the  meadow,  from  where  a  further
ascent  would  begin.  The  unimposing  stature  of  these
horses  revealed  nothing  about  their  incredible  strength
and ability to maneuver along narrow and steep moun-
tain paths. The forest above the meadow had clearly been
used for grazing by the very same horses, as the under-
story vegetation was severely impacted. Only upon reach-
ing the alpine zone, where loose dolomitic rock covering
the ground kept horses away, did we see a greater diver-
sity  of  plants.  Here  firs  and  spruces  were  replaced  by
Betula calcicola, Juniperus squamata, and J. pingii. Many
dwarf  shrubs,  including  a  curious  Buxus  rugulosa var.
prostrata (001613), hugged the ground.

Hutiao Gorge, or Leaping Tiger Gorge, said to be the
deepest  gorge  in  the  world,  was  our  destination  for  30
September.  Extending  15  km,  from Yulongxue  Shan  in
the south to Habaxue Shan in the north, it is traversed by

Collecting plants on the slopes of Diancang Shan near Dali are,
left to right, Sickel, Campbell, Debreczy, Rácz, Fox, Kang, and
Yang. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

fir  inhabiting  the  uppermost  ridges  of  Diancang  Shan,
but  our  collections  also  included  Arisaema  yunnanense
(001376),  Rodgersia  sambucifolia (001387),  and  Sorbus
rufopilosa (001388).

Nakhi kingdom
From Dali we continued north to the city of Lijiang, the
historical capital of the ancient Nakhi kingdom. The city
is  backed  by  the  majestic  Yulongxue  Shan,  or  Jade
Dragon Snow Mountain, 5596 m, standing on the edge
of Tibet. The mountain is home to half of Yunnan’s thir-
teen  thousand  plant  species,  including  four  hundred
species of trees.

After checking into a hotel, our group decided to do
a  quick  reconnaissance  on  the  mountain.  We  drove

38

On the Fringes of Tibet

Standing on the eastern rim of Hutiao Gorge at its northern end
where the Yangtze river emerges after dropping some 300 m in a
series of eighteen rapids. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Ascending to the plateau
The next day we headed north from Lijiang to Zhong-
dian following the course of the Zhongdian River, one of
the  tributaries  of  the Yangtze.  Zhongdian  is  the  seat  of
Dechen Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, which occupies
the northwestern corner of Yunnan. As the road we were
traveling  on  steadily  climbed  to  higher  altitudes,  rapid
changes in the landscape, vegetation, and architecture, as
well as the sudden appearance of horsemen and herds of
yaks, announced our entry into historical Tibet. Enticed
by the rich, lush vegetation along the river, we decided to
return there later and to dedicate a whole day to collect-
ing in this valley.

The  valley  along  the  Zhondian  River  fulfilled  our
every expectation. Despite constant rain and bloodthirsty
leeches, which were curiously attracted to our faces, plant
collecting was very fruitful. Particularly attractive at that
time of year, and richly adorned with colorful fruits, were
Schisandra  chinensis (001585),  Sorbus  prattii (001587),
and  Viburnum  kansuense (001586).  However,  of  all  the
plants  collected,  none  caused  as  much  excitement  as  a
spurge, Euphorbia nematocypha (001400), decorated with
fire-red leaves. To our dismay, hardly any fruit was present
on these plants. After searching through dozens of plants
for half an hour, we found only five precious seeds.

On 5 October we continued north to Daocheng in
Sichuan.  The  dirt  road  between  Zhongdian  and
Daocheng  leads  through  rugged  terrain  that  under
normal conditions can be traversed only by four-wheel-
drive vehicles and is frequently impassable due to land-

The author dwarfed by the massive trunks of Abies forrestii
(001396) growing in Yunshan Ping on the slopes of Yulongxue
Shan near Lijiang. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

the  mighty  Yangtze  River  and  bounded  by  two  peaks
towering  3900  m  above  it.  While  rushing  through  the
gorge, the Yangtze drops about 300 m in a series of eight-
een rapids. Our goal was to explore the north end of the
gorge, which is more difficult to reach than the south end
and therefore less visited. The dirt road we were traveling
on  ended  abruptly  at  the  gorge  only  to  reveal  an
unearthly  landscape  shaped  by  unimaginable  forces  of
nature. Standing on the rim of the gorge, we were over-
powered  by  the  scale  of  the  awesome  geological  forma-
tion around us. The seemingly uninhabited land before
us  was  Tibet.  The  only  sign  of  human  presence  was  a
small  shack  manned  by  two  people  selling  soft  drinks,
potato chips, and instant noodles.

39

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

The valley of the Zhongdian River, which flows south from 
Tibet to Yunnan, was a rich plant hunting area. Photo by 
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Blazing red foliage of spurge, Euphorbia nematocypha (001400),
growing in the Zhongdian River valley. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

slides. It took us a whole day in Zhongdian to find several
drivers brave enough to undertake such an arduous trip.
A convoy of four vehicles was assembled to accommodate
our  team  with  an  ever-increasing  load  of  plants  and
herbarium specimens. Not being sure of the road condi-
tions ahead of us, we left Zhongdian at the first light of
dawn.  Our  Tibetan  drivers  warned  us  that  in  good
weather it took more than ten hours to reach Daocheng.
Little did they realize the group they had agreed to trans-
port over these mountains would not resist the tempta-
tion to stop at every picture-worthy tree along the road.
To assure our movement at a reasonable pace, the Tibetan
drivers  learned  quickly  to  call  us  back  to  the  vehicles
using  the  one  English  phrase  they  knew—“Let’s  go!”—
shouted with a commanding tone. In the afternoon our

advances were further delayed by several mechanical fail-
ures, which afflicted our vehicles one by one, and eventu-
ally by a flat tire. It was shortly before midnight when we
saw the lights of Daocheng.

Before  departing  from  Daocheng  the  following
morning,  we  replaced  our  convoy  of  jeeps,  which  had
served us so well, with a small bus. To reach Yajiang, our
next destination, we had to cross a large section of the
Tibetan plateau, rising some 4000 m above sea level. As
we ascended to higher altitudes, the coniferous forest was
gradually  replaced  by  grassland  and  finally  by  alpine
desert  with  scarce  cushion  herbs  and  dwarf  rhododen-
drons hiding between crumbled rocks. Several species of
Gentiana with  brilliant  blue  flowers,  rivaling  the  azure
sky above, frequented these high altitudes. High moun-

40

On the Fringes of Tibet

Our small convoy of jeeps at one of the many stops along the road
from Zhongdian to Daocheng. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Pinus densata was among the conifers seen en route from 
Zhongdian to Daocheng. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Habitat of Abies squamata near Daocheng. Photo by Tomasz
Ani´sko.

tain pastures stretching over rolling hills dominated the
landscape.

Mountain of natural wonders
On 7 October, on the way from Yajiang to Kangding, we
were frequently able to admire the snowcapped peaks of
Gongga  Shan  proudly  guarding  the  entrance  to  Tibet.
Widespread along our route were Abies squamata, Larix
potaninii, and  Picea  likiangensis var.  rubescens. A  dwarf
Cotoneaster  adpressa (001595)  was  very  attractive  in  its
autumnal attire, exceptionally richly decorated with large,
red, shiny fruits. After crossing Zheduo Pass at 4150 m,
in order to reach Kangding located in a deep river gorge,
we  had  to  descend  rather  rapidly  some  1500  m.  This
required  the  driver  to  stop  frequently  to  allow  the

Groves of poplars in an otherwise treeless landscape near
Daocheng announce to travelers that they are approaching 
a settlement. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

41

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

vibur-
rhododendrons, 
nums,  and  mountain-
ashes.  Debreczy  and  Rácz
claimed this was the most
beautiful coniferous forest
they had ever seen in their
travels  around  the  world.
We were able to reach the
timberline,  but  darkness
quickly set over the moun-
tain,  preventing  us  from
exploring it further.

to 

split 

On  9  October,  after
spending  the  night  on
Gongga  Shan,  the  team
decided 
into
several  groups  taking  dif-
ferent trails to cover more
ground  before  we  had  to
return 
to  Kangding.
Johnson  and  I  headed
down  toward  the  glacial
tongue  terminating  at  a
cave at the altitude of 2850 m. We were especially amazed
to observe so many floristic parallels between this forest
on  the  edge  of Tibet  and  the  forest  of  the  Appalachian
Mountains in North America. Similarities went beyond
cohabitation  of  hemlocks  and  spruces  with  rhododen-
drons,  viburnums,  maples,  and  magnolias,  to  include
herbaceous  plants  such  as  Clintonia, Polygonatum, Smi-
lacina, and Trillium. Needless to say, we felt very much at
home. The arrival of autumn was apparent, but the spec-
tacle of fall leaf color was rather muted compared to what
we were used to in eastern North America, and limited to
mainly  maples  and  mountain-ashes.  What  this  forest
lacked in leaf color, however, was very generously com-
pensated for by an abundance of colorful berries.

Upon returning to Kangding, we cleaned and organ-
ized the seventy collections made on this trip. The next
morning we started on an all-day drive to Chengdu, the
capital of Sichuan, from where we flew back to Beijing on
11  October.  In  Beijing  I  met  with  Gao  Jiying,  a
researcher at the Subtropical Forestry Research Institute
in  Fuyang,  Zhejiang.  Gao  had  been  collaborating  with
Longwood  Gardens,  Descanso  Gardens  in  La  Cañada,
California, and Dr. Clifford R. Parks of the University of

42

Hailougou, a glaciated valley located on the eastern slope of Gongga Shan near Kangding. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

vehicle’s brakes to cool—not an unwelcome event on this
long and strenuous ride.

Kangding,  the  seat  of  the  Ganzi  Tibetan  Auton-
omous  Prefecture,  is  a  major  trading  post  on  the  route
from Beijing to Lhasa and has been historically regarded
as the gateway to Tibet. It is also among the most impor-
tant towns in the history of botanical exploration. Plant
collectors  such  as  Ernest  H.  Wilson,  Antwerp  E.  Pratt,
Jean  André  Soulie,  Grigori  N.  Potanin,  and  Joseph  F.
Rock  chose  Kangding  as  a  base  from  which  to  explore
eastern Tibet.

Gongga  Shan,  or  Minya  Konka,  7556  m,  is  the
highest  mountain  in  China  outside  the  Himalaya. The
mountain  abounds  in  natural  wonders,  including  gla-
ciers,  hot  springs,  and  most  importantly  a  virgin  forest
with nearly twenty-four hundred species of seed plants.
The only road on the mountain led us to Hailougou, a
glaciated  valley  located  on  the  eastern  slope  of  Gongga
Shan. The sixteen-hundred-year-old glacier is 15 km long
and 80 to 200 m high. Our hike began at an altitude of
about 3000 m and took us through a magnificent forest
of  centuries-old  Abies  faberi, Larix  potaninii, and  Picea
brachytyla, with  understory  vegetation  dominated  by 

Tibet’s Gorges and Mountain Passes

North Carolina at Chapel Hill on a joint project aimed at
collecting  all  species  of  camellias  known  to  occur  in
China.  Having  been  informed  about  our  expedition
returning from Tibet, Gao offered to meet with me and
share forty camellias from his collection. The most treas-
ured  of  these  was  Camellia  azalea (001113),  a  species
only discovered in 1984 and never before introduced into
cultivation.  Most  importantly,  this  is  the  only  camellia
known to bloom throughout the year.

TIBET’S GORGES AND MOUNTAIN PASSES

The  2000  expedition  permitted  only  limited  collecting
along the eastern fringes of Tibet, but it opened our eyes
to the immense floristic riches of that region. The south-
eastern part of Tibet, which receives the highest rainfall,
is the location of the largest concentration of plant life.
This makes that region an exceptionally attractive place
for plant explorers looking for prospective garden-worthy
plants.

Southeastern Tibet is recognized for its large number
of Rhododendron species. Even though these shrubs were
not the sole focus of the trip planned for 2002, rhodo-
dendron experts Ronald R. Rabideau, nursery manager of
Rare  Find  Nursery  in  Jackson,  New  Jersey,  and  Scott
Vergara, license manager of the Conard-Pyle Company in
West Grove, Pennsylvania, joined me on this expedition.
The trip was organized in collaboration with the Institute
of  Botany  in  Beijing. Yudan Tang,  curator  of  the  insti-
tute’s  garden,  coordinated  the  trip,  while  Wang  Ta  of
Lhasa guided us through Tibet.

Fresh snow in the mountains
Our  group  assembled  in  Beijing  on  6  October  and  the
same day we flew to Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, situated
at about 3600 m. On 8 October, after a day of rest and
acclimatization to high altitude, we headed northeast to
Lake Pasum. Driving along the Lhasa River, we gradually
gained elevation from 3600 m to about 5000 m at Milha
Pass. Before reaching the pass we stopped in several loca-
tions  and  collected  a  number  of  perennials,  including
Thalictrum diffusiflorum (02961), and a couple of shrubs,
including Wikstroemia scytophylla (02962). At higher ele-
vations  snow  was  already  on  the  ground,  but  herds  of
yaks still grazed in areas that remained green.

Camellia azalea (001113), discovered in southern China in 1984,
blooms throughout the year. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

From  Milha  Pass  we  descended  to  Lake  Pasum  at
about 3500 m. It was late at night when we arrived at the
village of Tsomjuk on the lake’s shore, and what appeared
to be a campsite with rudimentary cabins. Chilled to the
bone, we woke the next morning to a beautiful view of
the mountains on the other side of the lake catching the
rising  sun  on  their  snow-dusted  peaks.  This  made  us
appreciate how brief the growing season is here, and how
quickly winter can set in at such high elevations. Every-
thing  around  us  quickly  thawed,  as  did  we.  Revitalized
with a couple of cups of hot tea, we were ready to explore
the shores of the lake. Most of the time we followed the
road being constructed along the south side of the lake,
leading to a military base. The road took us as far as the
village  of  Je,  beyond  which  we  were  not  permitted  to

43

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

Scarlet berries of Triosteum himalayanum (02968) found growing
on the shores of Lake Pasum. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Nyingchi occupies the valley at the confluence of Nyang Chu and
Yarlung Tsangpo. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

wander. Before night we returned to our campsite carry-
ing a day’s worth of collections, including seeds of Larix
griffithiana (02974),  Podophyllum  hexandrum (02967),
and Triosteum himalayanum (02968).

On the morning of 10 October we drove south from
Lake Pasum to Nyingchi, a busy city and administrative
center on the banks of Nyang Chu, not far from its con-
fluence with Yarlung Tsangpo, the main river of southern
Tibet.  Traveling  to  Nyingchi,  we  descended  to  about
3000  m.  Our  goal  the  following  day  was  to  reach
Serkhyem  La,  a  mountain  pass  northeast  of  the  city,
through  which  one  of  the  few  roads  connecting  Tibet
with China was being built. Construction, taking place
simultaneously on the entire stretch of the road between
Nyingchi  and  Serkhyem  La,  slowed  down  our  progress

44

Namchak Barwa revealed its glory when the expedition reached
Serkhyem La traveling from Nyingchi to Bomi. Photo by Tomasz
Ani´sko.

considerably, and at times stopped us altogether. We soon
realized we would not be able to reach the pass and return
to Nyingchi before dark. After a long and grueling drive,
we ascended to about 3800 m, at which point we decided
to turn around. Fresh snow was already on the ground at
that  altitude,  thus  reducing  our  prospects  of  finding
plants.  Stopping  at  several  sites,  we  made  a  number  of
collections.  Among  them  were  Ceratostigma  griffithii
(02977),  Primula  florindae (02979),  Rabdosia  pseudo-
irrorata (02978), and several rhododendrons.

On 12 October, in order to reach our next destina-
tion, the town of Bomi on Parlung Tsangpo, a tributary
of Yarlung Tsangpo, we had to cross Serkhyem La at high
noon. To avoid the worst traffic jams on the construction
sites  along  the  road  leading  up  to  Serkhyem  La,  we
departed Nyingchi at dawn. To assure our timely arrival
in Bomi, we resisted any temptation to stop before reach-
ing  Serkhyem  La  at  about  4300  m.  Upon  reaching  the
pass,  a  magnificent  view  opened  before  us.  The  sacred
mountain  of  Namchak  Barwa,  7756  m,  stood  high  on
the  horizon,  dwarfing  the  surrounding  peaks  of  a  mere
4000  m  that  were  clad  in  dark  forests.  The  mountain
appeared as if crudely chiseled out of a solid block of ice.
In  its  whiteness  it  seemed  more  akin  to  the  passing
clouds, sliced by its knife-sharp ridges, than to the earth
below.

The prospect of spending several more hours on the
road to reach Bomi prevented us from taking more time
to  contemplate  the  beauty  of  this  site;  after  collecting
seeds of a few plants, we began our descent to the valley
of Rong Chu some 1800 m below. Rong Chu flows north

Tibet’s Gorges and Mountain Passes

The valley of Parlung Tsangpo, a tributary of Yarlung Tsangpo,
near Bomi. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Fruits of Malus rockii (02988) growing in the valley of Parlung
Tsangpo. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

and discharges its water to the river Tongkyuk, which in
turn is a tributary of Parlung Tsangpo. Stopping along the
way,  we  collected  Rodgersia  aesculifolia (02982),  Salvia
przewalskii
(02985),  and  Viburnum  mullaha var.
glabrescens (02984).

Yak-butter tea time
For the next two days we made excursions out of Bomi to
explore areas to the west and east of the town. Unfortu-
nately, the local authority denied us permission to cross
to the other side of Parlung Tsangpo, where we intended
to explore the mountain passes south of the town. The
proximity of the border with India makes this area mili-
tarily sensitive. On 13 October we drove west from the
town on the same road we had traveled the day before.
There we explored several sites along the river as well as
the  lower  slopes  of  the  surrounding  hills.  Among  the
plants collected were Deutzia compacta var. multiradiata
(02987),  Malus  rockii (02988),  and  Senecio  echaetus
(02990).

The  day  ended  with  a  spontaneous  visit  to  a
monastery that we spotted nestled on a small island in the
middle  of  Parlung  Tsangpo,  connected  to  the  outside
world by a shaky suspension bridge. Driven by curiosity
and a desire to find out what plants were cultivated by the
monks,  we  crossed  the  bridge  and  wandered  into  the
monastery.  Not  entirely  certain  what  kind  of  reception
we could expect inside, we proceeded cautiously, but to
our  delight,  the  first  monk  we  met  invited  us  into  his
living quarters for a cup of steaming yak-butter tea. Our
conversation over tea quickly turned into the subject of

A fall-flowering vine, Senecio echaetus (02990), growing on shaded
slopes along Parlung Tsangpo. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

plants, and we were greatly impressed by the breadth of
knowledge the monks had about the wild plants growing
in the monastery’s environs.

On 15 October we left Bomi with the intention of
driving  east  to  the  town  of Yiong  on Yiong Tsangpo,  a
tributary  of  Parlung  Tsangpo.  The  valley  of  Yiong
Tsangpo provided a convincing testimony to how geolog-
ically  young  this  landscape  was.  The  river  mercilessly
undercut  the  entire  sides  of  the  mountains. The  valley
was  littered  with  immense  boulders  as  if  it  were  some
playground  for  unimaginable  giants.  Driving  on  a  road
barely  scraped  out  of  this  river  of  stone,  we  wondered
how often the boulders came down. Our journey came to
an end when we learned that a landslide ahead of us had
destroyed  the  road  completely.  We  were  thus  forced  to

45

Himalaya and Adjacent Regions

The expedition’s vehicles are dwarfed by giant boulders scattered along Yiong Tsangpo. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

return to the town of Tangme at the confluence of Yiong
Tsangpo and Parlung Tsangpo. The area around Tangme,
at 2000 m, was the lowest elevation point of the entire
trip. At this relatively low altitude, the warm and humid
air  moving  from  the  south  through  the Tsangpo  Gorge
supported lush subtropical vegetation. One of the more
striking plants at that time of year was Hedychium sino-
aureum (02993), decorated by bright red fruits and seeds
backed by gingerlike foliage.

Crawling up Tra La
On 16 October we retraced our steps from Tangme to the
valley  of  Rong  Chu.  The  road  squeezed  through  the
gorges of Parlung Tsangpo and Tongkyuk, and climbed
some 1000 m in elevation, before the broad valley opened
before  us.  Several  stops  along  the  route  allowed  us  to
botanize  in  the  gorges,  which  resulted  in  collections  of
Gaultheria  trichoclada (021002),  Hydrangea  robusta
(021006), and Rhododendron nuttallii (021007), among
others. Before night we arrived at Lunang, a quintessen-
tial  frontier  town  that  must  be  a  welcome  sight  to  the

truck drivers traveling on the treacherous road between
Bomi and Nyingchi. Exhausted from long hours of tense
driving, we gratefully accepted accommodations in what
might  be,  under  the  circumstances,  generously  called  a
motel.

Waking up the next morning to the subfreezing tem-
peratures inside our cabins and a light cover of snow on
the  ground,  we  set  off  on  a  hike  to Tra  La,  a  4000  m
mountain  pass  above  Lunang  separating  the  valley  of
Rong Chu to the west from that of Yarlung Tsangpo to
the  east.  This  required  a  murderous  climb  of  seven
hundred vertical meters from the floor of the valley. To
add  to  the  challenge,  while  there  were  no  recognizable
paths  of  any  kind,  the  steep  slopes  we  climbed  were
covered  with  thick  moss,  which  made  them  extremely
slippery. Crawling on our hands and knees most of the
time and grasping every possible sturdy branch, we finally
reached the pass several hours later. We accomplished the
descent back to the valley mostly by sliding down on the
thick, plush moss, dodging the low branches and dense
thickets.  For  all  this  effort  we  were  well  rewarded  with

46

Tibet’s Gorges and Mountain Passes

A typical farmstead in the valley of Rong Chu near Lunang. Photo
by Tomasz Ani´sko.

interesting  collections,  which  included  Abies  georgei var.
smithii (021039),  Podophyllum  hexandrum (021008,
021013), and undetermined species of Aconitum (021012,
021014),  Iris
(021011,
021015), as well as several rhododendrons.

(021009),  and  Meconopsis

On the edge of the world
On 18 October we traveled from Lunang over Serkhyem
La back to Nyingchi, and the next day we drove to the
small village of Yeku on the south side of Tsangpo at the
foot of the Himalaya. On the way we stopped at the site
of a ruined monastery, where we found a large colony of
Paeonia  delavayi var.  lutea (021038).  We  suspected  the
plants  had  been  cultivated  by  the  monks  and  persisted
after the destruction of the monastery.

Situated near the end of the road paralleling Yarlung
Tsangpo, Yeku had the aura of a place on the edge of the
world. Beyond it lay the roadless hidden country where
the  mighty Yarlung Tsangpo  is  forced  between  7000  m
peaks into a series of narrow gorges. After dropping more
than  2000  m  through  the  gorges,  it  emerges  on  the
Indian  side  of  the  Himalaya  as  the  river  Brahmaputra.
Yeku  was  not  much  more  than  a  trading  post  for  the
porters buying goods and carrying them over the moun-
tain passes to Pemakö, a region isolated from the rest of
the  world  by  high  mountains  and  by  the  territorial
dispute between China and India.

One  of  these  passes,  Doshong  La,  was  our  destina-
tion  on  20  October.  A  winding  road  brought  us  to  a
boggy  area  near  the  timberline  at  about  3700  m,  from
where a 500 m climb to Doshong La began. This site had

Bright red fruits of Podophyllum hexandrum (021008, 021013)
found on the slopes leading up to Tra La east of Lunang. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Vergara, left, and Rabideau are surrounded by Paeonia delavayi var.
lutea (021038) reaching 2 to 2.5 m in height. Photo by Tomasz
Ani´sko.

47

A bungalow in Yeku which served as a starting point for our excur-
sions to Doshong La and Namu La. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Rabideau, left, and the author atop Doshong La. Photo by Tomasz
Ani´sko.

The small bog at 3700 m marked the end of the road and the
beginning of the footpath leading to Doshong La. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Yarlung Tsangpo as seen from the path leading to Namu La, north
of Doshong La, before the river enters the narrow gorge between
Namchak Barwa, 7756 m, and Gyala Peri, 7151 m. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Glossy leaves of Bergenia purpurascens (021018) showed their
scarlet fall color along the path leading to Doshong La. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Tibet’s Gorges and Mountain Passes

Desert habitat of Oxytropis sp. (021037) along Yarlung Tsangpo near Xigaze. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

been known as rich plant-hunting ground since Kingdon
Ward collected there in 1924. For us the time spent on
Doshang La turned out to be the single most fruitful day
of  the  entire  expedition.  Among  our  collections  were
many perennials, such as Bergenia purpurascens (021018)
and Triosteum himalayanum (021025), and shrubs, such
as Cotoneaster hebephyllus (021022), Gaultheria tetramera
(021019),  and Lonicera tomentella (021023).  At  length,
the  day’s  collections  were  complemented  by  numerous
rhododendrons.

Yeku  marked  the  turning  point  for  the  expedition.
On 22 October we left the village to begin a three-day
drive  west  along  Yarlong  Tsangpo  to  Xigaze,  Tibet’s
second  largest  city,  some  280  km  west  of  Lhasa.  As  we
traveled west the climate became drier, the lush forests of

Namchak Barwa giving way to sparse xerophytic vegeta-
tion and then deserts. But to our surprise, even among
the shifting sand dunes along Yarlung Tsangpo, we found
interesting plants adapted to this extreme environment,
such as species of Oxytropis (021037).

On  25  October  we  returned  to  Lhasa,  spent  a  day
cleaning and preparing seeds, plants, and bulbs for a phy-
tosanitary  inspection,  and  on  27  October  flew  back  to
Beijing.  While  waiting  in  Beijing  for  the  phytosanitary
documents  to  be  processed,  we  met  again  with  Long-
wood  collaborator  Gao,  who  shared  with  us  sixty-two
camellias  from  his  collection. These  were  added  to  our
own 224 collections and carried back to the United States
a few days later.

49

JAPAN

FORESTED ARCHIPELAGO

The  first  expedition  organized  under  the  collaborative
agreement  between  Longwood  Gardens  and  the  USDA
was undertaken in 1956. It targeted southern Japan and,
as Dr. Walter H. Hodge, Longwood’s head of education
and research, explained, “was concentrated in the remote
forest regions of the southern part of the archipelago on
the Islands of Ky¯ush¯u, Shikoku, and lower Honsh¯u . . .
whose warm temperate climate is similar to parts of the
southeastern and gulf coasts of the United States as well as
the milder coastal belt of the Pacific Northwest” (1959d).
Dr.  John  L.  Creech,  horticulturist  with  the  USDA
Agricultural  Research  Service,  who  had  collected  orna-
mental plants in Japan a year earlier, was selected as the
explorer. Western plant collectors explored Japan in the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, concentrat-
ing their efforts on plants suitable for northern climates.
“Most  collectors,  however,”  said  Creech  (1957),  “have
neglected the regions of warm temperate Japan, perhaps
partly  because  the  Japanese  themselves  are  not  entirely
familiar with these places. We would anticipate that the
plants native to areas with warm-temperate and even sub-
tropical conditions might have distinct limitations in the
United States. Yet, an agro-climatic study will show that
in terms of yearly variations in climate southern Japan is
remarkably like parts of southern United States.”

Creech attributed the great potential for finding new
plants in Japan to the fact that Japan is among the most

heavily  forested  countries.  “High  rainfall  during  the
growing season, accompanied by adequate temperatures,
have caused these forests to be luxuriant in woody plants,”
he  wrote  (1957).  “Because  the  Japanese  have  practiced
careful  silviculture  for  many  centuries,  great  forests  are
under  imperial  control  and  certain  parts  of  them  are
allowed to remain in a natural state of development.”

Late bloomer of Yatsugatake
Creech  arrived  in  Tokyo  on  30  September.  He  was
greeted by Dr. Hideo Takeda, botanist with the Military
Geology  Section  of  the  U.S.  Army.  “This  outstanding
Japanese botanist acted as interpreter, guide, and photog-
rapher  during  the  entire  period  covered  by  this  expedi-
tion,”  noted  Creech  (1957).  A  week  later  the  two  men
headed  to  the  Yatsugatake  Mountains,  situated  west  of
Tokyo, in central Honsh¯u.

“We  traveled  from  Tokyo  by  rail  to  a  small  town
called Chino, not far from Suwa Lake, where a mountain
innkeeper had arranged to meet us with a jeep,” recorded
Creech (1957). “The mountain roads are pitifully poor at
this time of the year. It required about four hours to grind
our way up to Shibuyo Onsen (inn) which is situated at
4950 feet [1500 m] altitude. Since we had collected here
during the summer of 1955, we were familiar with much
of the terrain and the vegetation. Our main interest was
to  collect  late-flowering  forms  of  Rhododendron  japon-
icum [60623]. This azalea inhabits open fields, especially
the  more  boggy  plateaus.  It  normally  flowers  in  early

50

Forested Archipelago

Creech began his exploration of Japan in the Yatsugatake Mountains in central Honsh¯u. Photo by
John L. Creech.

May.  Both  yellow  and
orange  forms  grow  wild
on this mountain. We had
observed  several  orange-
flowered  plants  in  bloom
on  July  20,  1955,  but
owing to the time of year
it was impossible to secure
living  collections.  There-
fore,  our  local  collector
had  visited  this  meadow
during  the  summer  of
1956 and had placed large
stakes  in  the  late-bloom-
ing  clumps.  When  we
arrived  in  October,  the
majority  of  R.  japonicum
had already defoliated, but
those  which  were  late-
flowering held their green
leaves  even  at  this  late
date.”

The Yatsugatake region contained a number of famil-
iar woody plants, many of which were in cultivation in
the United States, but there were also species that had not
yet succeeded in cultivation. “Of these, Ilex geniculata, a
deciduous  holly  with  red  fruits  on  long  stalks  was  the
most noteworthy,” wrote Creech (1957). “The edges of
the fields and wooded slopes contained such species as:
Hydrangea paniculata; Clethra barbinervis that grew stiffly
upright  to  about  10  feet  [3  m]  and  terminated  in
nodding clusters of fruits; Ligustrum ciliatum, a spreading
privet that usually remained less than 4 feet [1.2 m] high;
and  Sorbus  rufoferruginea, readily  discerned  by  the  bril-
liance  of  the  red  autumnal  foliage.  Isolated  colonies  of
Chamaecyparis obtusa [592109] occurred in open places.”

Two capes of Shikoku
On 14 October, Creech and Takeda left Tokyo for south-
ern Shikoku, the smallest of the four principal islands of
Japan,  located  south  of  Honsh¯u  and  east  of  Ky¯ush¯u.
“Southern  Shikoku  is  characterized  by  two  prominent
land features—the capes of Muroto and Ashizuri,” noted
Creech (1957). “The climate of this part of Japan simu-
lates central Georgia across to Mississippi, inclusive of the
gulf  area.  The  terrain  is  extensively  mountainous.  The

land may drop to the ocean in steep cliffs that support
only  herbaceous  plants  or  the  descent  may  be  more
gradual where broad-leaved evergreen forests grew down
to the narrow, rocky beaches.”

The  starting  place  for  any  travels  to  southern
Shikoku is the city of K¯ochi, lying inland from Tosa Bay.
Creech’s  first  exploration  in  this  area  was  to  Cape
Muroto, east of K¯ochi. “We reached it by traveling on a
winding dirt road along a coastline where the black sand
beaches  were  lined  with  huge  trees  of  Pinus  thunbergii,
the Japanese black pine,” wrote Creech (1957). “Standing
on the beach road at Muroto, one can see a great broad-
leaved forest that ascends steeply, presenting a mosaic of
greens. . . . Along the beach, Quercus wrightii [572446],
with gnarled wind-form, grew among huge rocks. Other
salt-spray  tolerant  plants  found  just  behind  the  beach
were  Rhaphiolepis  umbellata, Pittosporum  tobira, Ficus
erecta, and Eurya emarginata [58174]. The narrow, level
beach was covered by small stones. Here, Rosa wichura-
iana [82749];  Dianthus  japonicus, with  bright  pink
flowers; Lactuca keiskeana [572070], yellow-flowered and
with succulent leaves; Lathyrus maritimus; and a prostrate
legume, Indigofera pseudotinctoria, a rugged plant with a
deep  extensive  root  system  that  strongly  defied  the

51

Forested Archipelago

Japan (left) comprises four main islands, Honsh¯u, Shikoku,
Ky¯ush¯u, and Hokkaid¯o, and many smaller islands, with a total
area of more than 370,000 km2. It extends nearly 1400 km from
south to north, between latitudes 30º north and 45º north.
Mountains cover about 65 percent of Japan’s land area. Many
peaks reach 2000 to 3000 m in altitude, the highest being Fuji,
3776 m, on southern Honsh¯u. Japan’s climate is influenced by the
country’s latitudinal extent, the surrounding oceans, and the
neighboring Asian landmass. In winter, cold air from eastern
Siberia flows over the Sea of Japan and brings monsoons, which
cause rain and snow in the west part of Japan and dry weather in
the east. The summer monsoons, in contrast, caused by winds
from the east and south, bring warmer temperatures and rain. In
addition, the southern islands are affected by the warm Japan
Current flowing from the southwest, while in the north the cold
Kurile Current has a pronounced cooling effect. Precipitation
ranges from 900 mm on Hokkaid¯o to 4000 mm in central
Honsh¯u, most of it falling in early summer. Japan supports a very
diverse flora in proportion to its size. More than four thousand
species of plants are native to Japan, and about a quarter are
endemic to these islands. The southern areas of Japan are domi-
nated by evergreen, broad-leaved, woody plants. Lush vegetation
of that region contains many plants with affinities to floras of
southern Korea and China, highlands of the Himalaya, Myanmar,
and Indochina. Japan’s temperate regions support mixed forests of
deciduous and coniferous trees, with a close relationship to floras
of central China, high mountains of the Himalaya, and Malaysia.
The boreal region of Japan is characterized by coniferous forests,
with many species having a wide circumboreal distribution.

removal  of  the  shrub,  spread  rampantly. The  forest  was
rich in cryptogamic flora. Several interesting ferns, such
as  the  tiny  Pteris  cretica var.  albo-lineata, Rumohra  aris-
tata, and  Osmunda  bromeliifolia [592154],  flourished.
Psilotum  nudum [591624]  occasionally  could  be  found
among rotted tree stumps.”

Creech’s next destination, Cape Ashizuri, is situated
at the southern end of Shikoku, southwest of K¯ochi. The
cape  is  rather  isolated  and  heavily  forested  except  for  a
narrow  road  that  traverses  mountain  passes.  “Along  the
valleys,  Camellia  sasanqua [602333]  was  found  in
bloom,” noted Creech (1957). “The trees were 18 to 25
feet [5.4–7.5 m] tall, evidently escapes for I saw only one
locality where this species was probably natural. We jour-
neyed to Nakamura village and traveled through magnif-
icent reforested areas of Cryptomeria to the small port of
Shimizu.  From  here,  we  traveled  to  the  very  tip  of  the

53

Lush forests of southern Shikoku are filled with many species of
woody plants. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

cape, making our headquarters at the forestry bureau offi-
cial’s residence.”

Cape  Ashizuri  ends  in  a  precipitous  sea  cliff.  “The
abrupt rocky sea walls encouraged no woody plants but
extensive colonies of Hemerocallis aurantiaca var. littorea
abound,” noted Creech (1957). “It was a most rewarding
sight to approach the sea-cliff through groves of gnarled
Camellia japonica and to step out onto a terrace of Zoysia
japonica to  find  this  beautiful  daylily  in  bloom  by  the
thousands.  Peucedanum  japonicum [571619]  with  large
columbine-like  leaves  and  heads  of  white  flowers  was
scattered among them. From the sea-cliff, we returned to
the  dense  undergrowth,  heavily  populated  by  gray,  dis-
torted, multi-stemmed clumps of camellia.”

From Cape Ashizuri, Creech and his party returned
to  K¯ochi  and  went  on  to  Kotohira  City  in  northern
Shikoku.  “In  the  enormous  Shinto  shrine  area,  many

Japan

for 

large  trees  of  Camellia
sasanqua have  been  culti-
vated 
centuries,”
reported  Creech  (1957).
“Because  these  were  quite
ancient  plants  and  large-
flowered,  we  secured  cut-
tings  of  each  type  despite
the  fact  that  they  were
unnamed 
[572038–41,
602334–6].”  Two  days
later  Creech  returned  by
steamer  across  the  Inland
Sea to Okayama and jour-
neyed  by  rail  back  to
Tokyo.

The rugged coastline of southern Shikoku between K¯ochi and Cape Ashizuri. Photo by John L.
Creech.

Shrine forests of 
southern Honsh¯u
On  24  October,  Creech
started  yet  another  excur-
sion,  this  time  to  Kii
Peninsula, the southernmost part of Honsh¯u. “Kii Penin-
sula, lacking alluvial plains, is isolated by rugged moun-
tains and is one of the least populated areas of southern
Japan,” wrote Creech (1957). “Transportation is mostly
by  coastal  shipping  or  over  poor,  dirt  roads  that  wind
tediously  through  the  mountains.  Knowledge  of  the
plants is mostly local but it is said to be unusually rich in
various types of evergreen woody plants of a warm tem-
perate and subtropical nature.”

After  exploring  briefly  the  tiny  island  of  Kashima,
near Tanabe, Creech continued across the bay to Shira-
hama, a former pearl culturing center: “It was here that
Ardisia villosa [572062] was first encountered and grew as
a  restricted  ground-covering  plant  in  shady  places. The
area was rather disturbed and only a few wild plants of
interest were noted. . . . Therefore, we left the locality and
traveled by 3rd class train down to the lowest point of the
Kii  Peninsula,  stopping  at  Kushimoto.  From  there  we
took  passage  to  a  small  island  called  O¯ shima. This  is  a
typical fishing community where little agriculture is prac-
ticed. Occasionally we found small orchards of a citrus,
Fortunella margarita. The natives surrounded their homes
with  tall  hedges  formed  from  Distylium  racemosum
[572073], an evergreen tree native to the island” (Creech
1957).

54

Colonies of Hemerocallis aurantiaca var. littorea cover precipitous
sea cliffs of Cape Ashizuri. Photo by John L. Creech.

The  exploration  continued  on  Nachi-san  near
Shing¯u, on the eastern shore of Kii Peninsula. “At Nachi,
there is a densely forested tract that is a part of the famous
Kumano  Gongen  Shrine,”  recorded  Creech  (1957).
“Several small streams flow through the region that merge
into a waterfall about 400 feet [120 m] high. We pursued
a  trail  above  this  fall  through  a  planted  forest  of  Cryp-
tomeria  japonica and  into  an  uncut  jungle  of  vines  and

Forested Archipelago

dense shrubs. . . . After traveling up through the forest for
several hours, we reached the top of the pass where hem-
locks  and  false  cypress  towered.  There  were  the  usual
orchid epiphytes, but it was impossible to reach them as
the trees grew off at an angle from the edge of the cliff.
Even  the  local  forester,  who  normally  would  climb  any
tree,  declined  to  attempt  the  collection.  Frequently,  we
collected  orchids  where  cryptomerias  had  recently  been
cut and still lay on the ground.”

Descending from the pass, the group plunged into a
damp, gloomy woods along the stream and came upon a
second  but  smaller  waterfall.  “Here,  the  filmy  ferns,
Hymenophyllum, grew  in  the  stream-eroded,  dripping
walls,”  remarked  Creech  (1957).  “At  drier  localities  we
observed  several  ericads,  such  as  Rhododendron  serpylli-
folium [602323], the azalea with the smallest leaves being
less than one-fourth inch [6 mm] long. . . . A cold rain
dampened  the  whole  aspect  during  the  return  journey.
Later at the city of Shing¯u we paused to inspect a float-
ing  sphagnum  bog  and  found  it  to  be  a  composite  of
cool-temperate and warm-temperate plants. Ilex sugerokii,
I. serrata [581699], Photinia villosa [572441], and Daph-
niphyllum  humile were  all  characteristic  of  northern
Japan. During some era, warm-temperate plants such as
Vaccinium bracteatum, Ardisia villosa, Pittosporum tobira,
and Myrica rubra had invaded the bog to thrive in this
soggy environment.”

From  Shing¯u  the  group  traveled  by  jeep  and  bus
along the coast over Yanokawa Pass to Owase. Then they
continued north to Ise. “Our final stop on Kii Peninsula
was the forest of the Grand Shrine of Ise, particularly in
the Jingu shrine,” wrote Creech (1957). “This is the finest
example  of  Shint¯o  shrine  architecture.  The  temples  are
constructed  entirely  of  Hinoki  cypress  [Chamaecyparis
obtusa],  polished  to  a  brilliant  orange.  To  provide  the
timber to continue the erection of new structures, a large
forest of Hinoki cypress is maintained. A part of the forest
is permitted to develop naturally and collecting is rarely
sanctioned. Fortunately, the chief forester was a student of
our guide, Dr. Takeda, and we gained entrance.”

The rich forest surrounding the Jingu shrine yielded
many collections. One plant that made a strong impres-
sion on Creech was a species of Damnacanthus: “We had
seen Damnacanthus indicus several times earlier. This is a
remarkable small plant, with its foliage and branches in
fanlike  arrangements.  But  a  different  species  occurred
here. This was D. macrophyllus [571612], a larger shrub,

This Psilotum nudum (591662) from Taihaku Nursery in Goso
near Osaka was among more than twenty rare varieties of Psilotum
that Creech obtained in Japan. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

with leaves about 1 to 2 inches [25–50 mm] long, purple
colored  when  young.  It  is  spined  and  has  red  berries”
(Creech 1957).

During  his  stay  in  Ise,  Creech  visited  a  grower  of
curious  varieties  of  Psilotum  nudum (581237–8,
581240–5, 591625–6). “This rare cryptogam was in vogue
for centuries,” he noted (1957). “As many as two hundred
varieties  had  been  developed  with  cristate  and  distorted
stems. This leafless plant makes an interesting pot subject
and is easy to cultivate. Gradually, interest in this plant has
diminished;  today,  scarcely  thirty  types  are  cultivated.
Several  kinds  were  purchased  and  brought  back  to  the
United States for observation because they are not known
in our culture and will shortly cease to exist in Japan.”

Imperial flower
After  returning  to Tokyo  on  30  October,  Creech  dedi-
cated  the  next  two  weeks  to  visiting  chrysanthemum
nurseries and shows. “This weekend, I leave for a round
of visits to mum growers and the big shows which have
just  started  to  open  today,”  Creech  (1956a)  wrote  to
Hodge.  “It  is  quite  true  that  the  Japanese  grow  bizarre
types  of  mums,  the  like  of  which  will  certainly  make  a
show in the United States if they are grown in a manner
similar to that used here.”

Creech’s trip coincided with the flowering and exhi-
bition of chrysanthemums, which enabled him to make a
rather complete collection of the modern Japanese vari-
eties.  “Since  the  chrysanthemum  is  the  flower  of  the
imperial  family  of  Japan,  considerable  importance  is
attached  to  its  culture,  development,  and  display,”  he

55

Japan

A giant plant of Chrysanthemum ×morifolium trained to produce
four hundred blooms and exhibited in Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Hirakata Park in Hirakata City has one of the most visited
chrysanthemum shows in Japan. Photo by John L. Creech.

The fall flower show in Ky¯oto Botanic Garden, like many others
held around Japan, celebrates the traditional art of growing
chrysanthemums. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

explained  (1957).  “For  display  purposes  each  show
employs  its  own  staff  of  cultural  experts  and  breeders.
Often the varieties raised for a particular exhibit are not
released for general distribution and this results in types
peculiar  to  that  show.  Thus,  to  see  all  of  the  kinds  of
chrysanthemums,  ultimately  every  show  should  be
observed.”

Upon his return to Tokyo on 10 November, Creech
reported,  “It  was,  by  and  large  an  interesting  trip  as  I
visited the several large growers of chrysanthemums and
also the major mum shows. They are going to send me
small  suckers  of  all  of  the  leading  types  of  chrysanthe-
mums grown in Japan and it was as I had hoped. There
are many types of mums grown here which we have not
ever attempted in the United States, especially in the cat-

A startling array of unique chrysanthemum selections is exhibited
every year in Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo. Photo by Walter H.
Hodge.

56

Forested Archipelago

egory  of  large-flowered  and  show  types.  .  .  .  Now  after
these  are  established  in  Glenn  Dale,  there  will  be  the
problem  of  growing  them  for  show  purposes  but  I  am
sure the Longwood people will do a good job with a bit
of  coaching  on  Japanese  techniques.  As  a  result,  there
could be at Longwood, a chrysanthemum display the like
of  which  has  never  been  seen  in  the  United  States”
(Creech 1956b).

A plant collector’s paradise
Creech’s last trip was to take him to Ky¯ush¯u, the south-
ernmost of the main islands of Japan, and to Yakushima
and Tanegashima, small islands about 100 km south of
the Ky¯ush¯u port of Kagoshima. “These islands have been
a  constant  collecting  ground  for  Japanese  botanists,”
remarked Creech (1957). “Yakushima, in particular, has
been noted for the extent of its woody flora and E. H.
Wilson considered it a plant collector’s paradise.”

The departure was set for 16 November. “It will be a
long  and  interesting  trip  but  rather  difficult  to  accom-
plish,” wrote Creech (1956b) to Dr. Howard L. Hyland
of the USDA Agricultural Research Service in Beltsville,
Maryland. “The weather is getting quite cold in certain
areas  and  with  no  heat  in  the  Japanese  hotels,  you  can
imagine that it is difficult to crawl out of a warmed bed
when you can see your breath in the room. I think the
worst problem is that of getting wet while in the field and
having no way to dry out. So far, that has occurred on
every trip and usually my clothes dry out while I am still
wearing them.”

Before heading to Yakushima, Creech and his team
stopped at the agricultural experiment station at Kurume
in  northern  Ky¯ush¯u  to  outline  the  course  of  the  explo-
ration. Two members of the Kurume station staff, Sadeo
Abe  and  Teruo  Tamoura,  joined  the  team,  acting  as
guides and collecting plants that were of interest to them.
Yakushima is a small island about 22 km across. It is
surmounted  by  the  highest  peak  of  the  Ky¯ush¯u  area,
Miyanoura-dake,  1935  m.  “A  coastal  savanna  occurs
along  the  river  estuaries,”  noted  Creech  (1957).  “Near
the  mouth  of  the  Kurio,  a  true  mangrove  formation  of
Kandelia  candel has  developed.  The  broadleaved  ever-
green forests occur up to about 1800 feet [550 m] alti-
tude.  Above  this  is  a  vast  stand  of  conifers,  mainly
cryptomeria  and  fir,  with  some  deciduous  trees,  up  to
5500 feet [1700 m]. Above the forested zone, a subalpine
climate prevails; here, the plants are mostly dwarfed.”

Creech’s team in Yakushima. Abe, Takeda, and Creech, left to
right, are in the back row. Photo by John L. Creech.

Forestry  is  the  major  agricultural  pursuit  of
Yakushima,  and  cryptomeria  wood  from  this  island  is
especially prized for its beautiful grain. “The population
of  Yakushima  is  scattered  around  the  perimeter  of  the
island in a series of small villages, of which Amb¯o is the
largest,  and  Miyanoura  is  next,”  explained  Creech
(1957). “Both ports are shipping centers for cryptomeria
logs.  A  single  mountain  village  occurs  about  2500  feet
[750 m] altitude at Kosugidani and it can only be reached
by a narrow-gauge lumber railroad.”

A  steamer  from  Kagoshima  brought  the  group  to
Miyanoura, on the northern shore of Yakushima, where
Creech established a base camp in a small inn. They trav-
eled first east from Miyanoura along the coast as far as the
Nagata Light. Upon reaching Isso River, “we followed its
twisting course back up into the hills, often crossing from
bank  to  bank  by  leaping  over  gigantic  granite  boulders
that were lodged in the streambed,” wrote Creech (1957).
“Often the trees and shrubs grew in midstream where the
rocks had accumulated debris and soil. It was in such a
locality  that  we  found  Ilex  liukiuensis [572052].  This
evergreen holly was prolific in its fruiting habit and the
berries were bright red. It has never been in cultivation. .
. . Returning along the sea road, we found Smilax china
scrambling  on  the  sunny  banks.  This  vine  is  almost
thornless  and  has  large  red  berries.  Kadsura  japonica
[581701],  Morinda  umbellata [58188],  and  Alpinia
kumatake [572426]  were  abundant  on  the  roadsides.
Elaeagnus  crispa [58173]  was  widespread  in  abandoned
fields  and  along  the  roadsides.  The  berries  sometimes
were quite large and edible.”

57

Japan

Creech followed the course of Isso River in order to explore the
interior of Yakushima. Photo by John L. Creech.

Neofinetia falcata (580120) was among the orchids Creech 
collected on his hike along the Isso River. Photo by Rondel G.
Peirson.

Creech collected Damnacanthus indicus (58171) in the upper
reaches of Miyanoura River in Mann¯o National Forest on
Yakushima. Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

Creech’s  next  trip  surveyed  the  Miyanoura  River,
which drops gently from the hills and has a broad alluvial
plain. “The outstanding shrubs along the trail were Cal-
licarpa japonica var. luxurians [572430] and C. tosaensis
[572431],” noted Creech (1957). “These grew to 15 feet
[4.5 m], overarched by ponderous clusters of purple fruit.
I have never observed Callicarpa fruiting so abundantly in
cultivation. . . . As we reached higher elevations, the ver-
tical, eroded stream walls were pocketed with small plants
of  Rhododendron  indicum and  in  midstream  the  plants
developed into dense, low thickets. Surprisingly, many of
the plants were in full bloom although it was November.
. . . Stepping back a few paces into the damp forest, we
found  the  small  but  always  delightful  Damnacanthus
indicus [58171] covered with red berries.”

Having  explored  the  broad-leaved  evergreen  forests
of northern Yakushima, Creech moved his base camp to
the forestry office at Amb¯o, on the eastern shore of the
island.  From  Amb¯o  the  team  headed  for  Miyanoura-
dake. “We ascended Miyanoura-dake by a small lumber
train to as far as the camp called Kosugidani, about 2500
feet  [750  m]  altitude,”  Creech  reported  (1957).  “The
trail  to  the  upper  meadows  of  Miyanoura-dake  led
through the large forests of cryptomeria and firs. Along
the way, large clumps of Rhododendron metternichii grew
everywhere.  Sometimes,  large  branches  of  the  conifers,
sweeping off at a low angle, would accumulate forest duff
and the rhododendrons would spring up on the branches
almost in an epiphytic manner.”

58

Forested Archipelago

This small lumber train carried Creech and his party up
Miyanoura-dake, Yakushima. Photo by John L. Creech.

Lagerstroemia fauriei (572438) that Creech collected on Yakushima
was later used by Donald Egolf at the U.S. National Arboretum 
to develop a series of hybrids resistant to powdery mildew. Two
superior selections from Creech’s collection were introduced as
‘Fantasy’ and ‘Townhouse’, pictured here, by the North Carolina
State University Arboretum. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Trochodendron aralioides (59506), growing in Longwood’s Hillside
Garden, was collected by Creech on his hike on Miyanoura-dake,
above Kosugidani, Yakushima, at an altitude of about 1300 m.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Creech related his experiences on the mountain in a
letter  to  Hyland:  “We  went  up  to  a  sphagnum  bog  at
1600 m, collecting along the way, returning to the termi-
nal of the railroad at 7 p.m. and rode a cart, free wheel-
ing  down  the  track  to  700  m,  at  night  guided  by  a
flashlight! Next time we went on the car, the brakes failed
to work and we all had to jump off to stop the cart. But
the collections are well worth the excitement” (1956c).

The next excursion from Amb¯o took Creech and his
team around the south coast to the town of Kurio. “This
region had been heavily felled for logs and was in a state
of semi-devastation,” remarked Creech (1957). “In these
hills,  we  found  Lagerstroemia  fauriei [572438].  This

deciduous tree with brown and green flaky bark grows to
30 feet [9 m]. The flowers are white. Only a few trees of
this  endemic  species  were  noted;  it  was  evident  that  it
would soon be extinct in the wild.”

Back in Miyanoura, Creech wrote to Hyland: “Col-
lecting  has  reached  expedition  size.  When  we  returned
from  Amb¯o  today  it  required  two  jeeps  to  carry  the
baggage,  including  plants,  herbarium  specimens,  food,
clothing, and collecting equipment. . . . It is a great expe-
dition! Wilson was so right, Yakushima is a plant collec-
tor’s paradise” (1956c).

On  1  December  the  group  embarked  on  a  steamer
for the short journey to Tanegashima, only some 20 km

59

Japan

Chrysanthemums collected by Creech in Japan were displayed for
the first time in Longwood’s Azalea House in fall of 1957. Photo
by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

Back at Longwood, Creech inspects the chrysanthemums he 
collected in Japan in 1956. Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

east  of  Yakushima.  Tanegashima  is  a  narrow  island
approximately 60 km long and 13 km wide. It is devoid
of high mountains and largely given over to agricultural
crops.  Creech  and  his  team  headed  first  to  Tachimoto
Forest  in  the  southern  part  of  the  island.  “Although
mostly  planted  to  cryptomeria,  a  number  of  evergreen
oaks  have  survived,  Lithocarpus  edulis [591592]  being
common,”  commented  Creech  (1957).  In  Furuta
National  Forest,  the  group’s  next  stop  in  the  northern
part  of  the  island,  evergreen  oaks  were  also  plentiful.
“These  were  generally  accompanied  by  the  usual  epi-
phytic  orchids,  climbing  ferns,  and  cycads,”  wrote
Creech. “Of the orchids, Phajus maculatus [58102] was
the most striking. We came upon it while climbing up a
shaded  hillside. This  terrestrial  species  first  appeared  to
have  small  spots  of  sunlight  flickering  across  the  leaves
but in reality this mirage was a multitude of large yellow
variegations.  The  pattern  was  consistent  among  wild
specimens and of a genetic nature.”

Winter  storms,  dashing  the  surf  high  above  the
breakwater, prevented Creech’s leaving Tanegashima until
7 December, and on that date he returned to Kagoshima
aboard  a  steamer.  A  few  days  later  the  group  traveled
from  Kagoshima  back  to  Kurume.  “Our  arrival  in
Kurume  was  accompanied  by  cold  weather  and  a  light
snowfall making living in poorly heated Japanese quarters
rather gloomy,” remembered Creech (1957). “It also her-
alded the end of our collecting trip. On December 10 we
returned to Tokyo with our collections of seeds, plants,
and herbarium specimens.”

On 20 December, Creech concluded his expedition
and returned to the United States. From this exploration,
668  plants  were  introduced,  half  being  from  the  wild.
Among them were 219 cultivars of chrysanthemums. An
exhibit of these chrysanthemums was shown for the first
time at Longwood Gardens during the fall of 1957. Soon
Creech’s  chrysanthemums  were  distributed  to  major
growers  in  the  United  States.  One  was  later  renamed
‘Tokyo’ by Yoder Brothers in Berberton, Ohio, and when
released  to  the  trade  in  1962  turned  out  to  be  a  great
commercial success.

JAPAN’S WILD SIDE

Results  of  the  1956  expedition  to  southern  Japan  con-
vinced  Dr.  Russell  J.  Seibert,  Longwood’s  director,  and
his  collaborators  in  the  USDA  of  the  richness  of  that
island’s flora that still awaited discovery and introduction
into  cultivation.  While  the  1956  trip  concentrated  on
collecting plants new to American horticulture, planning
for the next expedition emphasized the need to introduce
plants that would contribute traits of improved hardiness
and  appearance  to  already  important  groups  of  garden
plants.

Because  of  his  previous  experience  collecting  plants
in  Japan,  Creech  was  asked  to  lead  this  expedition.  He
explained  the  task  ahead  of  him:  “Objectives  were  to
investigate  the  geographical  distribution  of  selected
woody  and  herbaceous  plants  of  Japan  and  to  collect

60

Japan’s Wild Side

propagating material from important variations of species
valuable  as  ornamentals  in  American  horticulture.  .  .  .
During the exploration of Japan in the fall and winter of
1956, I was content to bring to the United States species
that would add variety to southern gardens without con-
sidering hardiness relative to origin. Additional study of
the  Japanese  literature  showed  that  many  species  are
found in Japan far north of places where collections were
made earlier” (Creech 1966b).

Azaleas’ most favored island
The expedition began in April to coincide with the begin-
ning of the azalea flowering season in southern Ky¯ush¯u.
“Japan  is  the  center  of  distribution  of  azaleas  in  the
Orient,” explained Creech (1966b), “and Ky¯ush¯u is the
most favored locality for azaleas in Japan. Combination
of a highly acid porous volcanic soil and a mild maritime
climate  with  moderate,  evenly  distributed  rainfall  pro-
vides an ideal environment for the development of exten-
sive colonies of azaleas.”

Although  Ky¯ush¯u  was  undoubtedly  the  right  locale
for collecting azaleas, especially those believed to be the
prototypes of Kurume azaleas, timing was equally impor-
tant.  “One  of  the  really  good  points  in  planning  this
trip,” wrote Creech (1961c), “was to arrive here during
the early azalea season, for without the opportunity to see
the plants in bloom, a number of good things would have
escaped my eye. For out of bloom the plants all are pretty
much alike.”

Creech  arrived  in  Ky¯ush¯u  on  22  April  1961  and
began  the  four-week  exploration  of  the  island  in  the
southern  city  of  Kagoshima.  “Three  mountains,”  he
noted, “provide the most plausible clues as to the origin
of the Kurume azaleas, foremost of the cultivars that have
evolved from the species found in Ky¯ush¯u. These moun-
tains are Sakurajima [1118 m], a unique, active volcano
overlooking the city of Kagoshima; Takakuma [1236 m],
a mountain chain adjacent to Sakurajima; and Kirishima
[1700 m], a group of high volcanic cones famous for hot
springs.  These  mountains  are  all  within  a  30-mile  [50
km] radius of Kagoshima” (Creech 1966b).

Two days later Creech was on a ferry crossing the 4
km stretch of water separating Kagoshima from the active
volcano.  “Sakurajima,  an  isolated,  symmetrical  volcanic
cone,  juts  out  into  Kagoshima  Bay,  overshadowing
Kagoshima City,” he noted (1966b). “The slopes of this
active volcano are so covered with fresh lava rocks from

On Sakurajima, Creech found a puzzling array of wild azaleas
varying in color from light pink to strong reddish purple. 
Photo by John L. Creech.

constant  eruptions  that  the  upper  portions  do  not
support  a  forest  cover.  Yet,  among  huge  lava  boulders,
azaleas thrive in profusion and present a variable array of
colors from light pink to strong, reddish purple. I spent
the entire day of April 24 wandering the paths that wind
around  the  slopes  of  Sakurajima  trying  to  draw  some
conclusions.”

The following morning, Creech and his Japanese col-
leagues departed by jeep for Takakuma, the ash-covered
mountain chain paralleling the coast of O¯ sumi Peninsula
and consisting of a series of peaks that gradually ascend to
the highest point on the peninsula called Onogara. The
route led through gorges inhabited by broad-leaved ever-
greens,  and  in  one  of  these,  called  Sarugajo,  the  party
spent  the  better  part  of  the  day  collecting  plants.  “The
finest of the flowering trees in these dense forests is Sym-
plocos prunifolia [621488],” noted Creech (1966b). “The
tree grows to a height of 50 feet [15 m] and the flowers
are  white,  fragrant,  and  borne  in  dense  terminal
racemes.”

By evening Creech and his group reached the cottage
of  the  Kagoshima  University  Forestry  Station  in  the
Takakuma mountains. “The azaleas are the conspicuous
feature  of  the  open  meadows  of  Takakuma,”  Creech
recorded  (1966b).  “From  sea  level  to  about  500  m,
Rhododendron kaempferi [621466] abounds on rock out-
croppings and on ledges along trails. The flowers are typ-
ically brick red and the leaves large and scattered along
the  branches.  At  about  500  m,  a  new  azalea  appeared.
This is R. sataense Nakai [621460, 621473]. These plants
are dense and moundlike, with flowers that range from

61

Japan

Calanthe discolor f. sieboldii (61750), distinguished by its clear
yellow flowers, was collected by Creech in the Takakuma moun-
tains on O¯ sumi Peninsula. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Cypripedium japonicum (61751), found by Creech in the
Takakuma mountains, inhabits moist woods in southern Japan.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

pink to purple with broadly overlapping petals and shiny
leaves that are flat to convex.”

japonica

Camellia 

also  grew  abundantly  on
Takakuma, and Creech wanted to determine to what ele-
vations this tree was limited. “We set off early on April
26,”  he  wrote,  “and  ascended  during  a  drenching  rain
through  magnificent  forests  of  Cryptomeria interspersed
with the usual broadleaf evergreens. The trail led around
the  outer  ledges  of  the  mountain  where  andromeda,
hollies, and rhododendrons grew in quantity. . . . We pen-
etrated  the  forest  again  and  as  we  approached  1000  m,
the broadleaf evergreens began to be noticeably reduced
in  number  and  stunted  in  habit. The  last  specimens  of
Camellia  japonica [64203],  at  approximately  1050  m,
were ungainly, sparsely branched trees reaching a height

Creech found Rhododendron sataense (621460, 621473) growing 
in open meadows in Takakuma mountains on O¯ sumi Peninsula.
Photo by John L. Creech.

62

Japan’s Wild Side

of up to 3 m. It surpassed any other broadleaf evergreen
in  number.  The  ground  beneath  the  trees  was  littered
with fallen blossoms, and occasional flowers continued to
drop onto the bare, muddy soil” (Creech 1966b).

As there were no small camellia seedlings to be seen
anywhere,  Creech  concluded  that  either  the  fruits  were
washed  down  the  mountainside  or  fertile  seeds  were
rarely  produced.  “It  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  the
winter  conditions  must  be  like  in  these  mountains  but
certainly  the  weather  is  bitterly  cold,”  he  commented
(1961a). “Survival of camellias at this elevation is proba-
bly due to the slowness with which the weather modifies
in  the  spring,  and  the  resulting  lateness  of  bloom. The
fact that the trees are sheltered by conifers affords a con-
siderable  degree  of  protection  from  winds.  Then,  too,
precipitation is sufficiently high in winter that there is no
desiccation of the plants, for the forests are shrouded with
dripping fogs most of the winter.”

Back  in  Kagoshima,  Creech  prepared  for  the  next
excursion and on 28 April, accompanied by his Japanese
guides,  departed  for  Kirishima.  “The  Kirishima  moun-
tains are the highest volcanic cones in southern Ky¯ush¯u,”
he  noted  (1966b).  “On  the  evergreen-clad  lower  slopes
and in the grassy meadows at higher elevations occurs a
complex of azaleas that have figured largely in the litera-
ture on the development of the famous Kurume azaleas.
In 1955, I had climbed to the rim of the volcanic cone
Karakuni-dake  (1700  m)  to  observe  the  colonies  of
Rhododendron kiusianum, a small-leaved, purple-flowered
azalea.  When  this  azalea  hybridizes  with  R.  kaempferi
from  lower  elevations,  a  bewildering  array  of  seedlings
with pink, scarlet, crimson, and purple flowers results.”

Azaleas of Hirado
Having  completed  the  exploration  of  the  mountains
around Kagoshima, Creech relocated to the northern part
of Ky¯ush¯u. His first destination there was Hirado Island
which  is  home  to  the  famous  Hirado  azaleas.  “This
island,  which  is  now  relegated  to  the  occupation  of
fishing  and  subsistence  farming,  is  steeped  in  Japanese
history and romance,” said Creech (1966b). “Being iso-
lated and scenic, Hirado became a favorite spot for the
feudal samurai of older Japan and their palaces dotted the
gentle  slopes.  It  might  also  be  said  that  many  of  these
noblemen  delved  into  the  smuggling  trade  with  the
Chinese pirates and thus enhanced their fortunes. But the
gentlemen  did  have  elaborate  gardens  and  these  were

An array of Hirado azaleas collected by Creech on Hirado Island
of the northwest coast of Ky¯ush¯u. Photo by John L. Creech.

planted largely to azaleas. . . . The azaleas of Hirado are a
distinct  group  characterized  by  unusually  large  flowers,
some  measuring  up  to  13  cm  across  and  this  character
can  easily  by  traced  to  R.  scabrum. The  color  range  is
from pink through red to purple, which suggests the infu-
sion  of  R.  mucronatum and  R.  phoeniceum.  .  .  .  The
Hirado azaleas are located in individual private gardens so
one has to visit many places to see them all. Some of these
gardens  date  back  more  than  300  years  during  which
time selections were continually made from the sponta-
neous  populations  that  sprang  up  among  the  original
azalea  plantings.  Today,  approximately  230  varieties  of
Hirado azaleas are recognized.”

to  acquire 

Creech  managed 

thirty  varieties
(611456–69, 611512–4, 62133–8, 621254–5) that were
representative  of  the  range  of  variation  in  the  Hirado
race.  “I  have  brought  together  the  best  types,  some  as
plants,  others  as  cuttings,”  he  wrote  to  Hodge.  “These
will go to Glenn Dale on 8 May and if we have any luck
should definitely establish this race in America. I want a
set to go to Longwood just as soon as safely established at
Glenn  Dale.  You  would  be  surprised  at  the  difficulty
there is to delicately pry loose material from these gardens
because  the  plants  are  zealously  guarded”  (Creech
1961b).

During his last few days in Ky¯ush¯u, Creech concen-
trated on the mountains in the central part of the island.
On a small peak at Seidagawa, 520 m, isolated in the hot
central plain, he found Rhododendron japonicum growing
profusely:  “Above  the  town  of  Kusu  in  a  pine-chestnut
region,  R.  japonicum [621257–8]  grows  in  hot  sunny
meadows, quite different from the cool bog habitats ordi-

63

Japan

Creech collecting Rhododendron japonicum in the meadows above
Kusu, Ky¯ush¯u. Photo by John L. Creech.

narily frequented by this azalea. Furthermore, here can be
found the broadest range of color variation occurring in
the species. The colony includes the yellow form, aureum.
Despite earlier observations by Wilson to the effect that
the  yellow  form  is  rather  rare,  it  accounts  for  about  a
third  of  the  colony  I  visited  at  Seidagawa”  (Creech
1966b).

On  16  May,  Creech  departed  Ky¯ush¯u  and  traveled
back  to Tokyo.  After  four  weeks  of  field  work,  he  wel-
comed the prospect of spending a few days in the city. “As
you well know,” he wrote to Hodge, “collecting straight
for a month without letup is pretty tiring and I will be
glad to get back to Tokyo for some food other than fish
but the excitement of finding so many interesting plants
in this part of Japan keeps me going” (Creech 1961b).

Region of transition
The second part of the expedition encompassed a survey
of  the  Pacific  coast  of  central  Honsh¯u,  from  Kashima
north to Tomioka. This is a region of transition from the
predominantly  broad-leaved  evergreen  vegetation  of
southern  Japan  to  the  mixed  and  deciduous  forests  of
northern Japan.

“Our  first  collecting  area  was  in  the  Takahagi
Forestry  District  near  Ibaraki  City,”  reported  Creech
(1966b). “The most interesting localities were the beach
areas.  These  were  planted  to  forests  of  the  black  pine
(Pinus  thunbergii)  for  sand-dune  control.  The  shore
juniper,  Juniperus  conferta [611560],  has  invaded  the

64

The prostrate, compact, small-leaved selection of Euonymus for-
tunei var. radicans (621437) collected by Creech on Tsukuba-san
in Ibaraki Prefecture proved later to be exceptionally hardy and
was introduced in the United States as a cultivar, ‘Longwood’.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

pinewoods. In the shelter of the pines, the shore juniper
grows  to  18  inches  [46  cm],  but  on  the  open  sands  it
spreads prostrate and carpets miles of beach front. . . . At
many points the cliffs abruptly erode into the ocean and
provide  the  picturesque  scenery  so  typical  of  Japan.  An
orange-yellow daylily in full flower dominates the open
areas. This is Hemerocallis longituba [64923], the earliest
of the species to flower. Collections of these May-flower-
ing plants have now provided breeders with the full range
of flowering sequence.”

Further north, Creech made a stop at O¯ takine, west
of Tomioka, which at 1193 m is the highest peak in the
Abukuma range: “We traveled part way by jeep along a
logging road and on foot to the severely cutover meadows
at the top. On this mountain, the winter snow accumu-
lates to 7 m and the temperature falls to -15º to -20ºC
.  .  .  .  A  large  tree  of  Camellia  japonica [64209],  single
flowered,  grew  along  the  roadside  here.  Cuttings  were
taken from this tree since it was the only specimen I had
seen  at  so  high  an  elevation  in  this  region  (605  m)”
(Creech 1966b).

Having  traveled  the  length  of  the  Abukuma  range,
from seacoast to the highest peaks, Creech headed next to
Tsukuba-san, 876 m, an isolated mountain sitting in the
Kanto Plain. Among the plants he collected on Tsukuba-
san  was  Euonymus  fortunei var.  radicans [621437],  “an
especially diminutive type from a cliff face,” later intro-
duced to the trade under the name ‘Longwood’. Then he
traveled  by  boat  across  Kasumiga  Lake  to  the  Kashima

Japan’s Wild Side

Shrine. “At Kashima, the only collections of interest were
Damnacanthus  indicus [621434]  and  Fatsia  japonica,”
Creech recorded (1966b). “The area resembles southern
Japan  with  plants  requiring  a  warm,  temperate  climate,
including epiphytic orchids and evergreen ferns. This is
also the last of the truly evergreen forests along the outer
coast of Honsh¯u.”

Northernmost camellia outposts
Back  in  Tokyo,  Creech  shipped  his  collections  to  the
United States and prepared for the trip that would take
him to the Pacific coast of northern Honsh¯u. This time
he  was  accompanied  by  S.  Kurata  of  the  University  of
Tokyo. “Along the coast of this region,” explained Creech
(1966b), “I hoped to visit the most northern habitat of
Camellia japonica and to determine the manner in which
this and other broadleaf evergreens completed their dis-
tribution in northern Japan.” He noted that the habitat
of  C.  japonica along  the  Pacific  coast  of  Honsh¯u  is
remarkably  different  from  that  observed  in  Ky¯ush¯u.
“Here, the camellia is in strictly sea coast environment,
and as might be expected, the plants associated with the
camellia differ, too, from those found in Ky¯ush¯u” (Creech
1961a).

Creech began his collecting in the forests around the
port  of  Ayukawa.  “Here  I  located  the  most  extensive
colonies  of  Ardisia  japonica [621423]  I  have  seen  in
Japan,” he noted (1966b). “This evergreen ground cover
grows in the same dense fashion as the familiar Pachysan-
dra but  it  has  red  fruit  and  lustrous  green  leaves.  It
spreads by underground stolons.” Near Ayukawa, Creech
also  collected  Camellia  japonica (64211),  which  was
approaching the northern limit of this species’ distribu-
tion: “In this area Camellia japonica grows on the faces of
the sea cliffs, along with deciduous oaks and black pines.
It is a scrubby tree showing much winter damage but is
said to bloom from December to March.”

Creech and Kurata’s next stop further north along the
coast were two islands near Shizugawa: Tsubaki-jima and
Areshima. “Tsubaki-jima [or ‘Camellia Island’], so named
because it is a dense jungle of camellias, is a small, round
island,  black  on  the  horizon,  because  of  the  thick  ever-
greens,  especially  Machilus  thunbergii [621450],”  wrote
Creech (1966b). “This handsome relative to the camphor-
tree  has  not  been  introduced  previously  although  it
exceeds both the camphor-tree and the evergreen oaks in

hardiness. In the spring the young growth flushes brilliant
orange, not unlike that of Pieris japonica.”

Areshima  is  an  island  similar  to  Tsubaki-jima  but
closer to shore. On Areshima, Creech noted that “Camel-
lia  japonica [64213]  develops  a  distorted  habit  on  rock
faces. On the beach fronts, it clings to the rocks within a
foot [30 cm] of the tidal limit, attesting to its salt toler-
ance. Within the forest it reaches 12 inches [30 cm] in
diameter and attains 12 feet [3.6 m] in height” (1966b).
On  15  June,  Creech  and  Kurata  continued  driving
northward  from  Shizugawa  toward  Gay¯o-san,  1341  m.
“Barley is the main crop in this region and camellias are
frequently  planted  in  the  vicinity  of  the  grainfields,”
recorded  Creech  (1966b).  “At  a  small  town,  Rikuzen-
Takeda, the seeds of Camellia japonica [64215] are pressed
for oil that is used for cooking and as a hairdressing.” At
the top of Gay¯o-san they found azaleas in flower: “Rhodo-
dendron kaempferi [65429] was just at the end of its flow-
ering period. The flowers are small, dark red with a heavy
blotch.  R.  japonicum was  also  in  flower  with  rather
uniform  orange-red  blooms.  These  azaleas  were  now
found in deciduous forests, mostly birch and maple.”

Driving from Gay¯o-san to the village of Kamaishi on
the coast, Creech and Kurata stopped at Cape Funakoshi.
“Funakoshi  is  the  northernmost  locality  for  truly  wild
stands  of  Camellia  japonica [64216],”  wrote  Creech
(1966b).  “Here  in  the  protection  of  large  Cryptomeria
trees in a swale behind the seacoast, some thirty or forty
straggly  trees  are  grouped  together.”  Surprisingly,  these
camellias showed no evidence of poor growth that might
be accredited to winter injury. More camellias grew along
the  roads  leading  to  and  from  Funakoshi,  and  some  of
these trees were even several kilometers in from the coast:
“The colonies were often growing at the edges of persim-
mon and apple orchards, and frequently I passed through
ripened  barley  fields  to  reach  camellias.  Although  the
time of year was late June, I found sufficient numbers of
partially  decomposed  flowers  lying  under  the  trees  to
confirm the statements of the local inhabitants that the
camellias bloomed in May” (Creech 1961a).

The  northernmost  place  on  the  Pacific  coast  of
Honsh¯u where Creech found Camellia japonica (64219)
being cultivated was the tiny fishing village of Raga. “The
trees  are  in  shrine  gardens  and  around  one  or  two
dwellings,” he wrote (1966b). “An elderly farmer assured
me that these were native plants and flowered in May. He
generously  permitted  me  to  collect  cuttings  and  pre-

65

Japan

Camellia japonica growing along the road near Raga in Honsh¯u.
Photo by John L. Creech.

Creech found Lysichiton camtschatcense (611030) growing 
abundantly in sphagnum bogs on Mount Hakkoda, Honsh¯u. 
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Creech considered the northernmost population of Rhododendron
japonicum (621464) growing on Mount Hakk¯oda in northern
Honsh¯u to be “the finest form of the species.” Photo by 
Walter H. Hodge.

sented  a  bag  of  seeds. These  were,  as  usual,  part  of  the
oilseed harvest.”

From  Iwate  Prefecture,  Creech  traveled  to  Aomori
Prefecture  in  northern  Honsh¯u,  where  his  first  destina-
tion  was  Hakk¯oda-san,  1585  m.  “Mount  Hakk¯oda  is
capped with perpetual snow and replete with moorlands
colonized  by  ericaceous  and  other  subalpine  plants,”
noted Creech (1966b). “We climbed from one bog to the
next, collecting seeds and cuttings of hollies. Ilex sugerokii
[68583]  is  the  most  vigorous  holly  species  on  Mount
Hakk¯oda. It is a shrubby species rarely exceeding 8 feet
[2.4 m]. . . . I. crenata var. radicans [65117] grows in and
around the bog pools while I. rugosa completely prostrate
can  be  found  considerably  higher  on  rocky  ledges  and

hidden under dense clumps of Pinus pumila.” The most
spectacular plant on the mountain was, however, Rhodo-
dendron japonicum (621464): “This is the northern limit
of natural distribution and a remarkable contrast to the
colonies found blooming in Ky¯ush¯u in early May. It was
in  full  bloom  on  June  24.  The  plants  were  scattered
throughout the bogs, often at the very edges of the pools.
It  is  a  meadow  plant  here  as  elsewhere  in  Japan.  At  its
northern limit, R. japonicum is a vigorous plant with large
glaucous  leaves.  The  flowers  are  uniform  in  color
throughout  the  stands.  It  is  a  glowing  orange  red  and
trusses of ten to twelve flowers are compactly borne. By
far,  this  is  the  finest  form  of  the  species  I  have  ever
observed in Japan.”

66

Japan’s Wild Side

Place for daylilies
Hokkaid¯o, the northernmost of Japan’s main islands, was
the final chapter of Creech’s expedition. On 8 July, start-
ing  from  Sapporo,  Creech  traveled  south  to  Lake
Shikotsu. Except for one large peak, Izari-dake, 1318 m,
the terrain around the lake is high moorland inhabited by
scrub trees and ericaceous plants, including three azaleas:
Rhododendron  kaempferi (66474),  R.  tschonoskii, and  R.
albrechtii. From Lake Shikotsu, Creech journeyed down
the  coast  of  Hokkaid¯o  along  the  Hidaka  Mountains  to
Cape Erimo.

“Driving  along  this  road,  carved  casually  out  of
massive looming cliffs, is an easily recalled experience,” he
wrote (1966b). “Along the narrow seafront, the beaches
were often ribbonned with extensive gatherings of giant
kelps. These had been brought from deep water and were
being  dried  for  food.  Rosa  rugosa grew  in  numerous
colonies  behind  the  beach.  It  is  one  of  the  best  dune-
holding  plants  of  this  region.  Inland  from  the  narrow
beach, loose shale affords little room for woody shrubs.
Herbaceous  species  of  plants  predominated.  Without
doubt, Hokkaid¯o is the place to search for daylilies. More
extensive colonies are found here than anywhere else in
the  Japanese  Empire.  Facing  the  ocean  as  it  does  the
Hidaka Mountain Range is a rich floristic locality. This
range was so dense with fog that nearby climbers could be
heard but could not be seen.”

From Cape Erimo, Creech returned to Sapporo and
proceeded  to  Matsumae,  an  ancient  city  located  at  the
southernmost  tip  of  Hokkaid¯o.  “Along  the  coastal  road
near  Esashi  I  spent  a  morning  in  a  fine  meadow  filled
with daylilies, Hemerocallis middendorfii [64926–7], and
collected plants to express some of the variations of this
robust orange-yellow daylily,” he recorded (1966b). “The
flowers varied from those with narrow straplike segments
to  others  with  broad  ovate  overlapping  segments  and
flowers  15  cm  across.  Others  had  multiple  buds  with
many flowers open at one time.”

Matsumae  was  the  only  place  in  Hokkaid¯o  where
Creech found cultivated large plants of Camellia japonica
(64220–2).  “I  am  sure  the  feudal  lords  arriving  in  this
harsh land longed for the warm, sophisticated culture of
Ky¯oto  and  transplanted  as  much  of  that  as  possible,
including  plants.  What  significance  can  be  attached  to
these plants is conjecture, but at least a number of garden
camellias flourish and may be the hardier remnants of the

Creech found various forms of Hemerocallis middendorfii
(64926–7) growing along the southern seacoast of Hokkaid¯o, 
and H. middendorfii var. esculenta, shown here, along the Pacific
coast of northern Honsh¯u. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

varieties transported to this place. All are late flowering
here—April to June—and include singles and doubles in
both  white  and  pink.  It  is  the  northernmost  center  of
camellia culture in Japan” (Creech 1966b).

From  Hokkaid¯o,  Creech  returned  to  Tokyo  on  21
July and two days later departed for the United States. “In
retrospect, this was my most rewarding journey to Japan,
replete  with  new  locations  for  important  ornamental
plants,” wrote Creech (1966b). “This exploration did not
yield much in the way of introducing new species for this
was not the intent. Rather, this effort to improve signifi-
cant  garden  plants  has  provided  the  broadest  base  of
breeding  stocks  of  documented  origin  yet  available  to
those concerned with Japanese plants.”

67

Japan

A  total  of  347  collections  of  plants,  cuttings,  and
seeds were shipped during the course of the trip. In addi-
tion, arrangements were made for the collection of seed
from  important  localities  when  the  seed  matured.  “I
believe that I have brought to America the greatest collec-
tion of breeding stocks of important Japanese plants than
any-one  previous,”  wrote  Creech  (1961d)  to  Hodge.
“This is with all due respect to my own earlier trips and
other collectors. We now have all the wild camellia, holly,
azalea, and similar materials to do some really fine breed-
ing and developmental work with these plants.”

TREASURE HOUSE

Almost a quarter century passed since Creech’s 1961 trip
before  Longwood  Gardens  had  another  opportunity  to
introduce plants from Japan. Unlike Creech’s expeditions
in 1956 and 1961, the trip, planned jointly with the U.S.
National Arboretum for 1985, was to be dedicated pri-
marily to cultivated plants. It was thought that during a
short  five-week  trip,  more  could  be  accomplished  by
selecting new introductions from plants already in culti-
vation in Japan, rather than by collecting in the wild. The
team consisted of two explorers: Rick Darke, Longwood’s
curator of plants, and Sylvester G. March, chief horticul-
turist at the National Arboretum and a veteran of plant
exploration in Japan.

“Japan  is  an  invariable  treasure  house  for  garden
plants,” wrote March (1985). “The focus of the trip was
on visiting arboreta, botanic gardens, prefectural research
stations, nursery specialists, and private collections in the
Tokyo  area  and  south  to  Hakone,  Nagoya, Tsu,  Kyoto,
¯Osaka, Hiroshima, Iwakuni, and Kumamato.” With their
goals  thus  set,  Darke  and  March  departed  for  Japan  in
mid-October.

The  next  day  Darke  and  March  were  taken  to
Kawaguchi,  in  the  northern  suburbs  of  Tokyo,  to  visit
several nurseries. First they stopped at the nursery owned
by the Nihonkaki Corporation, where they purchased a
number  of  plants,  including  several  species  of  Tricyrtis,
such as T. macranthopsis (85881), T. ohsumiensis (85884),
and  T.  perfoliata (85885).  Then,  in  Kabayashi  Maple
Nursery, Darke and March selected a number of unusual
cultivars of Acer buergerianum, A. shirasawanum, and A.
sieboldianum. A rare red-flowered form of Rhododendron
mucronulatum (85865)  and  a  white-flowered  form  of
Allium  thunbergii (85810)  were  found  in  the  Kairo-en
Nursery.  Finally,  a  visit  to  Suzuki  Sanyas¯o  Nursery
resulted  in  two  dwarf  varieties  of  goldenrod,  Solidago
virga-aurea var.  minutissima (85873)  and  S.  virga-aurea
var. praeflorens (85874).

On  20  October  the  explorers  went  to  the  Jindai
Botanical Garden in Tokyo. March considered it a good
example of how Japan’s botanical gardens “excel in having
the magical blend of attractions to draw a broad audience
to  learn  and  enjoy  at  their  gardens—people  of  all  ages
sketching  and  painting;  families  spread  out  on  broad
expanses of grass taking in the beauty of the surroundings;
and  throngs  of  people  viewing  outdoor  chrysanthemum
exhibitions; all making the gardens a vibrant part of the
fabric of daily life” (March 1985). The daylong browsing
through  Jindai’s  plant  collections  resulted  in  only  one
acquisition,  that  of  Aster  tataricus  (85813).  “At  Jindai
Botanical Garden I noticed a plant of Aster tataricus that
was evidently lower-growing than the typical forms in cul-
tivation in the United States,” remembers Darke. “Since
the  typical  Aster  tataricus  is  too  tall  and  aggressively
spreading for the average sized garden, this compact form
offered a promising alternative. It was named ‘Jindai’ to
honor  its  origin  and,  when  introduced  commercially  in
the United States, quickly gained popularity.”

Magical blend of Jindai
Upon their arrival in Tokyo, Darke and March spent the
first several days visiting sites in the city and its vicinity.
On 16 October they toured Aritaki Arboretum, a private
establishment in Koshigaya with a reputation for being a
source for elite plants. The arboretum’s curator, Tadahiko
Aritaki,  had  traveled  and  collected  plants  throughout
Asia. Darke and March were especially interested in the
plants Aritaki had introduced from Taiwan.

Camellias of the samurai
On  26  October,  Darke  and  March  began  their  journey
southwest of Tokyo. A couple of days later the explorers
arrived in Nagoya, the capital of Aichi Prefecture, situated
at  the  head  of  Ise  Bay.  Here  they  paid  a  visit  to  the
Fukukaen  Nursery  and  Bulb  Company  to  learn  about
their  breeding  of  new  cut  flower  and  pot  plant  crops.
Then they toured the Nagoya Fruit Garden, a municipal
garden completed only a year earlier, which is devoted to

68

Treasure House

Aster tataricus ‘Jindai’ (85813), introduced by Darke and March
from the Jindai Botanical Garden in Tokyo, is a lower-growing
form of this vigorous perennial native to east Asia. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Hirose, left, and Karasawa with Miconia magnifica (85855)
obtained from Hiroshima Botanical Garden by Darke and March.
Photo by Rick Darke.

a broad range of fruit-bearing plants. According to March
it  was  “without  a  doubt,  the  most  impressive  garden
visited” (1985).

By 7 November, the explorers reached O¯ saka on the
northeastern shore of O¯ saka Bay, where they stopped at
the Yoshida Bonsai Center and the Yamashoji Kokujuen
Nursery. From the extensive offerings of these two nurs-
eries,  several  unique  plants  were  selected,  among  them
Ardisia  crispa (85811),  a  white-flowered  form  of  Cercis
chinensis (85826), and Stachyurus praecox var. matsuzakii
(85875).

From O¯ saka the explorers headed west to Hiroshima,
a  prefectural  capital  situated  at  the  west  end  of  Japan’s
Inland  Sea. Their  destination  was  Hiroshima  Botanical

Garden, a relatively young municipal garden established
in 1976, featuring extensive collections of orchids, bego-
nias, fuchsias, water lilies, and others plants from around
the world. They toured the garden accompanied by Kohji
Karasawa, director, and Yoshimichi Hirose, expert on var-
iegated  plants.  One  plant  that  impressed  Darke  and
March was Miconia magnifica (85855), a small tree from
Central America. With its enormous leaves colored green
above and purple-blue below, it is considered among the
most striking foliage plants.

By  11  November  the  team  arrived  on  the  island  of
Ky¯ush¯u, heading for the city of Kurume in Fukuoka Pre-
fecture,  where  the  federal  Vegetable  and  Ornamental
Crops Research Station is located. Darke and March were

69

Japan

A weeping form of Ilex serrata (85848), acquired from Shimabichi
Nursery in Kawaguchi by Darke and March, was introduced in
the United States as a cultivar, ‘Longwood Firefall’. Photo by Rick
Darke.

especially  interested  in  seeing  the  results  of  the  ever-
green azalea breeding carried out at the station. While
there, they picked up one recently introduced red-flow-
ered cultivar, ‘Benifusha’ (8624), notable for its excep-
tional hardiness.

From Kurume the explorers traveled to Kumamoto,
the home of Higo camellias, which date back to the times
of the samurai. The origin of Higo camellias is shrouded
in  mystery,  but  their  flowers  are  unique  and  distinct
because of their very large and iridescent petals and large
number of showy, brightly colored stamens. Among the
many  Higo  camellias  acquired  by  Darke  and  March  in
Kumamoto were the pink ‘Osaraku’ (85820), red ‘Kobai’
(85818), and white ‘Fuji’ (85816).

Feeling overwhelmed
Back  in  Tokyo,  Darke  and  March  dedicated  their  last
couple of days in Japan to visiting more nurseries. They
spent  a  good  part  of  17  November  selecting  unusual
plants from Shimabichi Nursery in Kawaguchi. To their
delight, it turned out to be the most productive day of the
whole trip. From Shimabichi’s exceptionally diverse and
interesting  offering,  they  picked  forty-seven  plants,
including a number of rare selections of Enkianthus cam-
panulatus (85830–4) and dwarf forms of Styrax japonica
(85876), Clethra barbinervis (85827), and Magnolia stel-
lata (85852).  A  weeping  form  of  Ilex  serrata (85848)
acquired  from  Shimabichi  was  later  introduced  in  the
United States as ‘Longwood Firefall’.

Yokoi, left, and Darke with Ilex crenata ‘Sky Pencil’ (85847),
growing in Longwood’s nursery eleven years after it was 
introduced from Yokoi’s garden. Photo by Rick Darke.

While in Kawaguchi, Darke and March also paid a
visit to the garden of Dr. Masao Yokoi, professor at the
Laboratory of Floriculture and Ornamental Horticulture
at Chiba University, and according to March, one of the
best-known plant specialists in Japan at that time. “Dr.
Yokoi’s garden at Kawaguchi City can only be described
as  a  paradise  for  those  interested  in  variegated  plants,”
wrote March (1985). “Every square meter of the garden
and  greenhouse  is  jam  packed  with  variegated  plants.
Because  there  is  no  space  to  walk,  he  waters  the  green-
house by standing in the doorway and aiming the hose.”
Yokoi  graciously  shared  with  the  explorers  some  of  the
plants  from  his  outstanding  collection,  including  two
that  later  gained  widespread  popularity  in  the  United

70

Treasure House

Miscanthus sinensis ‘Cabaret’ (91599) obtained by Darke and March from Yokoi was displayed in Longwood’s Idea Garden. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

States:  a  columnar  form  of  Ilex  crenata (85847)  named
‘Sky Pencil’ and a variegated Miscanthus sinensis (91599)
named ‘Cabaret’.

The trip concluded on 23 November. In addition to
the 292 plants they collected in Japan, Darke and March
returned home with an immense respect and admiration
for the country’s gardening tradition and fascination with
ornamental  plants.  “No  matter  how  frequently  I  travel
there in search of garden plants,” said March (1985), “I
cannot come away without feeling overwhelmed by the
intensity and wealth of horticulture.”

Yokoi, left, and Darke in Yokoi’s garden in Kawaguchi. Photo by
Rick Darke.

71

SOUTH KOREA

REDISCOVERING KOREAN FLORA

The  scars  of  the  Korean  War  were  still  fresh  when  Dr.
Edward  G.  Corbett,  research  horticulturist  of  the  New
Crops  Research  Branch  of  the  USDA  Agricultural
Research  Service  in  Glenn  Dale,  Maryland,  and  Dr.
Richard  W.  Lighty,  geneticist  at  Longwood  Gardens,
undertook  an  ambitious  expedition  to  South  Korea  in
1966.  Horticultural  exploration  of  the  peninsula  had
barely begun at that time. Aside from sporadic port calls
by Russian ships in the nineteenth century, a visit by the
English  nurseryman  John  Gould  Veitch  in  1860,  and
brief exploration in the early twentieth century by Ernest
H. Wilson and John G. Jack of the Arnold Arboretum of
Harvard University, the wealth of the flora was unknown
in the West.

“Nevertheless,”  recalls  Lighty,  “it  was  well  known
that  the  flora  of  Korea,  like  that  of  adjacent  China,
Manchuria,  and  Japan,  is  closely  related  to  that  of  the
eastern  United  States  and  that  collections  there  would
have  value  similar  to  those  from  earlier  trips  to  Japan.
Furthermore, Korea is climatically similar to that region
with  summer  precipitation,  heat,  and  humidity  that
match  that  of  our  east  coast  from  Maine  to  Florida.
Winters  also  match  ours  in  terms  of  temperature
extremes.  Other  reasons  for  projecting  this  exploration
were the inaccessibility of the even richer flora of China,
our lack of knowledge of botanic gardens and arboretums
that could be relied upon to collect under contract, and

the  presence  of  an  outstanding  field  botanist,  Dr.  Lee
Tchang Bok, professor of Seoul National University. He
had  a  personal  familiarity  with  the  flora  of  the  entire
country beyond that of other Korean botanists.”

The  trip  was  planned  to  encompass  much  of  the
growing season, culminating in autumn as seed ripened.
The length of time, almost four months, allowed repeat
visits  to  areas  of  high  interest,  assuring  that  desirable
plants were secured.

Climbing a volcano
“When we arrived in Seoul on 7 July, it was raining hard
as though to affirm the heralded summer precipitation,”
remembers Lighty. The explorers spent the first few days
taking  care  of  organizational  details.  “These  included
obtaining  permission  to  use  facilities  of  the  Eighth
United  States  Army  base  at  Yongsan,  in  the  heart  of
Seoul; making arrangements to access the regions where
the animosity between North and South Korea continued
to make travel dangerous; and establishing procedures for
cashing checks, holding our mail, and seeing to it that, on
return to Seoul after each foray, our plants were quickly
placed  in  the  next  diplomatic  pouch  to  leave  for  the
United States.”

Although an itinerary had been drawn up prior to the
trip,  it  had  to  be  altered  as  circumstances  dictated.
“Transportation difficulties, flooding, and new and more
accurate information on the distribution of target species
all affected, in a practical way, when and where we went,”

72

The Korean peninsula extends southward from eastern Siberia and
Manchuria to within about 110 km of Japan at its southern end.
Approximately 960 km long and up to 320 km wide, the penin-
sula covers more than 220,000 km2. Mountains and hills occupy
nearly 70 percent of Korea’s territory. The highest peak, Mount
Paektu, 2744 m, is located on the border between North Korea
and China. The main areas of lowlands are in the western and
southern parts of the peninsula. The climate of Korea is influenced
by polar, tropical, and continental air masses moving in from sur-
rounding areas. During winter, northerly winds bring dry and cold
weather from Siberia. In contrast, summer monsoons bring abun-
dant moisture and warm air from the south. In the northern parts
of the peninsula, winter temperatures can drop to below -37ºC,
while summer temperatures in the south can reach as high as

35ºC. The rainfall ranges from 500 mm in the northwestern high-
lands to 1800 mm in the southeastern coastal areas. About three
thousand species of vascular plants are native to Korea, and of
those about 14 percent are endemic. The flora of the southern
regions is more diverse than that of the north. Rich, coniferous
forests predominate in the inland regions, while evergreen, broad-
leaved forests are widespread on the warmer islands. Many trees in
northern Korea are closely related to those found on other regions
of the Northern Hemisphere. Others, less common elsewhere in
the temperate regions, were able to survive the glaciation in the
mountain refuges on the peninsula. A number of species found in
the coastal regions of southern Korea are related to the genera dis-
tributed throughout the Southern Hemisphere.

South Korea

recalls Lighty. “In general we covered all of the places we
had anticipated visiting.”

Corbett and Lighty’s first trip was to Cheju, an island
off the southern tip of the peninsula. “It is dominated by
the  beautiful  volcanic  peak,  Mount  Halla,  which  is
similar  in  form  to  Mount  Fuji  of  Japan,”  remembers
Lighty. “At 1950 m in height, it is South Korea’s highest
peak  and,  at  higher  altitudes,  can  have  cold  and  snowy
winters. At sea level, Cheju Island is subtropical, and the
deep and fertile soils have an ancient history of agricul-
ture. Many elements of the Japanese flora are represented
here along with Korean-Manchurian species typical of the
peninsula. Among the plants collected here were Aruncus
aethusifolius (69190),  Hemerocallis  coreana (67344),
Lindera  erythrocarpa (69216),  and  a  number  of  rhodo-
dendrons.”

These first collections did not come without paying a
price. As Lighty recalls, he “suffered a sunstroke while at
the top of Mount Halla following a grueling climb.” In a
letter sent to Dr. Russell J. Seibert (1966a) he confessed,
“In two days I had two cans of warm beer and four slices
of  spam. When  we  got  down,  the  MD  said  I  had  sun-
stroke. If so I think it was in combination with something
else.” Later he admitted, “I had made the mistake of car-
rying my 30 kg pack up the mountain. Fatigue and ultra-
violet exposure at an altitude of 1950 m left me with an
inability to keep water or food down.”

Most of the collecting on Cheju was done on Mount
Halla, since the expedition’s primary focus was on tem-
perate plants. “Each evening we would go over the day’s
collections,  wash  soil  from  the  roots  of  plants,  and
repackage  living  material,  wrapped  in  slightly  damp
paper and placed in sealed plastic bags,” explains Lighty.
“These would be carefully packed to withstand the rigors
of the remaining time in the field and, along with copies
of the field notes, sent to Washington on our return to
Seoul.  We  returned  from  Cheju  Island  on  18  July  and
sent our collections off through the American Embassy,
provisioned for the trip to Ullung Island, and rested.”

Close to heaven
“Ullung Island was a destination I had looked forward to
since reading Ernest H. Wilson’s account of his brief visit
there,”  recalls  Lighty.  “The  island  was  still  without
wheeled vehicles and had only limited locally generated
electricity  in Todong,  the  largest  village  on  the  90  km2

Lighty leads the group on their first day of hiking on Mount Halla
on Cheju Island. Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

island.  The  one  refrigerator  was  used  alternatively  to
make ice cream or cool beer, never both at the same time.
Ullung Island is in the middle of the Sea of Japan, and
therefore quite hot and humid; one might say sweltering
when the wind was not blowing.”

The party left Seoul on 24 July and, after a five-hour
train ride and nearly as long a ride in a crowded bus over
flooded roads, reached Pohang harbor in the evening. In
Pohang  they  boarded  the  small  freighter  for  a  ten-hour
ride to Ullung. “Now I know what inaccessible means!”
wrote  Lighty  (1966b)  to  Seibert.  “Then  too—all  the
spaces in their transportation system are made for men 5
feet 5 inches [1.7 m] tall—I have not fit yet.”

Lighty recalls this boat ride: “Still suffering from the
effects  of  the  sun,  and  having  difficulty  fitting  into  the
dresser  drawer–sized  bunks,  I  spent  the  night  on  the
canvas cover over the hold, and fell asleep watching the
mast play across a brilliant, star-filled sky. I awoke at first
light and watched as the rising sun brought the steep lava
cliffs of Ullung Island into bright relief. My first thoughts
were that this must have been how it appeared to Wilson!
There  followed  a  remarkable  feat  of  seamanship  as  the
captain  dropped  anchor,  and  backed  the  ship  into  the
tight  little  harbor;  then  dispatched  two  other  lines  to
secure the stern to the cliffs on our left and the breakwa-
ter on our right. After that, we were lightered in to the
beach where we disembarked. Ullung Island is a resort of
sorts, but it was quickly clear that few if any Westerners
had  been  there  within  the  memory  of  children  under
fifteen  years  of  age.  We  were  followed  everywhere  and
closely  watched  at  all  times,  from  windows,  roofs,  and

74

Rediscovering Korean Flora

doorways, by battalions of
children. Only by drawing
the  curtains  were  we  able
to get a little privacy.”

Ullung  is  “famous  to
botanists as the home of a
number of endemics—but
to the world at large, it is
the  origin  of  squid.  .  .  .
Each night all the eligible
males  went  to  sea  and
caught  squid  like  fury”
(Lighty 
1966b).  On
several  occasions  Lighty
observed  these  daily  rou-
tines: “The boats return at
first light, and the women
and children take over the
job  of  gutting  and  clean-
ing  the  catch.  The  squid
are hung on bamboo racks
to  dry  in  the  wind  for
several  days  before  being  bundled  for  storage  and  ship-
ment, mainly to Japan. All of the tiny villages of Ullung-
do are set in small coves at the base of sheer cliffs; and all
are  characterized  by  vast  numbers  of  drying-racks,
looking  like  laundry  drying-yards  for  hundreds  of
people.”  However  picturesque  the  drying  squid  might
have  appeared,  Lighty  was  unequivocal  in  his  apprecia-
tion of them: “I hope I never see another.”

Steep lava cliffs of Ullung Island as they appeared to Corbett and Lighty. Photo by R. William
Thomas.

The island also posed other challenges. “I had been
coming  down  with  dysentery  since  we  returned  from
Cheju  Island,”  explains  Lighty,  “and  it  now  started  to
have  its  full  effect  in  terms  of  enervation.  A  visit  to  a
Catholic  hospital,  a  shot  in  the  buttocks  with  a  horse
syringe,  and  several  doses  of  powders  would  keep  it  at
bay, but I had lost 10 kg, and most of my energy. In addi-
tion to the heat and exhaustion, we now found that the
island had, literally, no level land.” In a letter to Seibert,
Lighty wrote, “The most rugged terrain I’ve ever seen. Up
and  down  are  the  only  two  directions  of  that  island  of
volcanic  origin”  (1966b).  Lighty  recalls  an  old  saying
from  Ullung:  “When  the  farmers  go  out  to  plant,  they
take seed and an equal number of tacks to hold the seeds
on the hillside.”

It  was  these  sheer  walls  that  the  explorers  had  to
climb  to  do  the  collecting. They  soon  found  a  way  to

Squid-drying racks in Todong on Ullung Island. Photo by Richard
W. Lighty.

avoid  the  overland  difficulty:  “On  several  occasions  we
engaged  an  off-duty  squid  boat  to  take  us  part  way
around the island to one or the other of the tiny villages,
many  of  which  did  not  have  docks  or  breakwaters,”
recalls Lighty. “We would disembark and begin climbing
immediately. It would have been a trying experience for
healthy, vigorous people, and that we were not. Despite
this, we took full advantage of the flora of this remarkable
island.  It  is  the  only  place  on  earth,  with  the  possible

75

South Korea

exception  of  a  small  area  around  Vladivostok,  Russia,
where Lilium hansonii (681258)  is  found. This  was  the
most important of a number of lilies I hoped to collect,
as it was represented in the West by only a single clone
which, like most lilies, was self-incompatible. Yet it was
one parent of the important hybrid lily group, the Marta-
gon Hybrids.”

While not battling the sheer cliffs guarding the mys-
terious interior of Ullung against intruders, Corbett and
Lighty occasionally experienced the gentler nature of the
island.  “Returning  to Todong  from  one  foray,”  remem-
bers Lighty, “we joined a group of high school-aged girls
and boys participating in a work camp on the island. We
boarded as the sun was setting, and as we skimmed over
the crystal-clear water, we could see deep down 15 m to
house-sized  boulders  rounded  by  the  action  of  the  sea.
We  were  sitting  on  rice-straw  blankets  covering  a  huge
load  of  braided  garlic  while  a  brilliant  half-moon  rose
above  us,  and  we  all  joined  in  singing  the  usual  camp
songs  that  seem  to  be  known  the  world  around.  As  we
basked in the moment, the high cliffs with pounding surf
on  one  side,  and  the  squid  boat  lights  winking  on  the
other, Ullung Island seemed a place closer to heaven than
to the hell it had seemed at high noon. This is the Ullung
Island that I remember.”

The  tranquility  of  this  place  seems  to  have  had  a
soothing effect on Lighty: “By this time I was down to 70
kg, the least I had weighed since I was twelve, but the sun-
stroke was gone, and the dysentery on the wane, so my
vigor and ambition were returning. On 30 July, we had to
leave. The freighter was back in harbor, its lights blazing
and its amplifiers blasting the town with Korean, Ameri-
can, and other flavors of music. The captain had been to
America as a young man, and liked all things American—
including us. He looked the other way as I went back to
my canvas bed under the brilliant night sky.”

Demilitarized mountain
“Back in Seoul on 2 August we checked on arrangements,
made previously, to go to Mount Sorak, 1708 m, area,”
recalls  Lighty.  “This  mountain  is  the  southern-most
expression  of  the  Diamond  Mountains.  It  is  above  the
38th parallel, but outside the demilitarized zone between
North  and  South  Korea,  and  was  the  scene  of  intense
fighting on several occasions during the Korean War. We
were told by an American advisor to the Korean National
Police  that  the  area  was  closed  to  tourists  and  that  his

office could do little to help. He suggested we go to the
military.”

Meanwhile, to use the time effectively the explorers
went  to  Mount  Kwanak,  outside  of  Seoul,  which,  as
Lighty  explains,  “had  also  been  a  battlefield  on  several
occasions and a refugee camp following the Korean War.
What vegetation had not been blasted off by bombs and
artillery had been eaten or burned for fuel by the starving
refugees. There was no soil, only pulverized rock, but by
1966  it  had  begun  to  recover,  and  a  young  scrub  of
adventive species had begun to grow.”

Returning to Seoul, Corbett and Lighty found that it
was possible for them to explore the Mount Sorak region.
Although the exact conditions under which they would
be allowed to work were still unclear, they departed on 8
August. One venue for collecting was the resort village of
Osaek.  The  party  spent  three  nights  there  in  a  motel
offering  Korean-style  accommodations,  which,  noted
Lighty,  “require  a  different  set  of  bones  than  God  gave
me” (1966c). The resort of Osaek grew around naturally
carbonated springs, whose healthful waters are collected
by visitors and taken back to Seoul and elsewhere.

Cool  spring  water  in  Osaek,  healthful  or  not,  was
much welcomed by the explorers. “My major problem in
Korea is liquid—cold liquid,” wrote Lighty (1966c) in a
letter sent to Longwood. “One can buy beer (quite good
lager),  or  cola,  or  something  they  call  cider  but  which
never saw an apple, but to get these properly cooled takes
much management. We use wells and springs where there
is no ice (includes most of rural Korea) and then we drink
it  warm  if  all  else  fails.  I  am  worse  off  than  Ed  here
because much of the natural water of Korea has a high
humus  content  and  actually  makes  me  retch.  He  can
drink  most  any  water  after  putting  iodine  pills  in  it.  I
haven’t had any water since we left Seoul.”

On  12  August,  Lighty  reported  back  to  Longwood
regarding  the  difficulties  they  faced  while  collecting  on
Mount Sorak: “Each day we climbed in a different direc-
tion but we were always stopped less than halfway up the
mountain by ROK [Republic of Korea] Army. The infil-
trators  are  becoming  quite  a  problem—every  night
several are spotted and/or killed. . . . Today we were going
to try climbing from this side of the mountain but dis-
covered  on  awakening  that  three  infiltrators  had  been
spotted here last night and the ROK Army is all out after
them. We did, however, get a lieutenant and two soldiers
to accompany us up one part of the mountain” (Lighty

76

Rediscovering Korean Flora

The military escorted Corbett and Lighty on the climb up Mount
Sorak. Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

Coniogramme fraxinea var. intermedia (66747) collected by Corbett
and Lighty on Mount Sorak. Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

Aceriphyllum rossii (70758) growing along a stream on Mount
Sorak. Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

The team near Mount Odae, including, left to right, Park,
Corbett, Cho, Lee Moon Ho, Lee Tchang Bok, and Lighty. 
Photo by Edward G. Corbett.

1966c). Despite these difficulties the party made several
forays from Osaek. In September they revisited this area
to collect the seeds that were not ripe on the first visit.
Among the plants collected on Mount Sorak were Aceri-
phyllum rossii (70758), Coniogramme fraxinea var. inter-
media (66747), Forsythia ovata (681242), Rhododendron
brachycarpum (68743), and Syringa amurensis (681256).
Another fertile collecting area in that region was a rel-
atively mature forest surrounding a Buddhist temple on
Mount Odae, 1563 m, some 160 km east of Seoul. Here
Corbett  and  Lighty  collected  Athyrium  coreanum
(66596),  Spiraea  salicifolia (681254),  and  Thalictrum
uchiyamai (68609),  among  other  plants.  According  to
Corbett,  the  presence  of  Buddhist  monasteries  with
extensive land holdings was one particular advantage of
collecting in Korea: “The Buddhist philosophy includes a

strong  interest  in  preserving  the  natural  environment,
and  this  meant  that  those  areas  were  rich  floristically.”
Lighty adds that “throughout our travels we found that
such temple forests had been protected for centuries by
the monks, and had generally been spared destruction in
the war.”

Led by the monks
On 17 August the party returned to Seoul. To reach the
capital  they  had  to  drive  over  what  Lighty  noted  were
“some of the dustiest and bumpiest roads I have experi-
enced  (and  we  have  traveled  some  bad  ones).  .  .  . The
number of washouts from the terrible flooding they have
had is astounding” (1966d). He attributed the flooding
to  the  widespread  deforestation:  “The  only  really  good
collecting areas in Korea lie on the high mountains and

77

South Korea

Lycoris  koreana,”  remembers  Corbett,  “and  Dr.  Lee  was
able to persuade the monks to allow us to collect some
bulbs. A couple of monks agreed to lead us to the plants,
and we started out up a steep rocky slope which was tra-
versed  only  with  great  difficulty.  Near  the  summit  we
were shown a cave with a mineral spring reputed to have
healing qualities. We had to sample the water and then
we  again  set  out  by  a  circuitous  route  to  find  Lycoris.
Finally, after about five hours of walking we came to the
stand of Lycoris koreana within several hundred meters of
the entrance to the monastery, our starting point.”

Caught in a typhoon
“On return to Seoul,” remembers Lighty, “we dispatched
our collections and went on to Suw˘on, where the Agri-
cultural College of Seoul National University was located.
We had the comparative luxury of staying at the Univer-
sity’s  guest  house,  a  Victorian  building  dating  to  the
Japanese occupation” (1966e). The guesthouse offered a
welcome  respite  from  the  accommodations  generally
available in small and remote villages. Corbett and Lighty
rejoiced:  “Our  two-day  stay  at  Suw˘on  has  considerably
improved  our  digestive  tracts—we  had  a  western-style
cook and housekeeper who really knew how to cook like
home! She even had refrigerated boiled water for us.”

Corbett  and  Lighty  then  turned  their  attention  to
Mount Chiri, 1915 m. “It was fairly far south, so we took
a train to Kurye, then hired a truck to reach the largest
temple  in  Korea,  located  at  the  base  of  Mount  Chiri,”
explains Lighty. “The climb was not steep, but it took five
hours to reach our campsite, a summer resort for Presby-
terian missionaries that had been built here in the early
1900s, but had been destroyed during the Japanese occu-
pation.  The  remains  of  sixteen  stone  lodges,  tennis
courts,  swimming  pools,  and  other  amenities  suggested
that life was not always hard for missionaries in the field.”
The surrounding forests of maple, birch, hornbeam, and
oak were cut through by cold, rapidly flowing brooks cas-
cading over granite boulders. Crystal-clear pools punctu-
ated the woods and invited the tired explorers to enjoy
“swimming—that is to say bathing—for the first time in
four days” (Lighty 1966f).

After the second day, plant collecting was somewhat
curtailed by heavy, cold rains and fog related to a typhoon
that had come off the East China Sea. The downpour was
more  than  the  party  was  prepared  for.  “Our  tents  were
worse  than  useless—since  we  had  had  some  degree  of

Lycoris koreana (68598) collected at Paegyang-sa near Kwangju.
Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

in the temple forests. Outside of these . . . they cut all the
trees  right  down  to  one-inch  [25  mm]  saplings—the
regrowth is cut off as it appears. Then they sickle off all
the  weeds  and  grasses  to  feed  their  animals.  The  rule
seems to be, ‘if in doubt—cut it off before your neighbor
does.’ Most of the hillsides (those not terraced for rice)
look,  as  a  result,  like  they  are  plowed  each  year.  Soil
erosion is rampant and the flooding we’ve just had is the
result” (Lighty 1966e).

In Seoul, Corbett and Lighty packed and dispatched
their collections before getting ready to fly to Kwangju.
Their destination was the nearby temple preserve at Pae-
gyang-sa, the southernmost of the collecting sites on the
peninsula.  The  specific  goal  for  this  excursion  was  to
collect  Lycoris  koreana (68598),  an  orange-flowered
species never cultivated in the West. “One monastery we
visited  there  had  the  only  known  wild  population  of

78

Rediscovering Korean Flora

confidence  in  them,”  recalls  Lighty.  “They  leaked  like
sieves and, at the height of the storm, one took off and
was damaged. Fortunately there was a peasant’s hut close
at  hand  where  we  could  take  refuge—and  we  did!”
(Lighty  1966f ).  In  spite  of  the  weather,  the  team
managed to make most of the collections they had come
for. Among the notable plants collected on Mount Chiri
were Alangium platanifolium (70759), Davallia mariesii
(66618), and Rhododendron tschonoskii (69226).

Following  the  excursion  to  Mount  Chiri,  Lighty
wrote  to  Seibert:  “We  have  almost  completed  the  first
phase  of  our  trip—the  exploration  and  study  of  new
areas. After a brief stay at Suw˘on with several short trips
to close-by areas, we will begin to re-cover the areas we
have already seen, this time collecting seed. Seed is spotty
this  year—in  some  areas  a  given  species  has  produced
none while in other areas the same species has produced
abundantly” (1966f).

Surrounded by reminders of war
On 22 September the party returned to Mount Sorak to
see it in its full fall glory. “At its peak, the color rivals that
of New England, and many of the same genera contribute
to  the  show  there,”  reminisces  Lighty.  “Acer  pseu-
dosieboldianum and  Carpinus  laxiflora were  among  the
most colorful species at this early stage. We were seeking
seed of the dwarf form of Pinus pumila, a plant which in
South Korea is found only in the alpine zone of Mount
Sorak. We saw extensive mats of this pine, but there was
no seed to be found. Collecting was made difficult by the
steady cold rain which accompanied us for most of the
climb and turned to sleet as we reached the top.”

The most memorable climb took place on 24 and 25
September. Lighty described it in a letter to Seibert: “That
evening, just before we reached the temple below the peak,
a cold rain hit us. We afterward found out that this was the
start  of  another  typhoon.  Why  must  we  always  meet
typhoons  while  at  the  top  of  mountains? We  were  fairly
well soaked by the time we got inside the government-built
lodge. Fortunately the foresters had arrived early and built
roaring fires, and the floors were radiantly hot. We dried
out  and  worked  over  our  collections  while  rice  was
cooking—then  after  dark  had  descended  we  ate  supper
.  .  .  .  Next  morning  we  awoke  to  heavy  fog  and  high
winds—bitter  cold.  We  ate  breakfast  and  put  on  all  the
clothes we had and forced ourselves out into it. Fortunately
the last several kilometers were steep and we kept warm by

Corbett soaked after a rainstorm. Photo by Edward G. Corbett.

exertion,  for  not  five  minutes  after  we  set  out,  the  rain
came with renewed fury. We were quickly wet through to
the  skin! We  made  several  collections  as  we  wended  our
way upward. Finally we were above the tree line, and there
the wind, rain, and sleet—almost hail—hit us with terrific
force. All we could think about was moving on—getting
out of it. We lost our way twice and had to return 2 km—
very frustrating when you’re in the middle of a storm! All
around us were the remains of the Korean war—cartridge
cases, ammo boxes, bullets, and cartridges and even a few
human bones. They say there were many more for the first
few years after the war. All of Korea had this same sort of
thing. Finally after eight hours we arrived at the village of
Osaek—a village where we had stayed before. . . . It was
good to be back—and not only to get warm once again.
We  both  caught  colds—mine  mild—Ed’s  worse.  Lucky
that is all we got” (Lighty 1966g).

79

South Korea

The expedition’s final Korean collecting was done in
the vicinity of Suw˘on, again at Mount Kwanak and at a
temple  nearby.  Shortly  before  their  departure,  Lighty
wrote to Seibert: “The end is drawing near—and we feel
it has been a most fruitful trip. Our collection numbers
are  in  the  460s  and  will  probably  end  up  a  little  lower
than  500.  Both  Ed  and  I  started  out  with  the  idea  of
being discriminating—and we hope we have not lost this
quality. The flora here is rich, and the possibility of har-
diness in most of the material has somewhat increased its
potential scope of use. Of course we realize that only a
minute fraction of the total has any chance of becoming
widely used as outstanding ornamentals” (Lighty 1966h).

IN PURSUIT OF COLD-HARDY CAMELLIAS

“Most if not all of the Camellia japonica varieties tradi-
tionally  grown  in  the  United  States  are  originally  of
Japanese origin,” wrote Barry R. Yinger (1989), curator
of  Asian  plant  collections  at  the  U.S.  National  Arbore-
tum.  “They  were  first  widely  grown  in  the  deep  South
where  cold  hardiness  was  not  considered  a  serious
problem,  but  in  recent  years,  with  dramatically  colder
winters in parts of the South too, it has become clear that
Japanese  camellias  are,  in  general,  less  hardy  than  they
should be to be a reliable part of the landscape. We know
now that if we want to have significantly hardier camel-
lias  we  must  look  beyond  Japan.  Fortunately,  the  wild
type of Camellia japonica, from which all the cultivated
forms  were  developed  through  selection  and  breeding,
has a very broad range extending beyond Japan through
the coastal regions and islands of Korea deep into China.
.  .  .  I  found  (as  many  had  before  me)  that  the  Korean
climate,  even  near  the  coast,  is  harsher  than  Japan’s
climate. Korea is on the edge of the Asian land mass with
its continental climate. . . . The prevailing winter winds
are  strong,  frequent,  cold,  and  dry.  In  general,  Korean
winters are harder on both plants and people.”

Based on this premise, in 1983 Yinger had circulated
a  proposal  for  collecting  and  studying  plants  in  South
Korea.  Longwood  Gardens,  along  with  several  other
institutions, expressed interest in joining that effort, and
in July of the following year the first expedition, focused
on  Korea’s  northwestern  islands  and  coastal  areas,  was
launched.

The prostrate form of Caryopteris incana (69860) found by
Corbett and Lighty along the beach on Cheju Island was later
introduced in the United States as a cultivar, ‘Blue Billows’. 
Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

Magnolia sieboldii (68599) collected by Corbett and Lighty along a
rocky streambed on Mount Sokni, some 130 km southeast of
Seoul, flowers at Longwood Gardens nearly forty years later. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Being discriminating
After returning to Seoul on 28 September, the party once
again flew to Cheju. “This time we were fit and healthy,
and the climb that had consumed three agonizing days in
July  was  accomplished  in  one  long  day,”  remembers
Lighty.  “This  time  we  also  worked  at  sea  level.  In  an
ancient plantation of Torreya nucifera (68612), tradition-
ally employed as a vermifuge, we found Calanthe discolor
(66570) which, on return, proved hardy with protection
at Longwood. Along the beach we found a most interest-
ing  form  of  Caryopteris  incana (69860),  with  prostrate
stems arching at the ends to hold the typical blue flower
clusters 15 cm above the ground.”

80

In Pursuit of Cold-Hardy Camellias

Apps, March, and Yinger’s expedition began on Taechong Island
near the coast of North Korea. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Remnants of wild populations of Camellia japonica on Taechong
Island. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

In  addition  to  Yinger,  the  team  of  plant  collectors
included Dr. Darrel A. Apps, head of Longwood’s educa-
tion division, and Sylvester G. March, chief horticultur-
ist at the U.S. National Arboretum. Young June Chang, a
student  at  the  Seoul  National  University,  served  as  the
expedition’s interpreter and guide.

Flowery minefields
The explorers planned to travel to several islands in the
Yellow Sea off the northwest coast of South Korea and to
the  sites  on  the Taean  Peninsula. The  expedition  began
on  29  July  with  the  exploration  of  three  islands,  Tae-
chong, Paengyong, and Sochong, which are situated just
below latitude 38º north and which are within sight of
the North Korean territory. This is the northern limit of
the  distribution  of  Camellia  japonica and  several  other
broad-leaved evergreens.

“Getting  to  the  islands  was  no  small  feat,”  remem-
bered  Apps.  “Arrangements  were  made  through  the
United States Embassy with the Korean Navy and Korean
Intelligence  Agency  to  have  our  collecting  team  trans-
ported  by  boat. The  trip  from  Inchon  to  Paengyong  is
nearly  twelve  hours  by  commercial  carrier.  By  Korean
Navy fast boats it takes six hours. Since military maneu-
vers were the navy’s main mission we were, so to speak,
excess  baggage.  To  our  surprise  we  were  usually  trans-
ferred  from  boat  to  boat  about  every  two  hours  (two
transfers per trip). When jumping from deck to deck in
four to eight foot [1.2 to 2.4 m] waves one starts think-
ing about his mortality!” (Apps and Batdorf 1988).

Taechong, Paengyong, and Sochong, being near the
coast of North Korea, are of strategic military importance
to  South  Korea.  “Because  of  their  location  the  various
military  branches  maintain  round-the-clock  surveil-
lance,” noted Apps. “Korean Marines are dug in around
the  coast  of  each  island.  Mine  fields  are  laid  between
encampments  to  maintain  an  impenetrable  security.
Essentially  we  were  guests  of  the  military  and  did  our
plant collecting under the watchful eye of armed guards.
It  is  not  too  surprising  that  the  best  undisturbed  plant
communities were in the mine field. We also can report
that these plants are still there!” (Apps and Batdorf 1988).
After  a  few  days  on Taechong,  the  team  had  made
thirty-eight collections of Camellia japonica and forty of
other plants, including Cimicifuga heracleifolia (85348),
Cymbidium goeringii (85351), and Polygonatum odoratum
var.  pluriflorum (85368).  Three  days  of  collecting  on
Paengyong, the largest of the three islands, added another
thirty-one collections, among them Sanguisorba officinalis
(85370, Scilla scilloides (85372), and Sedum oryzifolium
(85377). Then, on 10 August, the group headed to the
island of Sochong.

“Our main plant target on this island was Camellia
japonica,” recalled Apps. “Sochong boasts a natural stand
of a score or more of trees that are 20 feet [6 m] tall and
ten  inches  [25  cm]  or  more  in  diameter. The  trees  are
located  on  a  wind-swept  hill  that  rises  a  couple  of
hundred feet over a quaint bay. On our collecting day it
was  nearly  95  degrees  Fahrenheit  [35ºC]  with  winds
blowing  30  miles  [48  km]  an  hour.  Those  of  us  with

81

South Korea

Camellia japonica grows on Sochong Island on exposed, windswept
hillsides overlooking the Yellow Sea. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Fruits of Camellia japonica (84882) collected on Sochong Island.
Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

glasses had to continually wipe off the caking salt spray”
(Apps and Batdorf 1988).

The explorers were struck by the dramatic difference
between  the  common  perception  of  where  camellias
ought to be growing in the wild, and the reality of the
site. “Based on my experience with camellias in gardens,
I expected them to be woodland shrubs growing in the
shade of forest trees,” wrote Yinger (1989b). “This face-
to-face  contact  with  wild  camellias  made  it  clear  that
camellias thrive at seaside and possess remarkable salt tol-
erance, which suggests strong resistance to urban pollu-
tion as well. They are also clearly much more tolerant of
sun and wind than I had expected. In fact, the extra expo-
sure seemed to produce exceptional flowering and strong
compact  growth.  These  camellias  clearly  preferred  very
well-drained soil and were thriving among rocks.”

Yinger  estimated  the  camellias  on  Sochong  to  be
about  150  years  old:  “Hard  living  had  not  made  these
plants any less beautiful. Their smooth gray trunks were
solidly muscular, topped with dense crowns of rich, glossy
dark green leaves. Their overall aspect was of rude good
health  under  great  stress,  a  description  which  could  be
applied to many of the human inhabitants of the island
too. . . . The dark brown seeds, the size of a rather large
bean, covered the ground as thick as a gravel walk in some
places. Despite this enormous crop of seeds, there were no
seedlings or young plants at all. The goats and cattle which
had stripped the leaves from the trees as high as they could
reach had made short work of any young plants, and it

was obvious that when these trees were gone, there would
be none to replace them” (Yinger 1989b).

This  lack  of  seedling  regeneration  concerned  the
explorers. “We were saddened when we realized that the
prognosis  for  this  native  stand  of  Camellia was  bleak,”
wrote Apps. “Unfortunately, the rapid industrialization of
Korea seems to preoccupy all of its citizenry—preserving
native habitats is a long way from being a political agenda
item” (Apps and Batdorf 1988).

After collecting cuttings from twenty different camel-
lias,  the  group  headed  for  a  rocky  cliff  where  they  saw
large  colonies  of  flowering  daylilies,  Hemerocallis. “It
turned out that this was one of the few times that we were
left alone by our military assistants and it was also a time
when  we  nearly  got  into  serious  trouble,”  remembered
Apps. “Near the top of the bank was a stunning clump of
an almost yellow daylily; most of the others were a soft
orange-apricot self. . . . After a struggle with falling rocks
and a very thorny Rosa rugosa patch the yellow daylily was
at hand. Suddenly from among the large rocks near the
ocean floor we heard shouts of native women. Our inter-
preter Young June Chang yelled, ‘Stop!’ It was more than
a little disconcerting to learn that the edge of a mine field
had, or was about to be entered! The yellow daylily was
carefully extracted from the rocky soil and the return trip
made  ever  so  carefully  in  an  attempt  at  backtracking.
Those  hostile  thorny  roses  seemed  more  friendly  this
time as bare hands held on to prevent a slip or a rock slide
down the cliff” (Apps and Batdorf 1988).

82

In Pursuit of Cold-Hardy Camellias

Offshore of North Korea
On 15 August the explorers started off for their next des-
tination, Taeyonpyong  and  Soyonpyong,  two  islands  in
the  Yellow  Sea,  east  of  the  Paengyong  island  group.
“Again  there  was  much  adventure  associated  with  our
naval  transport  system,”  recorded  Apps.  “Toothy  grins
were everywhere as the young naval men watched us load
plant presses, dryers, pruning poles, and other parapher-
nalia into their boat. They seemed to enjoy a little diver-
sion from their normal routine. We had left Inchon at 10
a.m. and arrived at a floating military docking station at
3  p.m.  in  the  Yellow  Sea  near  Taeyonpyong.  Then  we
transferred to a smaller craft that took us to the island.
We were met by an Intelligence officer who escorted us to
military quarters. He informed us that we were one and
one-half  kilometers  from  North  Korea  and  that  nearly
one-half of the villagers on these islands were sympathetic
to  the  North  Korean  political  ideology.  As  we  walked
along the edges of the island we could see North Korean
fishing  boats—a  reminder  that  the  land  mass  extended
farther north and that there were probably some interest-
ing  plants  there  too,  but,  not  available  to  us  just  yet!”
(Apps and Batdorf 1988).

The following morning the group headed to Soyon-
pyong  for  a  day  excursion.  On  the  island  they  made
twenty  collections,  including  several  undetermined
daylilies, Hemerocallis (861088): “Along with the daylilies
on  this  island  were  handsome  clumps  of  Pennisetum
alopecuroides. Both  dark  and  blond-headed  forms  were
often growing side by side. Nearby were patches of a cam-
panulate flower Adenophora. These three plants together,
Hemerocallis, Pennisetum, and Adenophora, would make a
striking  perennial  border  combination”  (Apps  and
Batdorf 1988).

The next day the team of explorers stayed on Taeyon-
pyong. In the course of daylong botanizing on the island,
they  were  able  to  add  seventeen  new  collections:  “On
Taeyonpyong  we  made  several  significant  other  plant
finds.  A  large  shrub  Lindera  glauca variety  salicifolia
[88374] had been reported to exist but was thought to be
a sterile form. One day we found many plants and some
that were fruiting. Seeds were collected on a second trip
later that fall. Near our original landing site, on a steep
bank,  we  found  one  plant  of  a  most  unusual  form  of
Scilla  scilloides [871222].  Its  flower  stalk  was  branched
and  had  a  rich  ruby-red  color.  On  the  ends  of  each

In fall the foliage of Lindera glauca var. salicifolia (88374) turns
blazing orange and contrasts with shiny black fruits. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

branch  were  multiple  white  cauliflower-like  miniature
flowers” (Apps and Batdorf 1988).

Collecting for preservation
The last leg of the trip took the explorers south to Taean
Peninsula on the west coast of South Korea, and to several
nearby  offshore  islands,  including  Anmyon  and  Tae-
baengi. Two days of scouting on these islands resulted in
more  than  thirty  collections,  including  Clematis  patens
(85349), Convallaria keiskei (85350), Peucedanum japon-
icum (84756),  and  several  camellias.  After  a  five-week
journey  through  some  of  the  most  remote  locations  in
northwestern  South  Korea,  Apps,  March,  and  Yinger
returned  to  the  United  States  carrying  235  plants,  cut-
tings, bulbs, and rhizomes.

83

South Korea

March shows fruits of Cornus kousa (86469) collected in October
when he returned to Korea with Bristol, Meyer, and Yinger. 
Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

This Camellia japonica (84881), raised from seeds collected on
Sochong Island in the Yellow Sea, proved to be the most cold-
hardy of Korean camellias trialed at Longwood Gardens. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Visits  to  the  offshore  islands  made  the  explorers
acutely  aware  of  the  extent  of  the  habitat  destruction
threatening the existence of many plants there. “There is
no mystery in what is happening to the plants—there is
simply the condition of more people, more land cultiva-
tion, and more domestic animals to destroy native plant
communities,”  wrote  Apps.  “For  the  most  part  we  can
have  little  influence  on  site  preservation  in  other  coun-
tries.  About  the  only  opportunity  we  have  is  collecting
.  .  .  .  It  occurred  to  us  that  American  gardens  might
become  repositories  for  Korean  germplasm—a  bit  like
providing a sanctuary for a deposed political figure who
may or may not return” (Apps and Batdorf 1988).

A month later March and Yinger returned to Korea
in  order  to  collect  seeds  from  many  of  the  plants  seen

earlier. They were joined by Peter W. Bristol, director of
horticulture at the Holden Arboretum in Kirtland, Ohio,
and Paul W. Meyer, director of horticulture at the Morris
Arboretum  in  Philadelphia.  The  four-week  trip  added
another 250 plants for introduction to the United States.
Plants  collected  in  South  Korea  were  distributed
among the participating institutions, and a long process
of evaluations began. Two years later Apps wrote to Dr.
H.  Marc  Cathey,  director  of  the  U.S.  National  Arbore-
tum: “Our trip two years ago has given us several good
perennials. We have selected three Chrysanthemum sp. for
potential fall display, we have picked out a good form of
Gypsophila  oldhamiana [84894–5],  we  are  real  excited
about Astilbe chinensis var. davidii [85339], and I person-
ally  have  fallen  for  eight-foot-tall  [2.4  m  tall]  Echinops

84

Seven Mountains

setifer [855].  Besides  these  perennials  there  are  several
more  plants  that  have  promise  as  ornamentals—we  are
hoping to name a form of Serissa foetida [8540]” (Apps
1986).

The  greatest  impact  the  1984  Korean  expeditions
had on American horticulture was, however, through the
introduction of cold-hardy Camellia japonica germplasm.
Trials  at  Longwood  Gardens,  Morris  Arboretum,  and
elsewhere showed that these plants can withstand harsh
Pennsylvania  winters  and  flower  reliably  every  spring.
One  superior  plant  raised  from  seed  collected  on
Sochong (84882) was selected and named ‘Korean Fire’
by  Yinger.  In  2003  this  cultivar  was  awarded  the  Gold
Medal  by  the  Pennsylvania  Horticultural  Society.
Through the efforts of plant collectors and plant breed-
ers,  the  Korean  camellias,  which  evolved  on  the  small
windswept  islands  along  the  North  Korean  coast,  may
extend  the  range  in  which  camellias  can  be  grown  and
thus  introduce  many  gardeners  living  in  the  northern
climes to these exquisite flowers.

SEVEN MOUNTAINS

The  1984  trips  to  Korea  explored  the  flora  of  the  west
coast and of the islands of the Yellow Sea. Subsequently,
in 1986, plans were made to continue the search for supe-
rior  landscape  plants  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  Korean
Peninsula. Cathey wrote to Frederick E. Roberts, Long-
wood’s director: “We are seeking to discover new and elite
woody plants which can be brought to the United States
in  cooperation  with  botanists  and  horticulturists  in
Korea. It is one of a series of trips we are taking to Korea
to locate plants which can be used in our breeding pro-
grams at the arboretum” (Cathey 1986).

It was three years later that such an expedition was
launched. The  principal  target  areas  for  collecting  were
chosen in the mountainous province of Kangw˘on in the
northeastern part of South Korea, including the island of
Ullung,  which  lies  about  150  km  off  the  east  coast  of
Kangw˘on Province. Seven major mountains were selected
as  the  collecting  sites.  Because  of  the  severe  climate  of
Kangw˘on, collecting in that region offered opportunities
for  introduction  of  trees,  shrubs,  and  perennials  with
superior cold hardiness and stress tolerance. The goals for
the expedition emphasized collecting species with signifi-
cant landscape potential, documenting the native flora of

Members of the 1989 fall expedition to Korea, including, left to
right, Thomas, March, Kim, and Bristol. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Kangw˘on Province and Ullung, and assisting in the con-
servation of rare and endangered Korean native plants.

The  seed-collecting  expedition  planned  for  the  fall
of  1989  was  preceded  by  a  reconnaissance  trip  in  the
spring  of  the  same  year  to  identify  sites  where  desired
plants could be found. March and Meyer led both trips.
In the spring they were accompanied by Dr. Richard G.
Hawke of the Chicago Botanic Garden and Dr. James E.
Henrich  of  the  Missouri  Botanical  Garden,  whereas  in
the  fall  they  were  joined  by  Bristol  and  R.  William
Thomas,  Longwood’s  education  division  manager.
Daegon Kim of Yeungham University served as the guide
for the fall expedition.

Mount Odae and Mount Kariwang
The  team  assembled  in  Seoul  on  17  September. Three
days  later  they  departed  for  Mount  Odae,  which  had
been explored by Corbett and Lighty twenty-three years
earlier.  On  the  morning  of  21  September,  the  group
climbed to the top of the mountain. The dominant veg-
etation on this ridge, which was all dwarfed and stunted,
included  Abies  nephrolepis (90755),  Quercus  mongolica,
and  Taxus  cuspidata. “On  the  sheltered  slope  below  the
peak  were  ancient,  20  m  tall  trees  of  Taxus,”  recalls
Thomas. “Through the mist and clouds of that day, the
trees could easily have been mistaken for large specimens
of Cedrus.” Meyer describes some of the more widespread
species  on  Mount  Odae:  “Viburnum  sargentii was  a
common shrub across the exposed mountain top but was
seldom seen at the lower elevations. Acer tschonoskii var.
rubripes frequented these higher elevations and it was col-

85

South Korea

Bristol leads the group to the top of Mount Odae through the
forest of maples, oaks, and firs. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Higher  up,  at  about  800  m,  the  explorers  found  Acer
pseudosieboldianum (90756), Actinidia polygama (90762),
and Kalopanax pictus (90776).  Finally,  at  1100  m,  they
encountered  Acer  ukurunduense (90761),  Alangium  pla-
tanifolium var.  macrophyllum (91534–5),  and  Smilacina
japonica (90786).

Mount Chiak and Mount Taebaek
On  25  September  the  group  traveled  to  the  town  of
W˘onju,  some  100  km  southeast  of  Seoul,  where  they
planned  to  explore  the  nearby  Mount  Chiak,  1288  m.
The following morning the team hiked to the summit. “It
was probably the hardest climb of the trip, up very loose
rocky  inclines,”  recalls  Meyer.  “The  peak  was  covered
with Acer pseudosieboldianum, Quercus mongolica, Rhodo-
dendron  schlippenbachii, and  R.  mucronulatum. All  the
trees on the highest part of the mountain were dwarfed.
On the ridge, a little down from the peak, we collected
Carpinus laxiflora (90768). Its leaves were turning yellow
and orange at the time of our visit. This species seemed
to  be  confined  to  the  higher,  dryer  areas,  between  750
and 1200 m, and did not occur in the valleys. Just below
the summit we found Betula ermanii (90766), notable for
its grayish white, exfoliating bark.”

The next day it rained heavily and the explorers ded-
icated the whole day to processing their seeds and herbar-
ium collections. On 28 September the weather improved
enough for the team to spend the morning exploring the
forest at the lower elevation on Mount Chiak, after which
they headed back to Seoul.

March, left, and Meyer with an ancient specimen of Taxus cuspi-
data growing on Mount Odae. Photo by R. William Thomas.

oring  up  with  brilliant  orange-red  color,  whereas  Acer
tegmentosum with clear yellow fall color was found further
down the ridge.” The group’s collections on Mount Odae
were  not  limited  to  trees  and  shrubs;  there  were  many
herbaceous  plants  as  well,  such  as  Cimicifuga  simplex
(90769) with its slender racemes of white flowers, Hepat-
ica maxima (91543) with its beautiful, large, shiny leaves,
and  Hypericum  ascyron (90774)  with  its  golden  yellow
star-shaped flowers up to 8 cm wide.

From Mount Odae the expedition continued on 23
September to Mount Kariwang, 1560 m, located about
40  km  to  the  south.  Two  days  of  botanizing  on  this
mountain  turned  out  to  be  exceedingly  fruitful.  At  the
foot of Mount Kariwang, about 500 m in elevation, they
collected,  among  others,  Carpinus  cordata (90767),  Iris
sanguinea (90775),  and  Rodgersia  podophylla (91551).

86

Seven Mountains

Pinus densiflora, P. koraiensis, and Abies nephrolepis inhabit rocky
ridges on Mount Chiak. Photo by R. William Thomas.

In  Seoul  the  group  spent  a  couple  of  days  cleaning
seeds and processing herbarium specimens before travel-
ing to their next destination, Mount Taebaek, 1561 m.
This  mountain  is  situated  some  100  km  southeast  of
Mount  Chiak  in  the  Taebaek  mountain  range,  South
Korea’s major mountain range paralleling the east coast of
the  peninsula.  Two  days  on  the  mountain  allowed  the
explorers to survey its vegetation from the valleys to the
summit.  On  the  slopes  many  maples,  including  Acer
tegmentosum (90757),  A.  triflorum (90759),  and  A.
tschonoskii var. rubripes (90760), were putting on spectac-
ular fall colors. In an open woodland at about 1300 m,
the  group  came  upon  a  colony  of  Thuja  koraiensis
(91545), notable for its dark green leaves with conspicu-
ous  silver-white  bands  underneath.  Despite  extensive
searching on the sprawling plants, no seeds were found,

Slopes of Mount Taebaek were rich in maple species, including
Acer tegmentosum (90757), A. triflorum (90759), and A. tschonoskii
var. rubripes (90760). Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

and so stem cuttings were collected instead. In contrast,
Pinus  densiflora (90781)  growing  at  the  same  elevation
provided an ample crop of seeds.

Mount Sobaek
On 4 October the team traveled southwest from Mount
Taebaek to the town of Tanyang, some 70 km away. They
intended to explore Mount Sobaek, 1421 m, the south-
ernmost peak of the expedition. On the way the group
stopped at several locations identified during the spring
reconnaissance trip as good plant-hunting sites. “Earlier
in the spring we had identified sites of Syringa velutina
and  Syringa  reticulata var.  mandschurica,”  remembers
Meyer.  “We  were  able  to  relocate  these  but  seed  was
sparse. In the course of looking for the lilacs at a site 2 km
south of Tongjom railroad station, we spotted a number

87

South Korea

bers  Meyer.  “It  grows
commonly  over  the  steep
limestone 
slopes  near
Tanyang. We found many
plants, most of which were
under 1 m tall (91536–8).
The  hills  they  grew  on
were  relatively  devoid  of
other  woody  vegetation.
Scattered  here  and  there
rigida,
were 
Quercus dentata, and nat-
uralized  Robinia  pseudoa-
cacia.”

Juniperus 

Meyer reaching out for the seed capsules of Stew-
artia koreana (90790) growing in the valley of
Huibangsa on the lower slopes of Mount Sobaek.
Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Valleys on the eastern slopes of Mount Sorak
were home to many trees of Acer triflorum,
one of the expedition’s target species. Photo by
Paul W. Meyer.

of  small  plants  of  summer-blooming  Rhododendron
micranthum (90783). Large colonies were growing in thin
soil atop rocky escarpment and near vertical rock faces in
very exposed situations, in virtually full sun. This led me
to believe that they would be heat and drought tolerant
and hardy much farther to the north of Philadelphia.”

The  next  morning  the  group  headed  for  Mount
Sobaek. “The main collection we wanted to make there
was Stewartia koreana,” explains Meyer. “The trees were
plentiful in the valley of Huibangsa on the lower eleva-
tions of Mount Sobaek. We were finding many capsules
but unfortunately most had only sterile seeds and only a
few  well  developed  seeds  were  recovered  (90790).  The
trees  we  saw  were  growing  in  a  protected  valley,  in  the
moist area along a stream as well as in pockets of seem-
ingly fertile, organic soil along the base of rocky ledges.
They were just beginning to show tints of red and yellow
fall  color.” Thomas  adds,  “The  sight  of  these  tall  trees
with  stunningly  attractive  bark  was  one  the  explorers
would never forget.”

On 6 October, after a morning of drying herbarium
specimens  and  processing  seeds,  the  team  explored  an
area northwest of Tanyang. “We hiked for several kilome-
ters in search of Buxus microphylla var. koreana,” remem-

in 

located 

Mount Sorak
The expedition’s next des-
tination  was  Mount
Sorak, 
the
northeastern corner of the
country.  “On  11  October
we  collected  in  relatively
low elevations along a trail
leading from the village Sorak to the main peak of Mount
Sorak,” recalls Meyer. “The principal target species in this
area  was  Acer  triflorum. It  was  plentiful  in  the  lower
valleys on the eastern slopes of Mount Sorak but we did
not find any seed at all. We were more successful in col-
lecting seeds of Sapium japonicum (90784). We were sur-
prised to find Sapium there to be tree-like, unlike those
seen elsewhere, which were shrubby. A tree-form Sapium
would  potentially  be  more  useful  in  the  American
gardens. Some trees were still green with no signs of fall
color;  others  had  taken  on  shades  of  brilliant  red  and
orange. This species grows primarily in the lower parts of
the  valley  although  it  is  high  enough  to  be  above  the
flood plain of the streams.”

During  the  next  two  days,  collecting  efforts  were
somewhat  impaired  by  rain,  but  on  14  October  the
explorers woke to a beautiful blue sky. “We took the trail
that started above the village of Osaek, at about 1000 m,
and led to the summit of Mount Sorak,” recalls Meyer.
“As we ascended the mountain, we could look out and see
clouds which had settled into the nearby valleys. Occa-
sionally,  the  sea  of  clouds  was  pierced  by  neighboring
mountains giving the effect of islands. Once we got into
higher  elevations  the  deciduous  plants  had  already

88

Seven Mountains

While ascending to the top of Mount Sorak, the explorers 
traversed a forest of Quercus mongolica. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

dropped their foliage. The most prominent tree along the
trail  was  Quercus  mongolica, but  Abies  nephrolepis and
Pinus koraiensis were also common. On a ridge at about
1400  m  we  found  also  Thuja  koraiensis (91548)  and
Betula  costata (90765).  The  latter  one  was  exceedingly
variable  and  possibly  some  of  the  plants  had  resulted
from hybridization with another species.”

Mount Songin
The expedition’s last excursion took them on 18 October
to the island of Ullung, visited by Corbett and Lighty in
1966. The  team  took  a  ferry  from  Pohang  to  the  port
town of Todong on the east side of the island. The follow-
ing  morning  they  began  hunting  for  plants  in  the  hills
above Todong. Their exploration of a ridge about 100 m
above  sea  level  resulted  in  a  number  of  collections,
including Aphananthe aspera (90763), Campanula takesi-
mana (91539), and Neolitsea sericea (90780).

The  next  day  the  explorers  crossed  the  island  going
through  a  forest  of Pinus  parviflora (91544)  and  Tsuga
sieboldii. “Though  we  collected  some  seedlings  of  both
species  we  were  disappointed  that  no  seeds  were  found,”
recalls Meyer. “Both trees were loaded with cones but they
had already shed all their seeds. The pine and hemlock grew
together and the ecological association was reminiscent of
the white pine and hemlock forest of Pennsylvania.”

On  20  October  the  expedition’s  destination  was
Mount Songin. At 984 m, it was the highest peak on the
island,  though  the  lowest  of  the  seven  mountains
explored  on  this  expedition.  “In  the  morning  we  were
able to catch a truck ride up to the foot of the mountain,”

Bristol collects seeds of Rhododendron brachycarpum from plants
growing just below the summit of Mount Songin on Ullung
Island. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

remembers Meyer. “This saved us a couple of hours and
allowed more time for collecting. The forest canopy con-
sisted  there  of  Acer  okamotoanum, Fagus  multinervis
(91533), Sorbus commixta, and Styrax obassia. Most of the
trees were multiple-stemmed and we speculated that they
had  been  coppiced  many  years  ago.  From  the  ground
layer we collected Smilacina dahurica, which had bright
red  fruits  in  terminal  spikes,  and  Disporum  viridescens
(91541)  with  steel  blue  fruits.  We  reached  the  top  of
Mount Songin by mid-afternoon and found there large
colonies of Rhododendron brachycarpum heavy with seed.
Interestingly, none of the trees growing on the peak had
any  viable  seeds.  Rhododendrons  were  confined  to  the
area just below the summit on the northern slopes. Some
of them were completely exposed to full sun and wind.”
Two days later the group returned by ferry to Pohang
and  continued  their  journey  back  to  Seoul.  On  28
October the expedition came to an end, and the explor-
ers departed for the United States carrying with them 230
collections representing some of the best plants the seven
mountains had to offer for contemporary gardens.

“We were totally enchanted with the Korean penin-
sula,”  reminisces  Thomas.  “The  memories  of  warm,
friendly, smiling people, rich Korean culture, and beauti-
ful mountainsides clothed in brilliant reds, oranges, and
yellows, would not be forgotten.” Meyer, recognizing that
this expedition only barely began to uncover the botani-
cal treasures of this part of Korea, adds that “because of
its  floristic  diversity  and  harsh  continental  climate,  this
region  continues  to  offer  much  untapped  potential  for
plant exploration.”

89

CHINA

TAIWAN “OFF-LIMITS”

When contemplating a destination for the eleventh joint
USDA-Longwood plant-collecting expedition, Dr. John
L.  Creech,  chief  of  the  USDA  New  Crops  Research
Branch, suggested Taiwan. “This island with its rich sub-
tropical and temperate floras was considered by Ernest H.
Wilson as especially important,” he wrote to Dr. Russell
J.  Seibert,  Longwood’s  director.  “To  my  knowledge,  no
one has collected there since his time [1918]. Yet some of
our most important azaleas including those used in the
Glenn  Dale  hybrids  and  our  forcing  types  come  from
Formosa [Taiwan]. Most of these collections do not exist
any longer, yet we certainly need them to combine with
the  northern  types  I  brought  back  from  Japan.  In  all,
there  are  forty  species  of  Rhododendron on  Formosa,
eleven nominal Camellia species, plus a tremendous array
of  broadleaved  evergreen  trees  and  shrubs”  (Creech
1966a).

Seibert agreed and saw one other reason for exploring
Taiwan: “This area skirts the China mainland from where
it  has  not  been  possible  for  this  country  [the  United
States]  to  obtain  ornamental  plant  materials  for  many
years. Many of the species from this island are co-specific
or similar to those on the adjoining mainland. Taiwan is
currently  relatively  easy  to  penetrate  since  the  high
mountains  have  radar  installations  accessible  by  road.
Accessibility,  however,  is  limited  to  official  personnel
mutually cleared by the United States and Taiwan govern-

ments. It is therefore important that this area be explored
for potential ornamental plants at this time” (R. J. Seibert
1967d).

Retracing Wilson’s steps
Preparations for the expedition to Taiwan began in early
1967. Creech planned to retrace Wilson’s steps, both as to
time and place. In addition, he wanted to visit areas not
explored  previously  from  a  botanical  aspect,  but  which
recently  became  easily  accessible  thanks  to  a  newly
opened highway cutting across Taiwan from east to west.
“Taiwan bristles with mountains that run from north
to south separating the island into a flat, fertile plain on
the western side and a rugged, scarcely populated eastern
region,”  explained  Creech  (1967c).  “This  particular
exploration was restricted to the temperate zone vegeta-
tion which begins at 1800 m and ends with alpine ele-
ments on top of Mount Morrison, or Yushan, at 3997 m.
This is the highest peak of all eastern Asia. Included in
the  array  of  genera  to  be  found  in  these  mountains  are
rhododendrons,  camellias,  hollies,  and  conifers  which
will be useful as breeding materials or for direct introduc-
tion into the nursery trade.”

Creech  arrived  in Taipei  on  8  November  1967.  He
was met there by the staff of the Botany Department of
the National Taiwan University. Two botanists from the
university,  Dr.  Hsu  Chienchang  and  Dr.  Huang  Tsen-
gchieng,  and  a  professional  plant  collector,  Kao  Muht-
suen, accompanied Creech during his travels in Taiwan.

90

Taiwan, an island off the southeast coast of China, is about 450
km long, 140 km wide at its maximum breadth, and has an area
exceeding 35,000 km2. The mountain ranges, which dominate
Taiwan’s landscape, run north to south for nearly the whole length
of the island. There are forty-eight peaks more than 3000 m in
elevation, with Mount Morrison being the highest at 3997 m.
Taiwan lies astride the Tropic of Cancer, and its climate is moder-
ated by the warm Japan Current, resulting in long warm summers
and mild winters. The amount of precipitation varies from 1200
mm on the west coast to more than 6500 mm on the mountain
slopes facing the southeastern sea, most of it coming in the
summer. The mild climate and abundant rainfall result in luxuri-

ant vegetation. There are nearly four thousand species of 
flowering plants and ferns, about 40 percent of which are
endemic. Tropical and subtropical plants, including many
bamboos and palms, grow below 500 m. The most luxuriant,
warm-temperate, mixed forests of conifers and broad-leaved trees
are found below 1800 m. The cool-temperate, coniferous forest
with many broad-leaved evergreen species in the understory occu-
pies areas between 1800 and 2500 m. Above 2500 m, pure stands
of conifers become prominent. Above the timberline at 3500 m,
the vegetation transitions from a dense scrub of mostly junipers,
rhododendrons, and barberries to the alpine tundra found on the
highest peaks at about 3800 m.

China

North of Taipei on Mount Tatung, Creech collected Rhododendron
oldhamii, an azalea species that blooms year-round. It was later
used in the development of fall-flowering hybrid azaleas. Photo by
John L. Creech.

Four  days  later  Creech  and  his  team  went  on  the  first
excursion  to Tatung,  a  1080  m  high  volcanic  peak  just
north Taipei. “It was a good exercise,” remembers Creech,
“because in the sulfur outcroppings on the mountain we
encountered many azaleas and ericaceous plants, includ-
ing  Rhododendron  oldhamii and  Lyonia  ovalifolia
(69219).”

Atop eastern Asia
Creech’s  major  collecting  was  to  take  place  on  Mount
Morrison. On 15 November he started from Chiai by a
small diesel train to Alishan, a logging village and moun-
tain resort at the base of Mount Morrison. “The trip took
about four hours over a frightfully narrow track,” remem-
bers  Creech.  “There  are  over  seventy  bridges  and  more
than forty tunnels as black as pitch and just large enough
for the train. Up to 1200 m, the vegetation was subtrop-
ical. Shortly conifers appeared, Cunninghamia lanceolata
and Cryptomeria japonica, and with them came fog. But
around  2000  m  we  broke  into  sunshine  and  the  peaks
were  bathed  to  a  golden  brown.  The  sky  was  streaked
with gold and the fog settled below like a soft blanket.”
Typhoon Gilda held Creech’s party in Alishan for a
couple  of  days,  but  eventually  they  were  able  to  take  a
logging train up Mount Morrison. “Few visitors traveled
beyond Alishan, and I soon learned why,” wrote Creech
(1987). “The logging train, a series of flatcars and a small
caboose,  departed  Alishan  early  on  November  18.  My
next  stop  was  Tungpu,  a  logging  terminal  about  two
hours away. I chose to ride one of the flatcars rather than

Creech’s party traveled from Alishan to Tungpu by a small logging
train. Photo by John L. Creech.

the  caboose,  which  was  staffed  with  people,  baggage,
chickens, hunks of pork and every logging equipment to
the  point  where  something  of  every  category  stuck  out
the  windows.  Arriving  at  Tungpu,  at  an  elevation  of
around 2600 m, I soon realized that there was no Hilton
here—just a series of unpainted huts with no electricity
or  outside  communications. The  accommodations  were
primitive  and  the  food  suspicious.  But  the  locals  were
exceedingly  friendly  and  concerned  for  my  welfare.
Unfortunately, typhoon Gilda arrived with me. . . . The
rain and wind dissipated shortly, and I was able to spend
the  day  collecting  among  some  magnificent  colonies  of
Pieris  taiwanensis [70598–9].  The  color  of  the  young
growth was so intense that it painted the hillsides bright
orange.” Alishan is part of a plateau-like range with peaks
varying  from  1000  to  2800  m,  situated  to  the  west  of
Mount Morrison. While exploring the slopes of Alishan,
Creech collected, at about 2300 m, Chamaecyparis obtusa
var. formosana (691179) and two rhododendrons, Rhodo-
dendron morii (70580) and R. kawakamii (70579).

Creech,  accompanied  by  two  Taiwanese  collectors
and two porter-guides, left Tungpu early on 19 Novem-
ber:  “Like  all  trails  at  high  elevations,  our  footpath  led
through forested areas to the outer rock ledge, where it
became extremely dangerous. In several places, the route
crossed  narrow  ledges—with  the  sheer  mountainside
above and drops of several hundred feet below. And there
were no handholds” (Creech 1987).

“At one point I was sufficiently scared by the trail that
I wanted to turn back,” admitted Creech (1967a), “but

92

Taiwan “Off-Limits”

Creech’s party on a trail from Tungpu to the summit of Mount
Morrison. Photo by John L. Creech.

Creech collected seeds of Tsuga chinensis var. formosana near
Tungpu at 2600 m, where it was the dominant coniferous tree.
Photo by John L. Creech.

Kao Muhtsuen, a member of Creech’s team, collects seeds of
Juniperus squamata below the summit of Mount Morrison. 
Photo by John L. Creech.

my guide helped me along some 20 feet [6 m] of a 1-foot
[30  cm]  ledge  at  11,000  feet  [3350  m]  with  the  pole
pruner.  When  I  got  on  the  other  side  I  was  shaking
because I knew I had to retrace that point. And these guys
do it all the time!”

evergreen 

For his effort Creech was rewarded with superb col-
lecting and excellent seed crop along the trail: “A hand-
species,  Cotoneaster
some  prostrate 
morrisonensis [681238] lay in broad sheets over the face of
the rocks. We saw Rhododendron oldhamii, usually with
large, bright red flowers above densely hairy stems, and
once a shrubby Euonymus [E. pallidifolius 681240] with
such pink fruits and bright red arils that it looked like a
flowering  quince  at  a  distance.  The  handsome  Lilium
philippinense [69215]  was  everywhere  along  the  trail,
both in flower and with seed capsules” (Creech 1987).

By late afternoon Creech’s team reached a small hut
below  the  summit  at  a  place  called  Taipingshan.  “The
imperfect  weather  had  cleared  earlier  in  the  day,  so  we
had  a  clear  view  of  the  massif  above  us,”  remembered
Creech (1987). “It was a mixture of the greens of rhodo-
dendrons and junipers with bright red barberry foliage in
a  broad  band,  while  above  us  was  a  pale  mass  of  loose
shale. I spent the rest of the day collecting from individ-
ual rhododendrons while Kao and a porter picked juniper
berries  and  barberry  fruits.  The  rhododendron,  R.
pseudochrysanthum [71247–53], occurs only above 3000
m and is almost prostrate near the mountain’s peak, with
shiny ovate leaves that are heavily matted beneath. The
plants grow in large colonies in open, rocky, windswept
situations  and  are  said  to  be  a  grand  sight  when  they
bloom in April and May.”

93

China

Mixed forest of Tsuga chinensis var. formosana and Juniperus 
squamata below the summit of Mount Morrison. Photo by 
John L. Creech.

A view west towards China from the top of Mount Morrison.
Photo by John L. Creech.

Creech at the summit of Mount Morrison. Photo by John L.
Creech.

The next morning the group rose early and were on
their  way  to  the  top  by  7:30  a.m.  “As  we  ascended  we
continued  our  collecting  until  we  passed  the  stands  of
juniper  and  barberry,”  wrote  Creech  (1987).  “Now  the
path provided only narrow footing, causing us to wander
back  and  forth  just  for  purchase.  We  reached  a  place
called the ‘wind-hole,’ a gully that fell for over a thousand
feet  [300  m].  ‘Danger’  said  a  red  sign  in  Chinese—for
strong winds have been known to sweep climbers to their
death  at  this  point.  We  passed  across  the  gully  several
times and finally scrambled up to the top of Mount Mor-
rison. There  we  stood  surveying  the  distant  valleys  and
looking toward the mainland of China. . . . Although it
was early afternoon, and the sun was bright and warm,
long cloud fingers were beginning to stretch up from the
valleys  below.  We  knew  it  was  time  to  descend.  The

downward trip was more sliding and faster than going up.
Soon we were at the hut, where steaming bowls of rice fla-
vored  with  sugar  and  dried  daylily  flowers  were  passed
around. The  next  morning,  November  21,  we  retraced
our path downward, much more aware of the dangerous
footing. We reached the logging road in about six hours.
Exhilarated  by  the  successes  of  the  climb,  we  spent  the
night in Tungpu. We returned to Alishan on the morning
of the 22nd by logging train. This time we rode in the
caboose, which was now hooked onto a chain of flatcars
each  bearing  three  gigantic  logs  that  appeared  rather
loosely tied.”

After  this  exhausting  ascent  to  Mount  Morrison,
Creech confessed in a letter to Seibert, “At first I intended
to  collect  at  the  lower  elevations,  6000–8000  feet
[1850–2450 m], but by the time I had gotten there, I had

94

Taiwan “Off-Limits”

risked my neck enough on the trails that I finally climbed
to the summit, 3997 m, and collected a fine lot of mate-
rial, some much desired rhododendrons and a large quan-
tity of seed of Juniperus squamata, from the summit of the
mountain. I believe I am the first American collector to
ascend  Mount  Morrison  since  Ernest  Wilson  in  1918.
After making the climb myself, I marvel at what he did
under certainly lesser conditions. But I am sure the trail
is no different for if it were worse, he probably would not
have made it” (Creech 1967b).

Back in Taipei, Creech undertook short day-trips to
the mountains south of Taipei, where mostly subtropical
species may be found. “On 28 November, we had a short
trip to the village of Wulai,” he recalls. “This is a hilly area
through which the Hokusei River winds. The road ends
at  Wulai  and  from  there  we  used  local  transportation.
This  consisted  of  75  cm  single  rail  track  and  a  flat  car
pushed  by  a  driver  who  kneeled  as  one  might  do  in  a
child’s  wagon.  The  passengers  sat  on  small  boxes  and
away we went, first at foot speed, later at a moderate clip,
according to the grade. We stopped from time to time to
collect but were always on the lookout for cars coming in
the opposite direction. In such instances, we jumped off,
and the driver merely flips the cart off the track to a ‘lay-
by’ as the other car passes.” Collecting near Wulai at an
elevation  of  about  300  to  400  m,  Creech  found  pink-
flowered  Lagerstroemia  subcostata (69213),  Lasianthus
chinensis
(691183),  and  Rhododendron  kanehiraei
(70578).

Following the East-West Highway
The second part of Creech’s trip was by jeep over a newly
opened  East-West  Highway. This  road,  completed  only
two years earlier, opened up rugged territory previously
untapped  by  plant  collectors.  On  1  December,  Creech
and his party left Taipei to undertake a collecting trip to
Hohuan Pass, 3178 m, along the East-West Highway.

“Unfortunately,  the  direct  route  to  Lishan  near
Hohuan Pass had been washed out and we had to follow
a secondary road,” recalls Creech. “It was a one way track
and as we ascended, the fog closed in and by 6 p.m. it was
so thick that the driver was afraid to go on so we stopped
at  a  small  forestry  station  for  the  night.  The  next
morning, the weather had cleared and found us on the
road again where we passed through some fine evergreen
forests around 1700 to 2300 m. The road was simply cut
into  the  steep  slope  and  there  was  no  way  to  go  up  or

Creech, center, and his party at a stop along the East-West
Highway. Photo by John L. Creech.

Kao reaches out for the fruit-laden branches of a holly growing
near Hohuan Pass. Photo by John L. Creech.

down but along the roadside there were ample opportu-
nities to collect and we paused to walk to take advantage
of this.”

After a night at another forestry station, they woke to
find snow on the ground, with more falling. “We drove
over the pass and stopped in the shelter of a ledge from
where we climbed on foot,” remembers Creech. “But the
wind was so fierce we could only make a few collections
of rhododendrons and junipers and drive down to lower
elevations.”

From Hohuan Pass, Creech’s team drove to Lishan, a
popular  mountain  resort.  While  driving  through  lush
forests covering mountain slopes above 2000 m, Creech
made  several  stops.  Azaleas,  rhododendrons,  camellias,
evergreen oaks, and conifers flourished along the route,
and  Creech  collected  a  number  of  plants,  including

95

China

the  rhododendrons  stood  out  bright  green.  On  rocky
walls,  Cotoneaster  morrisonensis hung  like  strands  of  red
beads  and  junipers  almost  dripped  off  the  ledges,  their
branches were so pendulous. It was a harsh landscape and
no place for agriculture.” The route took Creech’s team to
Sun  Moon  Lake,  where  they  visited  a  small  forestry
station. At the station they acquired a number of woody
plants, including Castanopsis carlesii (69193) and Ketelee-
ria  davidiana (69212).  Near  the  lake  Creech  collected
broad-leaved  evergreen  shrubs  such  as  Daphniphyllum
pentandrum var.  oldhamii
(70761),  Rhododendron
lasiostylum (73554), and Tutcheria shinkoensis (71336).

Unhappy collector
Creech returned from his Hohuan trip on 6 December
and spent the following two days working in the herbar-
ium of the National Taiwan University. Then, on 9 and
10  December,  he  visited  the  National  Forestry  Bureau’s
Experimental Forest at Chito near Taichung. “Here, the
rare Taiwania cryptomerioides [69231] is still grown in a
natural state,” wrote Creech (1967c). “A nursery planting
will replenish this conifer and here I obtained both seed
and seedlings to introduce into the United States.” This
handsome evergreen with drooping branches is related to
cypress, Cupressus, and is becoming rare as a wild tree in
Taiwan.

A  few  days  later  the  course  of  this  expedition  was
abruptly altered. On 15 December, Creech was standing
on a plaza at National Taiwan University about to enter a
taxi. “Suddenly, I heard a terrific roar,” he recalled. “I was
thrown up in the air and landed in total dismay with the
same roaring in my face. A student on a motorcycle had
been  speeding  across  the  plaza  and  had  somehow  lost
control. As he passed me from the rear he caught my leg
with  the  motorcycle’s  footrest.  I  staggered  to  my  feet,
dazed but still conscious enough to know that I did not
want to go to any hospital but an American one. So I col-
lapsed  into  the  taxi  and  shouted,  ‘American  Embassy!’”
(Creech 1987).

Creech was taken to an emergency room of an Amer-
ican military hospital, where he was treated. “Fortunately,
there were no broken bones,” he wrote to Seibert, “but
sufficient muscle damage to my right leg and tail that the
Navy doctor decided I was finished as far as field work
was concerned” (Creech 1968).

Thus Creech spent the next two days packing his col-
lections and departed Taipei on 18 December: “So ended

Creech collects seedlings of Taiwania cryptomerioides (69231) at
the National Forestry Bureau’s Experimental Forest at Chito near
Taichung. Photo by John L. Creech.

Camellia  nokoensis (71327),  Gordonia  axillaris (69198),
and Hydrangea integrifolia (70591), a rare evergreen vine
climbing on oaks.

“By early afternoon we were hungry and returned to
the  forestry  station  at  Hohuan  Pass,”  recalls  Creech.
“Again  the  fog  moved  in  and  it  snowed  with  a  bitter
wind. We searched the rocky ravines near the station for
rhododendrons despite ice forming on the plants. After a
fine day of collecting we returned to the station and an
evening  by  the  fireside  was  especially  pleasant  even
though the thermometer seemed stuck at 10ºC.”

The  following  morning  the  team  started  back  to
Taichung  by  a  new  road.  “It  was  interesting  to  see  the
alpine  bamboo—solid  brown,  except  where  conifers
stood  gnarled  and  twisted  covered  with  moss  and
lichens,”  notes  Creech.  “In  shale  ravines  and  meadows,

96

Stepping onto the Mainland

the Taiwan collecting, several weeks before my scheduled
return.  Fortunately  there  was  no  permanent  damage—
but  it  surely  was  an  unhappy  collector  who  struggled
onto a plane for the long flight home” (Creech 1987).

Creech  returned  home  with  about  150  collections.
“In general, collecting in Taiwan presents no difficulties
provided  one  has  official  assistance,”  he  concluded
(1967c). “All mountain areas are ‘off-limits’ and require
special passes for entry, both by locals and foreigners. . . .
Native stands of plants are fast disappearing and as roads
are developed, the forests are heavily cut and replaced by
introduced  species.  There  are,  however,  some  regions
such as at Mount Morrison which are so steep that they
are still untouched.”

STEPPING ONTO THE MAINLAND

Ever  since  the  United  States  lifted  the  ban  on  travel  to
China in 1972 and the relations between the two coun-
tries  began  to  normalize,  horticulturists  and  botanists
alike  made  plans  for  exploration  of  China’s  floristic
resources. In 1974 the National Academy of Sciences sent
the first Plant Studies Delegation to China. Creech, who
was among the delegates, recalls: “One goal of the delega-
tion was to discuss ways for exchange of germplasm and
to undertake collection of important plants. The delega-
tion brought seed samples including seed from the U.S.
National  Arboretum  and  Longwood  Gardens,  and
received  seed  collections  from  the  People’s  Republic  of
China in return.”

Official delegation exchanges in the 1970s paved the
way in 1980 for the first joint plant-collecting expedition
to China sponsored by the Botanical Society of America
and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. With new oppor-
tunities arising in China, a number of institutions with
an interest in plant exploration and botanical exchanges
formed in 1991 the North American–China Plant Explo-
ration  Consortium  (NACPEC).  Longwood  Gardens
joined  this  consortium  the  following  year.  NACPEC’s
main  goal  was  to  facilitate  cooperation  between  the
botanical  gardens  and  arboreta  in  North  America  and
similar institutions in China in the area of plant explo-
ration. NACPEC member institutions included, in addi-
tion  to  Longwood  Gardens,  Arnold  Arboretum  of
Harvard  University  in  Jamaica  Plain,  Massachusetts;
Holden Arboretum in Kirtland, Ohio; Morris Arboretum

Left to right, with their Chinese hosts, are Meyer, Thomas, Del
Tredici, and Conrad, assembled in Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, on 
6 September 1994. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  Philadelphia;
Morton  Arboretum  in  Lisle,  Illinois;  the  U.S.  National
Arboretum  in  Washington;  the  University  of  British
Columbia  Botanical  Garden  in  Vancouver;  and  the
USDA Woody Landscape Plants Germplasm Repository
in Glenn Dale, Maryland.

Hubei’s Taoist epicenter
In  1994,  R.  William  Thomas,  Longwood’s  education
division  manager,  joined  NACPEC’s  plant-collecting
expedition to the Wudang Mountains in northern Hubei
Province. Alongside Thomas, the team was made up of
Kevin  P.  Conrad,  curator  of  the  herbarium  at  the  U.S.
National  Arboretum,  Paul  W.  Meyer,  director  of  the
Morris Arboretum, and Dr. Peter Del Tredici, director of
living collections at the Arnold Arboretum.

The team assembled on 6 September in Nanjing, the
capital of Jiangsu Province on the banks of the Yangtze.
They  were  greeted  by  Professor  He  Shanan,  director  of
the Nanjing Botanical Garden, who helped organize the
expedition. Two botanists from the garden, Mao Cailiang
and  Hao  Riming,  were  assigned  to  accompany  the
explorers  to  Wudang  Mountains  in  Hubei  Province,
located some 700 km west of Nanjing.

Five days later the team reached the village of Guan
Shan  in  the  foothills  of  the  Wudang  Mountains.  “We
arrived at Guan Shan around midday and were immedi-
ately  met  by  the  local  officials,”  recalls  Meyer.  “Our
group was received very cordially and the officials prom-
ised to do everything they could to facilitate our visit. We

97

Stepping onto the Mainland

China (left), with an area of more than 9.5 million km2, is the
largest country in east Asia. Mountains—among them the world’s
highest, Mount Everest, 8848 m—make up about a third of
China’s territory. Highlands with elevations above 4500 m occupy
an additional fifth of the land area. These two prominent features
of China’s topography, along with the proximity of Siberia to the
north and the Pacific to the east, directly affect its climate and veg-
etation. The mean annual temperature decreases from about 20ºC
in the south to below 0ºC in the north. The rainfall generally
decreases from the southeast to the northwest. While the annual
rainfall may exceed 2000 mm along the southeast coast, in desert
areas of the northwest it is less than 10 mm. Most of the rain falls
during the summer months. China can be divided into two major
floristic regions: the dry northwestern areas belong to the Irano-
Turanian region, the humid southeastern areas to the Eastern
Asiatic region. In addition, the most southerly parts of the main-
land and the islands of the South China Sea support tropical vege-
tation. With the exception of tundra, all types of the Northern
Hemisphere’s vegetation types can be found in China. The
number of species of seed plants in China is estimated at about
thirty thousand. Lack of extensive topographic barriers between
tropical, temperate, and cold regions has led to a great variety and
intermixture of tropical and temperate plants in China. The tropi-
cal forests of southern China bear close affinity to those of other
regions of southeastern Asia, whereas the vegetation of northwest-
ern China resembles that of Kazakhstan, Mongolia, and Russia.

were  told  we  were  the  first Westerners  to  ever  visit  this
village.”

Stretching  across  400  km,  the  Wudang  Mountains
boast seventy-two jagged peaks, of which Tianzhu Feng,
at 1612 m, is the highest. These mountains were chosen
as the target for the expedition because of their exception-
ally diverse flora, considered among the richest in China,
portions of which still remain in a relatively undisturbed
state. The Wudang Mountains were an important Taoist
center during the Ming Dynasty (1368–1644), dozens of
temples, shrines, and pavilions erected on their slopes.

“Remnants  of  ancient  forest  in  China  are  typically
found only in the vicinity of Buddhist or Taoist temples,”
explains Del Tredici, “hence the relatively good condition
of the forests of the Wudang Mountains. At lower eleva-
tions,  below  about  600  m,  the  forests  have  either  been
replaced by field crops or are being intensely managed for
fuel wood production through coppicing. The relatively
undisturbed  forest  still  exists  above  900  m  on  slopes
punctuated  by  inaccessible  peaks,  steep  cliff  faces,  and
boulder-strewn valleys.”

This is just one of many temples erected on the slopes of 
Tianzhu Feng, a reflection of this mountain’s significance as a
Taoist religious center. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

On  12  September,  the  first  day  of  collecting,  the
explorers  woke  up  to  blaring  loudspeakers.  “To  our
dismay,  the  speakers,  located  just  outside  our  bedroom
window,  broadcasted  political  messages  throughout  the
village,” explains Meyer. “After a bountiful breakfast, we
boarded  a  van  and  proceeded  to  the  trailhead.  It  had
rained the night before and the dirt roads that were cut
into  the  mountainside  were  dangerously  slippery.  The
driver soon informed us that he could not risk going any
further and that we would have to walk to the trailhead.
This added another 6 km to the day’s journey. All the veg-
etation on the roadside was heavily disturbed. Only a few
wild plants grew on the cliffs and small areas between the
fields.  As we ascended the mountain, we  entered a sec-
ondary  growth  forest  dominated  by  Quercus  variabilis

99

China

(95480). A particularly interesting collection of that day
was  Catalpa  bungei. It  was  growing  in  the  middle  of  a
steep, terraced hillside of soybeans and corn.” Del Tredici
considers this “the most beautiful of all Catalpa species.”

Botanical pilgrimage
On 14 September the team relocated to Wudang Shan at
the  foot  of  Tianzhu  Feng.  After  a  day  of  working  on
herbarium specimens, they pushed toward the mountains
despite  steady  rain.  The  paved  road  took  them  up
Tianzhu Feng to about 900 m, from where they contin-
ued on the trail leading to Nanyan Palace, dating from
the Tang Dynasty (618–907), and to a group of temples
built directly into the cliff face. “As we looked down from
the temples into the valley below, we could see nothing
but the gray fog,” remembers Meyer. “The swirling mist
which blew into the temple through the window grates
gave it a mystical atmosphere.” For two days the explor-
ers  botanized  on  the  coppiced  slopes  of  Tianzhu  Feng
between 600 and 900 m, where they found many shrubs,
including  Deutzia  grandiflora (98334),  Rhododendron
mariesii (98347), and Wikstroemia pampaninii (9626).

On 18 September they set out early in the morning
for a hike up the slopes of Tianzhu Feng to about 1400
m. A steep stone path led to the summit, crowned by a
Taoist  temple.  While  the  vegetation  in  the  immediate
vicinity of the stone path was impacted by thousands of
pilgrims, a well-preserved forest was accessible through a
network of less-traveled secondary trails.

“Once we left the main trail, we began to see for the
first time the mature forest that we had come to Hubei
for,”  recalls  Meyer.  “Soon  we  came  upon  Euptelea
pleiosperma (95558), a small tree with smooth gray bark
and  a  heavy  load  of  winged  fruits,  and  Acer  davidii
(95562), a striped-bark maple growing on a rocky ledge.
Further up the ravine we found a colony of a low-growing
Hydrangea  aspera (98339).  On  the  other  side  of  the
ravine,  I  spotted  a  tree  that  appeared  to  have  white
flowers. We worked our way across to the plant and dis-
covered  that  we  were  seeing  persistent  bracts  of
Emmenopterys henryi (98335).”

The  following  day  the  team  chose  an  easier  paved
path and a series of stone stairs used by the pilgrims that
took them all the way to the summit of Tianzhu Feng.
This is where the temple stood, topped with its golden
roof. On the way down the explorers followed a less-trav-

eled,  muddy,  treacherous  path  on  the  north  side  of  the
mountain. This allowed them access to relatively undis-
turbed forest where they made many collections, includ-
ing  Acanthopanax  henryi (961037),  Staphylea  bumalda
(95559), and Viburnum erosum (96384).

Heavenly forest
On 20 September the explorers hiked on the east face of
Tianzhu  Feng.  “The  weather  was  alternately  foggy  and
rainy creating a mysterious mood in the forest,” remem-
bers  Del  Tredici.  “Shortly  after  leaving  the  main  trail
leading to the summit, we entered a forest dominated by
large  specimens  Pinus  tabulaeformis and  Quercus  aliena.
Our  local  guide,  Zeng,  a  collector  of  medicinal  plants,
pointed  out  two  specimens  of  Stewartia  sinensis with
beautiful,  smooth  cinnamon-red  bark,  a  wonder  to
behold and touch. Growing nearby were several Cornus
kousa and a small specimen of Acer griseum. The Ameri-
cans in the group could hardly contain their excitement,
as  though  they  had  died  and  gone  to  horticultural
heaven. The only thing missing, sadly, was seed on any of
the  plants,  probably  due  to  the  previous  summer’s
drought. The understory of this exquisite forest consisted
of  the  beautiful  evergreen  holly,  Ilex pernyi; the  ubiqui-
tous Chinese spicebush, Lindera glauca; and Lyonia oval-
ifolia var. elliptica (98343). The forest floor was carpeted
with a bewildering array of ferns and herbaceous perenni-
als, including species of Aconitum, Cimicifuga, and Ligu-
laria, all  in  flower.  Jack-in-the-pulpits,  Arisaema, were
everywhere,  their  stalks  heavy  with  seed,  along  with
species of Epimedium and Rodgersia aesculifolia (95490).”
About noontime, the group found a small cave at the
base of a cliff, where they took shelter from the cold rain
and warmed up by the fire. In the afternoon, collecting
continued. Growing on a cliff face was an ancient speci-
men  of  Zelkova  sinica consisting  of  five  massive  trunks
covered  with  bright  orange,  exfoliating  bark  that  stood
out of the thick mist.

“A  little  way  beyond  the  Zelkova, we  found
Hamamelis  mollis (95560),  loaded  with  unopened  seed
capsules,”  recalls  Del  Tredici.  “We  were  particularly
pleased  to  collect  this  winter-blooming  species,  which
had  recently  been  gaining  popularity.  After  seeing  so
many plants without seed, it was a treat to find one in
fruit,  and  we  greedily  collected  every  seed  capsule  we
could find.”

100

Stepping onto the Mainland

In the lower-elevation areas of the Wudang mountains, the forests
have been replaced by field crops or are intensely coppiced for fuel
wood. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Del Tredici crosses a creek on the west side of the town of Yan Chi
He. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Meyer, Mao, Del Tredici, and Hao, left to right, head to the
mountains around the town of Yan Chi He. Photo by R. William
Thomas.

Small but very sweet nuts of Castanea henryi (95485) collected
from a moist ravine north of the town of Yan Chi He. 
Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Good fortune
The following day the group came down from the moun-
tain to Wudang Shan, spent a day organizing their collec-
tions, and on 23 September headed off southeast toward
the town of Yan Chi He. During the next three days they
explored  the  mountains  around  the  town.  In  the  hills
west of Yan Chi He, at an elevation of 750 m, they col-
lected Callicarpa japonica (98332), Philadelphus pekinen-
sis (97360), and several rhododendrons. In a moist ravine
north  of  the  town  they  found  Kolkwitzia  amabilis
(98341), while a hike along a creek on the west side of
Yan  Chi  He  resulted  in  collections  of  Camellia  oleifera
(96856) and Pistacia chinensis (95568), both oil-bearing
plants, and Castanea henryi (95485), said to have small
but very sweet nuts.

From  Yan  Chi  He,  the  expedition  traveled  to  the
town  of  Lang  He.  For  the  next  two  days  the  team  col-
lected on the hillsides surrounding the nearby village of
Bai  Yang  Ping.  “Although  the  hillsides  closest  to  the
village  had  been  recently  coppiced,  we  still  found  a
number  of  interesting  species,”  remembers  Meyer.
“Among the species collected the first day were Fortun-
earia sinensis (95576), Hovenia acerba (96569), and Mal-
lotus apelta (98344). The second day we entered a deep
gorge  with  mature  trees.  The  further  we  went  up  the
gorge, the larger the trees we saw. The path we followed
worked its way up the narrow gorge, often crossing over
moss covered and slippery rocks. At times the path disap-
peared  altogether  and  we  waded  up  the  stream.  The
superb and exotic scenery compensated for the treacher-

101

China

Thanks to its orange exfoliating bark, Zelkova sinica stood out in
the thick mist of the forest on the slopes of Tianzhu Feng. 
Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

This 20 m tall Emmenopterys henryi (96568) was found in an 
isolated valley on the northwestern side of Tianzhu Feng. Zeng
climbed it barefoot to collect seeds. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

ous  hiking.  Pterostyrax  psilophylla (96570),  growing
among the rocks on the stream edge, was the most excit-
ing find of the day. We had only spotted one tree of this
species  on  the  whole  trip  and  fortunately  it  had  fertile
seeds. Also growing along the stream edge was Pterocarya
hupehensis (95564). We tried to collect seed of this tree
before but found nothing but sterile seeds. This time we
were lucky to find a small number of viable seeds.”

Return to the holy mountain
On  30  September  the  expedition  departed  Lang  He  to
return to Tianzhu Feng. “We felt that the last few days of
the trip could be best spent in rich areas that we had seen
previously,  but  had  relatively  little  time  to  collect,”
explains Meyer. Arriving at Wudang Shan in midmorn-

ing,  they  set  off  to  the  area  where  they  had  seen  Acer
griseum a few days earlier.

“At about 900 m on a steep northwest-facing slope,
we found two large specimens of Acer griseum (95570),
covered with seed,” remembers Del Tredici. “Throughout
this area of mature forest, we saw numerous saplings and
seedlings of this species growing in dense shade on very
steep,  well-drained  terrain.  Acer  griseum appeared  to  be
clearly  able  to  persist  under  conditions  of  deep  shade,
periodic drought, and intense root competition. When a
gap in the forest canopy develops, this maple is perfectly
positioned to expand into the newly available space. Our
excitement  at  finding  Acer  griseum was  exceeded  only
when we noticed two other trees with bright orange bark
farther up the slope. More Stewartia sinensis, we thought

102

Tapping the Qinling Mountains

at first, but on closer examination we discovered them to
be specimens of Zelkova sinica. Its orange bark exfoliating
in discrete plates like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, was every
bit as spectacular as that of Acer griseum.”

The next day the group headed up another isolated
valley  facing  northwest  on  Tianzhu  Feng.  “Climbing  a
steep,  moist  ravine,  almost  immediately  we  were  in  the
midst  of  numerous  herbaceous  plants,  many  in  full
flower,” says Del Tredici. “Further up the slope, at about
1200 m in elevation, we came upon a particularly excit-
ing  find—a  giant  specimen  of  Emmenopterys  henryi
(96568), some 20 m tall. Its persistent bracts subtending
flower clusters were taking on a rose-to-tan color as the
small fruits ripened. Our local guide, Zeng, showed no
hesitation  about  climbing  the  tree  barefoot  in  order  to
collect  some  seed.  For  the  Americans,  it  was  a  thrill  to
find  this  species  considered  by  some,  one  of  the  most
strikingly beautiful trees of the Chinese forests.”

Upon  completing  their  work  on Tianzhu  Feng,  the
explorers headed back to Lang He, and on 4 October the
team  began  their  week-long  trip  back  to  the  United
States. The  expedition  returned  home  with  192  lots  of
seed, cuttings, and small plants. Del Tredici characterizes
their collections: “We have succeeded in bringing in new
germplasm  of  species  already  in  cultivation  in  North
America but represented by only one or two prior collec-
tions that may or may not include the hardiest ecotype
available. We also made a contribution to the ex situ con-
servation  of  several  rare  Chinese  plants,  such  as
Emmenopterys henryi, that were threatened by extinction
due  to  widespread  habitat  destruction.  And,  finally,  we
introduced into cultivation several species that had never
been grown in the United States. We were all struck by
how little natural vegetation remained in Hubei. Even in
remote mountain areas, agriculture has encroached on all
but  the  steepest  mountainsides.  It  is  only  in  the  most
remote mountain valleys that the remnants of the diverse
flora of Hubei can be found. It was clear that the natural
flora is on the edge of being eradicated. Collections from
this trip will contribute to the preservation of the biodi-
versity of the Wudang Mountains.”

TAPPING THE QINLING MOUNTAINS

The next expedition to China, organized under the aus-
pices of NACPEC, took place in 1996. Conrad and Rick

J.  Lewandowski,  curator  and  director  of  horticulture  at
the  Morris  Arboretum,  jointly  led  the  team,  which
included  Dr.  James  R.  Ault,  representing  Longwood
Gardens, and Kunso Kim, curator of the Norfolk Botan-
ical Garden in Norfolk, Virginia. The Qinling Mountains
of Shaanxi and Gansu provinces were chosen as the area
to be explored. “Our objectives were to collect, protect,
and  preserve  plant  materials  from  an  area  previously
ignored  by  plant  collectors,”  wrote  Kim  (1997).
“Attracted by the rich and diverse Chinese flora, botanists
around the world . . . explored many parts of the country,
but  curiously,  the  plant  communities  of  the  Qinling
Mountains  in  Shaanxi  Province  in  central  China
remained untapped.”

The rich floristic diversity of these mountains offered
much  that  these  plant  explorers  wanted  to  tap.  “The
Qinling  Mountain  Range  stretches  from  northeast  of
Beijing to southwestern China, ending west of Xian City
in Shaanxi Province,” explained Kim (1997). “This moun-
tain range has precipitous slopes, deep gorges, and rugged
peaks. Breathtaking mountains stretch as far as the eye can
see, and the sharply rising peaks appear to be a series of saw
teeth on the flat plain of the horizon. The Qinling Moun-
tain Range runs from east to west and acts as a geographic
barrier  blocking  the  dry,  wintry  wind  blowing  from  the
north  and  capturing  the  heavy  precipitation  from  the
summer monsoons carried from the south. The southern
slopes  of  the  Qinling  Mountain  Range  have  an  average
minimum temperature just above the freezing point. This
provides a mild climate and supports mixtures of subtrop-
ical  and  temperate  plant  communities.  More  than  1500
species are native to the Qinling Mountains.”

Unfortunately, the diversity of plants in the Qinling
Mountains  has  been  threatened,  as  in  other  parts  of
China, by extensive deforestation: “The overexploitation
of natural resources has inevitably resulted in the extinc-
tion  of  many  beautiful  plants. With  a  sense  of  urgency
due to this habitat destruction, NACPEC organized the
plant exploration in Shaanxi and Gansu provinces to save
and  bring  back  garden-worthy  and  endangered  plants”
(Kim 1997).

With  their  compass  set  on  the  Qinling  Mountains,
the  team  assembled  in  Xian,  the  capital  of  Shaanxi
Province,  on  2  September. They  were  met  by  Professor
Cui  Tiecheng,  deputy  director  of  the  Xian  Botanical
Garden,  who  would  guide  the  expedition  through
Shaanxi and Gansu.

103

China

Bright red seeds of Paris polyphylla (9724) collected in the Liping
Forest Station in Qinling Mountains. Photo by James R. Ault.

A stream led the explorers up a ravine deep into the Foping
Nature Reserve in Qinling Mountains. Photo by Rick J.
Lewandowski.

Hydrangea aspera ssp. strigosa (961593) was collected at 1700 m 
in the Liping Forest Station in Qinling Mountains. Photo by 
Rick J. Lewandowski.

Floating in the mist
The expedition started with a trip to the town of Foping,
some 150 km southwest of Xian. “Our first collection site
was Foping Nature Reserve,” noted Kim (1997). “After
leaving Xian City, which was our home base, and driving
in the two land cruisers for five hours through the coun-
tryside of endless flat corn fields, everyone was excited at
the sight of the mountain peaks appearing to float in the
mist. As we approached the mountains, a dramatic view
was revealed—sheer, steep cliffs and rock faces jutting out
above the road.”

During the first three days of exploring the Foping
Nature  Reserve,  the  group  collected  a  wealth  of  plants.
Among  the  plants  collected  were  trees  such  as  Acer
stachyophyllum (98261–2),  Magnolia  sprengeri (98258),

and  Tsuga  chinensis (9754);  shrubs  such  as  Deutzia  vil-
morinae (961584–5), Euptelea pleiosperma (961586), and
Viburnum erosum (9761); and garden-worthy perennials
such  as  Actaea  asiatica (961615),  Cimicifuga  foetida
(961612), and Tricyrtis latifolia (9752).

“On  9  September,”  noted  Kim  (1997),  “we  left
Foping Reserve in order to move to Yue Ba Station; while
still within the reserve it is located eighty miles [130 km]
from  the  previous  station.  We  drove  an  unpaved  and
bumpy  road,  the  conditions  being  especially  bad  after
heavy  rains  for  more  than  a  week.”  Collections  around
the Yue Ba Station during the following couple of days
were especially fruitful and resulted in the acquisition of
seeds of many tree and shrub species, including, among
others,  Idesia  polycarpa var.  vestita (98274),  Magnolia
biondii (98259), and Sinowilsonia henryi (9742).

104

Tapping the Qinling Mountains

Atop Ning Shan are, left to right, Conrad, Ault, Kim, and
Lewandowski. Photo by Rick J. Lewandowski.

Kim, Conrad, and Lewandowski, left to right, collect seeds of
Abies fargesii (961565) on Ning Shan in Qinling Mountains.
Photo by Rick J. Lewandowski.

its south side. Their destination was Ning Shan County
and the mountain of the same name, 2840 m high.

“This mountain exemplifies the diverse flora occur-
ring in different plant communities,” noted Kim (1997).
“We started climbing at 1400 feet [420 m] elevation at
Ning Shan and hiked up to 9000 feet [2750 m]. Vegeta-
tion  changes  as  we  ascended  were  fascinating.  Broad-
leaved  evergreens,  including  Machilus, Phoebe, Ilex,
Holboellia, Sinofranchetia, and  Cephalotaxus, dominate
the low elevation. An array of interesting perennials, such
as  Rodgersia, Paeonia, and  Ligularia, occur  as  ground
covers.  As  we  went  higher,  the  vegetation  gradually
changed  to  mixed  forest  and  included  maples,  oaks,
mountain-ashes, roses, and lilacs. The high atmospheric
moisture  and  rich  organic  soil  present  throughout  the
mountains  create  a  favorable  growing  habitat.  At  over
6000 feet [1850 m], rhododendrons, firs, and Cimicifuga
make  their  home.  The  surface  of  the  ground  was  so
thickly covered with moss that it felt as if we were step-
ping on sponge carpet. . . . Above 8000 feet [2450 m] the
rhododendron  forest  abruptly  ended  and  a  barren  peak
appeared and as we reached the fog-laden peak, a field of
blue  greeted  us.  In  between  the  windswept  Potentilla,
Rhododendron, Berberis, Salix, and Juniperus, a large field
of blue-flowered gentians in full bloom formed a carpet
that covered the whole peak.”

This rich area kept the explorers busy for four days.
The 
low-elevation  forest  afforded  such  finds  as
Cephalotaxus  fortunei (961580),  Lindera  neesiana (977),
Phoebe  faberi (9726),  and  three  species  of  Ligularia: 
L. dolichobotrys (961599), L. nelumbifolia (961601), and

Conrad, left, and Kim with seeds of Paeonia mairei (9721) col-
lected on Ning Shan in Qinling Mountains. Photo by Rick J.
Lewandowski.

On 14 September the group traveled south to Liping,
a  small  town  near  the  border  between  Shaanxi  and
Sichuan.  The  next  three  days  were  spent  collecting
around the Liping Forest Station. Among the plants col-
lected  were  several  new  perennials,  including  Lilium
brownii var. colchesteri (976), Paris polyphylla (9724), and
Tricyrtis  macropoda (9753);  shrubs,  including  Camellia
oleifera (961576),  Euptelea  pleiosperma (961587),  and
Hydrangea aspera ssp. strigosa (961593); and trees, includ-
ing Betula utilis (98264), Crataegus wilsonii (98272), and
Pinus henryi (9729).

Blue-carpeted mountain
A couple of days later the group crossed the main range
of the Qinling Mountains again and found themselves on

105

China

Widespread deforestation was observed by the explorers on the
slopes of Ning Shan in Qinling Mountains. Photo by Rick J.
Lewandowski.

Qinling  Mountains. Their  plan  called  for  three  days  of
collecting on Maiji Shan.

First  they  headed  to  Dang  Chuan  Forest  Station.
“There was a misty rain when we arrived at the station,
but the rain became heavier as the day progressed,” recalls
Lewandowski. “Being in pouring rain for several hours,
we  were  soaking  wet  and  chilled  by  5ºC  temperatures.
The day, although we experienced the worst weather by
far of the trip, was not without its rewards. We collected,
among  other  plants,  Carpinus  cordata (961579),
Cephalotaxus  sinensis (961581),  and  an  excellent  collec-
tion of Cimicifuga foetida (961610).”

On 6 October the group visited a nearby Guang Ying
Forest Station. “It appeared we were in for more rain and
chilly  weather,  but  we  decided  to  go  into  the  field
anyway,”  says  Lewandowski.  “The  drive  to  the  station
took  two  hours,  but  the  beautiful  scenery,  and  a  bus
window  that  shattered  unexpectedly,  broke  the  trip’s
monotony.  After  less  than  an  hour  in  the  field,  heavy
rains started. The air was frigid, a bone chilling cold that
forced  us  to  cut  our  collecting  short.  Nevertheless,  we
found several outstanding plants, including Cornus kousa
var.  chinensis (98269),  C.  controversa (98268),  and
Quercus aliena var. acuteserrata (961607).” On their last
day  in  Gansu  the  explorers  added  to  the  collections
Sinofranchetia  chinensis (9741)  and  Hydrangea  aspera
(961591),  which  they  found  in  the  forests  surrounding
Maiji Shan Botanical Garden.

Back in Xian the group dedicated a couple of days to
cleaning  and  organizing  their  collections,  and  on  13

Drupelike seeds of the Chinese plum-yew, Cephalotaxus sinensis
(961581), the expedition found near Dang Chuan Forest Station.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

L.  veitchiana (961598,  961600).  In  the  mixed  forests
higher  up,  the  team  collected  Acer  davidii (961566),
Sorbus koehneana (98281, 98283), and Syringa pubescens
ssp.  microphylla (9749).  Two  species  of  Cimicifuga, C.
foetida (961611)  and  C.  acerina (961609),  which  were
making their home among rhododendrons and firs, pro-
vided an ample supply of seed. The windswept Potentilla
turned out to be P. glabra var. veitchii (9735), while the
flower  that  painted  the  top  of  the  mountain  blue  was
Gentiana apiata (961589).

Dreaming of a hot tub
After a month of exploring southern Shaanxi, the group
boarded an overnight train to travel from Xian to Tian-
shui,  in  eastern  Gansu  Province,  on  the  north  side  of

106

Frontier Mountains

October departed for the United States by way of Beijing.
They returned home carrying 256 collections of some of
the most garden-worthy plants of the Qinling Mountains.
“The  excitement  of  finding  our  target  plants  and
many unexpected species kept our enthusiasm high, but
the long and strenuous hiking exhausted us,” reminisced
Kim (1997). “As we descended the mountain each day,
often soaked in sweat or rain, our dream of submerging
ourselves in a hot bathtub often turned out to be unful-
filled. Is plant exploration in such remote Chinese moun-
tains  worth  the  hardship?  Yes,  it  definitely  is.  It  is
distressing to witness the rapid destruction of the pristine
forest that is home to so many beautiful plants. Every day
we passed piles of timber lying by the road waiting to be
carried somewhere.”

FRONTIER MOUNTAINS

The  next  opportunity  for  Longwood  staff  to  join  the
NACPEC  group  on  an  expedition  to  China  came  in
1997, when plans were made to travel to the Changbai
Mountains  in  the  province  of  Jilin,  stretching  along
China’s frontier with North Korea. The Changbai range
was chosen as the destination for the expedition because
of the rich flora that evolved there in a climate with very
cold  winters.  It  was  expected  that  many  exceptionally
hardy  forms  of  species  previously  collected  from  more
southern locations in China and Korea would be found
in these mountains.

Jeffrey  Lynch,  section  gardener  in  charge  of  Long-
wood’s nursery, joined the team, which included Kris R.
Bachtell, horticulturist at the Morton Arboretum, Meyer,
Del Tredici, and Charles E. Tubesing, propagator at the
Holden  Arboretum.  The  group  assembled  first  in
Nanjing,  where  they  were  hosted  again  by  He  Shanan,
who provided the organizational support for the expedi-
tion.  He  arranged  for  Sheng  Ning,  botanist  at  the
Nanjing Botanical Garden, to accompany the NACPEC
group on this expedition.

On  31  August  the  group  flew  from  Nanjing  to
Shenyang, the capital of Liaoning Province, neighboring
Jilin to the east. In Shenyang they were met by Dr. He
Xingyuan,  director  of  the  Institute  of  Applied  Ecology.
The next morning the group visited the institute’s arbore-
tum.  “It  was  raining  hard,”  remembers  Meyer,  “but  we
did  get  a  feel  for  the  place.  It  was  quite  small  and  was

structured  along  ecological  themes,  featuring  native
plants,  rare  and  endangered  plants,  nitrogen-fixing
plants, and various other plantings, grouped by genus.”
On 2 September the expedition loaded into vehicles
and left Shenyang for Tonghua in southern Jilin, at the
foot  of  the  Changbai  Mountains.  Upon  arriving  in
Tonghua, the group met with Dr. Cao Wei, taxonomist
from  the  Shenyang  Institute  of  Applied  Ecology,  who
would guide them through the mountains.

Close call
The  next  morning  the  explorers  left  Tonghua  for  the
town of Changbai on the bank of the Yalu River, separat-
ing China from North Korea. “We made a slight detour
because  the  main  road  to  Changbai  that  followed  the
Yalu  River  was  closed,”  recalls  Meyer.  “Then  a  second
detour forced us off the road and into a river. Our van
had to cross the river several times, but this road took us
through a beautiful old growth forest filled with maples,
birches,  and  poplars.  It  was  just  sensational!  Unfortu-
nately,  we  could  not  spend  much  time  in  this  forest.
There was lots of concern about how to get to the Chang-
bai  Mountains,  given  that  the  detours  had  thrown  us
completely off course. How far it was, or when we would
get to our destination, were unknowns.”

By 4 p.m. the explorers caught the first glimpse of the
mountains in the distance. All along the road were signs
of recent logging, and the group’s van frequently passed
carelessly loaded trucks with long log ends trailing behind
and raising clouds of dust. “At one point we encountered
a terrifying close call,” remembers Lynch. “As a logging
truck was approaching our van, the load of large logs evi-
dently shifted and one of the logs swung free of the truck.
Acting like a medieval joust, it rammed the front of the
van,  tearing  off  the  entire  driver’s  side  door.  Only  by
chance was no one in our group injured or killed.” Meyer
adds:  “After  all  the  joking  about  how  dangerous  China
was, we were now fully enmeshed in a head-on collision.
In the fading light we walked down to look at the logging
truck and saw our van door wrapped around the butt end
of a large, 12 m long log of Tilia mandshurica, one of the
species we hoped to collect on this expedition.”

About an hour later the police arrived to investigate
the  accident  and  by  8  p.m.  the  group  was  allowed  to
board another vehicle that arrived from a nearby forestry
station and took them to the town of Changbai on the

107

China

Yalu River, upstream from Changbai, separates China from North Korea. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Yalu River. This town would serve as a base from which
the  expedition  would  launch  day-trips  to  the  southern
slopes of the Changbai Mountains.

South side
“The Changbai Mountains are relatively untouched and
unexplored,” explains Lynch. “This mountain range fea-
tures  several  climatic  zones  and  is  home  to  over  1300
plant  species.  The  highest  peak  in  the  range,  Baiyun,
2691  m,  is  a  magnificent  volcano  atop  a  wide  lava
plateau.  Within  the  volcano’s  crater  is  the  huge  Lake
Tian.”

While  in  Changbai  the  group  was  helped  by  Sun
Longxing, director of the local forestry department. On 4
September  their  first  collecting  mission  was  underway.
“The trip began on the south side of the mountains,” says
Lynch. “With an inventory of the plants that we wanted

to  collect,  the  group  ventured  along  the  Yalu  River,
finding  Astilboides  tabularis (971671),  and  Chosenia
arbutifolia (99246), a member of the willow family that
has  never  been  introduced  to  western  cultivation.  The
plant  we  collected  was  the  only  one  found  in  the  area
with viable seed.”

The next morning the explorers headed north from
Changbai. “Our first stop was along the highway where
we  collected  Sorbus, Acer, and  a  charming  little  plant,
Lychnis  fulgens
(971683)  with  sensational  coral-red
flowers,  over  5  cm  across,”  explains  Meyer.  “A  little
further on we turned off onto a logging road, where we
collected Cornus alba (971688), Rosa acicularis (971691),
and Tripterygium regelii (971687).”

“We then ventured up the mountain and, at 1000 m,
encountered a mixed forest of broad-leaved and conifer-
ous  shrubs  and  trees,”  remembers  Lynch.  “The  bulk  of

108

Frontier Mountains

Habitat of Astilboides tabularis (971671) along the Yalu River near
Changbai. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Chosenia arbutifolia (99246) growing on the banks of the Yalu
River. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

the material collected on this trip was found in this zone
because of its similarity to Pennsylvania’s climate. Exam-
ples  of  plants  found  in  this  zone  included  Abies  holo-
phylla, Acer mono, Fraxinus mandshurica, Pinus koraiensis,
Quercus mongolica, and Tilia amurensis (971681).”

On 6 September the group drove north out of town
again, this time along a dirt road where active logging was
underway. Meyer remembers that the “first stop to collect
Sorbus also  produced  an  abundance  of  Paeonia  obovata
(971693)  growing  everywhere  in  the  disturbed  under-
story, in moist soils and in partial shade. As a species, it
seems  to  have  benefited  from  logging.  The  seed  heads
were very filled with shiny, blue-black seeds sitting on a
plush mass of scarlet arils. One couldn’t possibly invent a
more sensual combination.”

A  little  further  on  along  the  road  they  noticed  a
colony of Thuja koraiensis (971695) covering an eroded

Tubesing leads the group through a colony of Oplopanax elatus
(971692) growing in a mixed forest north of Changbai. Photo by
Paul W. Meyer.

slope with plants up to 1 m tall. “On the upper slopes,
the  plants  were  much  taller,  up  to  8  m,  with  cones  on
their topmost branches,” explains Meyer. “Beneath Thuja
was a mat of pure sphagnum moss and below that a bed
of coarse shale. The plant was clearly clonal, and all the
small plants were layered lateral branches, as indicated by
a characteristic bow shaped base. After a little searching,
with the rain pouring down, we found one specimen with
a  fair  number  of  fresh  cones  on  it,  and  got  permission
from Sun to cut down one specimen that was 5 m tall,
with lots of fresh cones.”

On  9  September,  Sun  led  the  group  north  from
Changbai  into  the  coniferous  zone  that  extended  from
1000 to 1700 m. “The plan was to hike to the top of a
nearby mountain to see and collect seed of Pinus pumila,”
recalls  Meyer.  “Unfortunately,  Sun  was  unsure  of  the
correct  way  to  go  and  we  promptly  got  lost,  marching

109

China

Paeonia obovata (971693), collected in the vicinity of Changbai,
enticed the explorers with its shiny blue-black seeds backed by
scarlet arils. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Lynch, left, and Meyer on a plant-collecting foray near the town of
Changbai. Photo by Kris R. Bachtell.

guards  and  many  border  crossings  where  other  armed
guards searched the vehicle, our journey went on well.”
In the afternoon the group reached a research station
near the town of Erdao Baihe at the base of the northern
slopes of Changbai Mountains, their home for the next
several days, where they were met by Dr. Dai Limin, the
head of the station. “The next morning we departed for
the summit of Baiyun,” recalls Lynch. “This was the last
day that it would be accessible due to the fact that it had
not rained in weeks and a wildfire warning was in effect.
Upon reaching the top the scenery was breathtaking. The
wind was howling over the beautifully sculpted pumice
peaks, and the clouds left ominous shadows on the sur-
rounding  hills.  The  tundra  floor  was  a  deep  red  color
from the cranberry bushes that had adapted themselves to
the  harsh  climate. The  last  time  the  volcano  was  active
was  about  four  hundred  years  ago,  and  now  amidst  its
enormous crater is Lake Tian.”

“On the way down we walked through Betula ermanii
forest,”  describes  Meyer.  “Admiring  the  twisted,  wind-
swept trunks of the birches, we reached the base of a 68 m
tall waterfall that formed near the point where Lake Tian
flowed out of its crater to form Songhua River. Our next
stop on the way down was in the conifer belt, about 1200
m,  where  Abies, Picea, and  Larix dominated.  Then,  at
around 800 m, we stopped in the mixed conifer–decidu-
ous  forest  belt. The  forest  floor  was  littered  with  moss-
covered  trunks  and  branches.  There  we  collected  seeds
from large Pinus koraiensis (9811) trees. Scattered among
them were Pinus densiflora var. sylvestriformis.”

Betula ermanii (971717) inhabiting southern slopes of Changbai
Mountains. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

around in a big circle in the pouring rain. Because of the
problems with the weather and the directions, the deci-
sion was made not to climb the mountain, but instead to
walk back down the road, collecting as we went. Betula
ermanii (971717) and Syringa wolfii were common, along
with Abies nephrolepis (971718).”

Northern slopes
The  expedition  continued  their  collecting  around  the
town  of  Changbai  until  13  September,  when  they  said
farewells to Sun and prepared for their trip to the north-
ern side of the Changbai Mountains. “Ten days after our
departure to the south side of the Changbai Mountains,
we  embarked  on  a  fourteen-hour  drive  to  the  north
slopes,” remembers Lynch. “Despite the need for armed

110

Frontier Mountains

Lake Tian occupies an enormous crater atop Baiyun, the tallest peak of Changbai Mountains. Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

The group spent 15 September collecting in a mixed
forest at about 750 m. Under the canopy of giant pines,
oaks,  ashes,  and  poplars,  they  found  Acer  triflorum
(98137) growing on the banks of a small streambed. “At a
stop along the river we collected Alnus hirsuta (9815) and
more Acer triflorum (9816),” remembers Meyer. “Then we
went looking for Acer mandshuricum (98138), which was
everywhere, but with very little seed. We finally collected
seed from a tree growing under a giant Populus koreana.”
On  the  rainy  morning  of  17  September  the  group
drove northwest from Erdao Baihe with the goal of reach-
ing a forest where Taxus cuspidata once grew. “The forest
was  excellent,”  recalls  Meyer.  “We  immediately  found
Carpinus  cordata (9828)  mixed  with  giant  Abies  holo-
phylla, Betula costata, Pinus koraiensis, Quercus mongolica,
and Tilia mandshurica. In the understory were Acer pseu-

dosieboldianum, A.  tegmentosum, and  Deutzia  glabrata
(9829). The herb layer was also rich, with Actaea asiatica
(9832) and Caulophyllum robustum (9833). Taxus cuspi-
data was  formerly  plentiful  in  the  area,  but  in  recent
years, it had been heavily cut for use in medicine. Near
the end of the day, after we had given up on finding any,
we located a mature specimen and a few seedlings from
which cuttings were collected.”

This was the expedition’s last day of collecting in the
mountains.  On  19  September  the  explorers  woke  at  5
a.m. for the drive back to Shenyang, arriving there fifteen
hours  later  after  a  long  detour  and  a  flat  tire.  From
Shenyang the group traveled back to Nanjing, where they
spent a couple of days cleaning, inventorying, and allocat-
ing the 143 collections for each participating institution.
On 24 September they departed for the United States.

111

China

Songhua River begins as a waterfall flowing out of the crater containing Lake Tian. 
Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

“The  most  important
contribution made by this
expedition  is  a  compre-
hensive collection of many
trees—especially in genera
Acer, Abies, Picea, and
Pinus—from  areas  where
winter  temperatures  can
drop  to  -40ºC,”  recalls
Meyer,  summing  up  the
results  of  the  expedition.
“Changbai Mountains are
the  northern  extreme  for
many species from Korea,
which  are  cherished  as
garden  plants  and  culti-
vated in the United States.
Collections  we  made  are
going  to  be  among  the
hardiest one can find.”

HEMLOCK HUNTING

An important aspect of plant exploration is the introduc-
tion of new species or varieties that may be resistant to, or
tolerant of, certain diseases and pests that afflict plants in
cultivation.  One  such  group  of  plants  that  has  been  of
great  concern  is  the  much  beloved  hemlocks  of  the
eastern United States, Tsuga canadensis and T. caroliniana,
which  have  been  under  severe  attack  from  the  Asian
hemlock wooly adelgid, Adelges tsugae, since the 1950s. In
addition to the extensive research undertaken to charac-
terize  the  pest’s  biology  and  spread,  starting  from  the
1990s, efforts have been made to introduce Asian hem-
locks that may be resistant to the wooly adelgid. A study,
conducted in 1991 by the Morris Arboretum, indicated
that from among various Tsuga species cultivated in the
United States only T. chinensis, native to China, was free
of  the  pest.  Based  on  these  encouraging  results,  Morris
Arboretum,  jointly  with  the  U.S.  National  Arboretum,
spearheaded  an  effort  to  collect  Tsuga germplasm
throughout China and subject it to testing for resistance
to the wooly adelgid.

In  1999  Longwood  Gardens  joined  this  project,
when Jerry S. Stites, Longwood’s horticulture department
head,  embarked  on  an  expedition  with  Dr.  Edward  J.
Garvey,  botanist  at  the  USDA  Agricultural  Research

Del Tredici, left, and Lynch, assisted by their Chinese colleagues,
collect fruits of Acer triflorum (98137). Photo by Paul W. Meyer.

Service,  and  Shawn  V.  Belt,  horticulturist  at  the  U.S.
National  Arboretum,  to  travel  to  China’s  southwestern
province of Sichuan.

Reaching for the cones
The team assembled in Beijing on 1 October and from
there flew to Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan Province
and the starting point for the expedition. In Chengdu the
team  met  with  Wang  Qing  of  the  Nanjing  Botanical

112

Hemlock Hunting

Garden,  who  would  be
their  guide.  After  a  hard
day  of  traveling  north
from  Chengdu, 
the
explorers  arrived  at  the
Wolong  Panda  Reserve,
near Wenchuan.

The  team’s  first  col-
lecting  day  came  on  4
October  when 
they
headed  up  the  trail  that
led  to  Wuyepeng  panda
observation  station.  “We
crossed  a  raging  white
water  river  on  a  wooden
footbridge  and  started  a
relentless  climb  up  the
mountain  with  beautiful
views  across  the  valley,”
remembers  Stites.  “Tiny
cabbage patches and corn-
fields  created  an  amazing
patchwork quilt on the other side of the mountain. Hem-
locks were found between 2500 and 3000 m altitude. We
climbed  for  three  hours  before  we  reached  the  remote
observation station where we had lunch. Another hour of
climbing  and  we  came  upon  a  relatively  flat  area  with
several large hemlocks, Tsuga dumosa. All of the branches
were too high to reach and most of the cones were from
last year. We finally found a tree with cones about 8 m
above the ground. After several attempts, we got the rope
saw in place and cut the branch off. We collected imma-
ture green cones and some of the old cones hoping to get
a few viable seeds. At 4 p.m., we headed back down the
mountain. The trail down was wet, slick, and very steep
adding to our fatigue with every rubber-legged step.”

In the hills above Miyalou the expedition found a sizeable population of Tsuga chinensis.
Photo by Edward J. Garvey.

prone  to  rock  slides.  We  were  delayed  more  than  once
while  the  road  was  being  cleared  by  hand  from  rock
slides. The roads were a maze of potholes and surprises.
Our driver was skilled at dodging broken down trucks,
yaks,  and  old  women  carrying  loads  that  dwarfed  their
size. He relied on the car’s horns more than the brakes to
navigate his way through.”

The day after arriving in Miyalou the team started off
on an all-day hike up the mountains. After an extremely
difficult  climb,  they  reached  an  area  at  2500  m  where
hemlocks, Tsuga chinensis, grew. As in previous sites, most
cones were inaccessible, but they managed to cut lower
cone-bearing limbs from several trees.

The  next  day  the  group  made  “pretty  good  collec-
tions” in the nearby Wen Xiang Gou Reserve. “A number
of  healthy  hemlocks,  Tsuga  chinensis, were  within  sight
but  only  several  were  accessible,”  recorded  Stites  in  his
field notes. The following day the group traveled west to
Miyalou  near  Li  Xian.  “For  every  day  of  collecting  we
spent at least two long, grueling days driving to the next
site,”  explains  Stites.  “Usually  it  required  climbing  a
mountain pass on a windy gravel road to get to the next
valley. Often one side of the road dropped hundreds of
meters into a raging river and the other was a steep slope

Over the Qionglai Mountains
On  8  October  the  expedition  departed  Miyalou  for
Danba, a town at the confluence of the Xiaojin and Dajin
rivers, on the west side of the Qionglai Mountains. “On
our way to Danba we crested a summit at 4100 m and
saw the sun for the first time of the trip,” describes Stites.
“Blue  sky,  a  few  clouds,  and  snow-capped  mountains
made spectacular scenery. By 4 p.m., we had traveled only
210  km  of  our  300  km  journey.  Wang  suggested  we
spend the night in Guishuan since the final 90 km could
take five more hours. Guishuan is not open to foreigners

113

China

The snow-capped Gongga Shan appeared in its full glory as the
expedition crossed Qionglai Mountains on their way to Danba.
Photo by Jerry S. Stites.

Collecting Tsuga chinensis var. oblongisquamata (01289) along the
Kuangyong River. Garvey, right, speaks with Songji, holding pole
pruners, and Wang while Belt photographs the tree. Photo by Jerry
S. Stites.

Traveling from Miyalou to Guishuan, the group stopped for lunch
in the little village of Tadong. Photo by Jerry S. Stites.

and it was apparent by the stares we received. Wherever
we went we drew a crowd. After checking into our hotel,
Belt, Garvey, and I took a walk to see the sights. Wander-
ing around the market was quite an experience. We dis-
covered  a  roof-top  bar  where  we  could  be  anonymous
observers and enjoy a few beers.”

After  reaching  Danba,  the  group  made  excursions
over the next couple of days to sites several hours’ drive
away  on  rough  roads.  “On  10  October  it  was  a  bone-
jarring,  three-hour  drive  to  the  forest  station  in  the
Kuangyong  Valley,”  remembers  Stites.  “With  our  local
guide,  Songji  Longkai,  we  had  four  people  and  gear
crammed  into  the  back  seat  of  our  jeep.  In  the  valley
several  families  lived  at  the  primitive  forest  station. We
went to a small room with a bare light bulb hanging from
the ceiling and crowded around an electric hot plate for

114

Belt with Tsuga chinensis var. oblongisquamata (01289) along the
Kuangyong River. Photo by Edward J. Garvey.

Hemlock Hunting

The group crosses a stream in Dongma Valley near Danba, where they collected Tsuga chinensis var. oblongisquamata (01290). 
Photo by Jerry S. Stites.

lunch. Lunch was all you can eat pig’s ears, pig’s feet, and
other unidentified parts. After lunch we walked from the
forest station along a dirt road and had an easy and fruit-
ful day of collecting. Along Kuangyong River we found
many  trees  of  Tsuga  chinensis var.  oblongisquamata
(01289),  which  provided  an  ample  crop  of  seeds. This
made the long drive back worthwhile.”

Trekking south
On  12  October,  on  the  way  south  from  Danba  to
Kanding, the group stopped in Caqilongba Valley, where
they  found  easily  accessible  trees  of  Tsuga  chinensis
(01288)  growing  along  the  river.  Out  of  Kanding  the
expedition  undertook  a  couple  of  excursions.  In
Yangchang Valley and Tonglin Valley, in moist woodlands
along riverbanks, they made more collections of T. chi-
nensis var. oblongisquamata (01287, 01366).

On  15  October  the  expedition  continued  south  to
Luding.  The  next  morning  they  undertook  a  trip  to
Hailougou Glacier on the slopes of Gongga Shan, 7556
m. At about 2800 m another species of hemlock, Tsuga
dumosa, inhabited  moist  woodland.  Although  no  cones
could be found within reach of a rope saw, a number of
small  seedlings  were  collected  on  that  site. The  group’s
next  destination  was  the  town  of  Mianning,  some  200
km south of Luding. While hiking in the nearby Yuanbao
Valley,  the  team  found  two  populations  of  T.  dumosa
growing between 2600 and 2800 m.

In their pursuit of hemlocks, after a long day’s drive,
the expedition reached Dechang, a town situated on the
banks of Anning River, on 19 October. “The following
day we had a relatively short drive to the small village of
Liuchong,” remembers Stites. “Most of the male villagers
crowded around us to see what we were up to. They were

115

China

Uncertain  about  the  prospects  of  finding  hemlocks  in
that location, the group decided to conclude the expedi-
tion  and  return  to  Chengdu.  A  couple  days  later,  Belt,
Garvey, and Stites returned to the United States, bringing
with  them  seventeen  collections  of  hemlocks.  As  Stites
points out, “Whether wooly adelgid resistant forms will
be found among them, only time will tell.”

CHINA’S CAMELLIA LANDS

Since  Longwood’s  conservatories  first  opened,  camellias
have been an essential part of the indoor display. “They
furnish  one  of  Longwood  Gardens’  outstanding  dis-
plays,” wrote Dr. Donald G. Huttleston, Longwood’s tax-
onomist,  about  camellias  in  1960.  “The  Longwood
Gardens’ camellia collection was begun in 1919 at a time
when but one small conservatory had been completed. In
the  spring  of  that  year  thirty-four  varieties  of  Japanese
camellias  were  obtained  from  Belgium  through  John
Scheepers, Inc., of New York. . . . In the spring of 1920,
when  the  large  conservatories  were  well  under  way,  an
additional  thirty-seven  varieties  were  obtained  from
France.” In time more varieties were added, mostly from
Europe,  so  that  by  1960  the  camellia  collection  had
grown to 211 cultivars. By then there was an understand-
able  desire  to  expand  camellia  display  into  the  outdoor
gardens. There was, however, one major obstacle to over-
come: the available camellias were not hardy in this part
of  the  United  States. To  remedy  the  situation,  a  daring
project aimed at finding and testing cold-hardy camellias
was started at Longwood in the 1960s—a project which
has  continued,  with  its  ups  and  downs,  through  the
present day.

If one has sufficient ambition and stamina to under-
take  such  a  seemingly  impossible  task  as  finding  cold-
hardy  camellias,  one  has  to  go  where  the  wealth  of
camellia  diversity  still  hides:  China.  An  opportunity  to
tap into China’s wealth of camellias came for Longwood
Gardens in 2000, when Dr. Clifford R. Parks, professor
of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, with
forty years of experience researching camellias, assembled
a team to travel to China’s southern provinces of Yunnan,
Sichuan, Guangxi, and Hunan. Lynch and I represented
Longwood.  The 
included  Dr.  Betty
McConaughy of the University of Washington in Seattle;
David  Parks  of  the  Camellia  Forest  Nursery  in  Chapel

team  also 

The group traveled from Kanding to Gongga Shan by way of
Luding, site of the heroic capture of the bridge over the Dadu
River during the Long March of the Red Army in 1935. Standing
on the bridge are, left to right, Stites, Belt, and Garvey. 
Photo by Edward J. Garvey.

enamored with our telescopic pruners. After the custom-
ary delays and confusion our local guide showed up and
we  started  trekking  up  the  mountain.  Just  above  the
village, at about 1700 m, stood a lonely Tsuga chinensis
var.  oblongisquamata (011652).  We  were  told  that  all
other hemlocks near the village had been harvested. Our
only  hope  to  find  these  trees  was  to  climb  higher.  A
couple of weeks of hiking in the mountains had not pre-
pared  us  for  today’s  trail.  The  trail  was  very  steep  and
muddy making forward progress slow and difficult. Our
local guide was getting impatient with his poky Ameri-
cans. We continued up the trail with Wang bringing up
the rear. The trail was getting steeper and we were cling-
ing to trees and shrubs to keep from slipping backwards.
Our ascent continued until we reached a rocky ridge at
about 2500 m with a few small hemlocks, Tsuga forrestii
or  possibly  T.  dumosa. A  thorough  examination  of  the
trees  turned  up  no  cones.  Apparently  the  cone-bearing
trees Wang had seen in this location earlier in the summer
had been cut down.”

Upon  their  return  to  Dechang,  the  team  members
decided to skip the last of the collecting sites planned for
this trip. “The last site near the town of Miyi, some 100
km downstream from Dechang, was a two-day drive on
roads  worse  than  what  we  had  been  experiencing,”
explains  Stites.  “Wang  confessed  that  he  was  unable  to
reach  the  site  in  the  summer  pre-investigation  trip
because the road was washed out. He did not know if the
road was repaired and could not call ahead to find out.”

116

China’s Camellia Lands

Long, left, asks a villager if he has seen camellias on Lion 
Mountain near Wuding. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Denuded mountains around Dukou, Sichuan, are home to 
Camellia kangdianica. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Hill, North Carolina; Ronald R. Rabideau of Rare Find
Nursery in Jackson, New Jersey; Katherine Rankin of the
Smithsonian Institution in Washington; Tim Thibault of
Descanso  Gardens  in  La  Cañada,  California;  Jennifer
Trehane, a camellia expert from Dorset, England; and Dr.
Xiao Tiaojiang  and  Dr.  Barbara Thakor,  both  from  the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

The  team  assembled  in  Kunming,  the  capital  of
Yunnan, on 14 February. Our host for the entire trip was
Long  Chunli,  researcher  from  Kunming  Institute  of
Botany. The expedition was timed to coincide with the
blooming of most of the camellia species in that part of
China. Although it was not the season to find seeds on
camellias, we were able to collect pollen from the flowers,
which would later be used in cross-breeding camellias in
the United States.

The following morning we headed north toward the
border with Sichuan. What began as a modern, comfort-
able highway quickly became a bumpy gravel road. The
stark  scenery  with  its  dry,  denuded  hills  resembled  the
American  Southwest,  with  the  exception  of  ever-present
terraced fields carved out of the mountainsides and green-
ing  up  with  winter  wheat  and  leafy  vegetables.  Lion
Mountain near Wuding, our first collecting site, is famous
for its Buddhist temple. While botanizing there, we were
often passed by pilgrims and newlyweds carrying incense
sticks as offerings. Several populations of Camellia pitardii
var.  yunnanica, our  first  encounter  with  wild  camellias,
were found there growing amidst evergreen oaks.

After crossing into Sichuan the next day, we reached
Dukou, an industrial city surrounded by mountain ranges

where rich coal deposits abound. A narrow road led us up
the mountains through several mining villages. Our bus
had  to  make  frequent  stops  and  maneuver  carefully  in
order to allow trucks loaded with coal to pass by. Effects
of habitat destruction and industrial pollution made the
whole scenery rather depressing. Despite almost complete
deforestation in that area, we found a stand of Camellia
kangdianica, considered  by  some  to  be  a  variant  of  C.
reticulata, along the edge of a cultivated field. Camellias
proved to be exceptionally resilient and capable of regen-
erating from the rootstock even after the forest that had
provided shade and shelter was cut down. However, the
future of these remnant colonies, subjected repeatedly to
harvesting for firewood and grazing, is uncertain.

Through the lands of the Yi
On  16  February  the  trip  continued  north  to  Yanbian
with a stop in a forest conservation park located in an area
inhabited predominantly by the people of Yi nationality,
one of the many minority groups living in Yunnan. The
rural landscape, with picturesque villages nestled between
the mountains, offered a much welcome relief after a day
spent in Dukou. While Lynch and Thibault tried to find
fruits of Schima argentea, a handsome evergreen tree from
the tea family, the rest of the group assembled around a
large  camellia,  awaiting  its  identification  from  Clifford
Parks and Xiao. Their determination “unknown species”
made us all aware of how complicated the taxonomy of
this genus is.

In order to reach all the sites planned for the follow-
ing day around the village of Guosheng, north of Yanbian,

117

China

Terraced hillsides near Yanbian, Sichuan, are greened up with
winter wheat. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Crossing a stream near Guosheng, are, left to right, David Parks,
Clifford Parks, and Thibault. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Camellia brevigyna found near Guosheng. Photo by Tomasz
Ani´sko.

we had to hire two small pickup trucks, because the road we
were  to  travel  was  too  rough  for  our  bus.  In  addition  to
finding several populations of Camellia brevigyna, C. minor,
and a small plantation of C. sinensis, we came across a giant
Astilbe  grandis (00234)  with  huge  leaves  hanging  over  a
small stream coming down a rocky cliff.

Our route changed direction on 19 February as we
traveled  east  toward  Huili  when  a  casual  road  stop
resulted in an unexpected discovery. To our great excite-
ment, we found a colony of a camellia of uncertain iden-
tity that for the time being was declared to be Camellia
boreali-yunnanica. Later that day, a visit to Yuza, the site
of  the  original  discovery  of  C.  huiliensis, revealed  that
most  of  the  plants  from  that  population  had  been
destroyed. Even during our visit there we could observe a
group of presumably local women and children picking
camellia  flowers  which  were  later  sold  from  roadside

118

Yi women selling camellia flowers picked in the wild. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

China’s Camellia Lands

Valley of the poisonous anise tree
To reach our next destination, Xichang, we took the road
running along a valley cut through the mountains by the
river Anning. Sugar cane plantations abounded on both
sides of the river. From time to time bright red flowers of
silk-cotton  trees,  Bombax  ceiba, growing  near  the  road
created a great deal of excitement on our bus. Stamens of
this  tree  are  considered  a  culinary  delicacy,  and  we
sampled them; the silky fiber embedding the seed is also
used for stuffing pillows.

“After two weeks in China, some of the novelty had
worn off,” remembers Thibault. “We had come to expect
noodles  for  breakfast,  a  crammed  bus  ride,  a  couple  of
sites  with  camellias,  a  modest  hotel  room,  cold  shower,
huge dinner, and an evening of recording data. Neverthe-
less,  the  first  of  our  collecting  sites  around  Xichang
proved  a  unique  experience.  The  day  started  with  the
usual  noodles  and  bus  ride.  That  day  our  bus  had  an
escort of Chinese government officials accompanying us
to the village of Guojimou. We were off to the land of the
Yi, and a Chinese botanist had recently been attacked at
this  site.  Our  Chinese  hosts  did  not  want  any  trouble.
Neither did we, but we also hoped for a good local guide.
The local leader of the Yi seemed receptive to the requests
of the Chinese officials. He did not object to us collect-
ing plants in their lands and as a result we had a host of
guides accompanying us that morning.”

As far as road conditions permitted, the bus drove up
the mountains east of Xichang, through the Mangcaogou
Valley, or valley of the poisonous anise tree, which takes
its  name  from  Illicium  simonsii. In  order  to  reach  the
camellia  site  we  had  to  continue  on  foot  for  another  3
km. “The first plants we saw blooming there were very
appropriate  for  the  valley  named  after  them—Illicium
simonsii,” recalls Thibault. “Continuing on up the Mang-
caogou Valley, from a distance we spotted one spectacu-
lar camellia tree covered with large white flowers. Upon
closer inspection it was decided that it was a highly vari-
able Camellia boreali-yunnanica (00277). The plants were
around 5 m and very floriferous. The flowers themselves
were large, approaching 12 cm judging by the palm of my
hand,  with  a  color  varying  among  plants  from  almost
white to almost purple, including two-tones.”

As the morning went on, more and more of the Yi
came out from the nearby village of Guojimou to have a
look at us. “We were supposedly the first Westerners on
this  site,”  explains  Thibault.  “We  had  been  invited  to

Camellia tenuivalvis (00269, 00274) growing near the summit of
Longzhou Shan, north of Huili. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

stands.  This  situation  exemplified  the  urgent  need  to
collect  seeds,  pollen,  and  herbarium  specimens  before
these camellias disappear from the wild.

Longzhou  Shan,  an  impressive  mountain  north  of
Huili,  awaited  us  the  next  morning. The  peaks  on  the
northern side were clad with an evergreen forest of Litho-
carpus
trees,  while  the  southern  side  featured  large
colonies of Camellia tenuivalvis (00269, 00274). At 3200
m, this is likely the highest elevation where camellias can
be found. The near-freezing temperature and patches of
snow  on  the  ground  helped  us  to  appreciate  this  fact.
Other  species  of  evergreen  plants  flowering  with  the
camellias caught our attention. Especially delightful was
Illicium simonsii (00276), a species of anise tree with very
showy,  creamy  yellow,  fragrant  flowers  backed  by  soft
green, dense foliage.

119

China

lunch in the village. A young couple was curious about us,
enough to slaughter one of their pigs in our honor. They
provided a quick introduction into Yi life. The house we
were  invited  to  was  obviously  a  new  construction,  with
freshly white washed mud walls holding a satellite dish on
top of them. The satellite dish, television and electricity
were apparently compliments of the Chinese government
as a way to keep farmers updated on new techniques and
world events. We watched a few minutes of the Chinese
agriculture channel together before roast pork and chicken
soup were served in wooden bowls set on the floor. Fear
had turned to friendship.”

Rock’s village
On  return  to  Yunnan  Province  we  were  greeted  by  an
overcast  sky  and  drizzle—not  a  frequent  occurrence
during  the  dry  winter  season.  On  25  February,  driving
from Huaping in northern Yunnan to Wuping Reservoir,
we saw numerous herds of black goats. This made us a
little skeptical about how diverse the plant life might be
at the site. From what we were able to observe, grazing
goats consumed everything in their path with the excep-
tion  of  poisonous  plants  or  plants  armed  with  thorns.
Animals grazing on plants and people cutting plants for
firewood  appear  to  be  two  major  factors  preventing
natural reforestation in these mountains. Our efforts were
rewarded, however, when we found flowering specimens
of  camellias,  identified  as  a  diploid  form  of  Camellia
reticulata, growing  together  with  Rhododendron  spin-
uliferum, an  association  frequently  seen  in  the  areas
visited during this trip.

Continuing  east  from  Huaping  to  Lijiang,  the  cul-
tural  center  of  the  Nakhi  minority,  we  made  a  stop  in
Nanhua Township at the site of a large colony of Camel-
lia saluenensis. Growing among the camellias was a rare
palm, Trachycarpus nana, not previously known to occur
in the area.

The road from Huaping to Lijiang steadily climbed
up  the  mountain  ranges  and  became  increasingly
winding. Every turn revealed yet another spectacular view
of deep valleys below, green fields of winter wheat con-
trasting with steep tan slopes. For several kilometers the
road followed along the gorge of the Yangtze.

We  decided  to  visit  Yufengsi  Temple,  located  on  a
mountainside some 10 km northwest of Lijiang. At the
highest level of the temple, a special courtyard housed an
enormous  ancient  Camellia  reticulata tree,  famed  for

Illicium simonsii growing in the Mangcaogou Valley, east of
Xichang. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Color variants of Camellia boreali-yunnanica (00277) in the 
Mangcaogou Valley, east of Xichang. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko

120

China’s Camellia Lands

Camellia saluenensis was found growing among Chinese windmill
palms, Trachycarpus nana, in Nanhua Township. Photo by 
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Members of the expedition pose with women in traditional Nakhi
costumes in front of the ancient Camellia reticulata tree in
Yufengsi Temple. In the back row are, left to right, Lynch, Thakor,
Clifford Parks, McConaughy, and Xiao; in the front row are
Rabideau, the author, and David Parks. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

The house of Joseph F. Rock in Nguluko near Lijiang. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

opening twenty thousand flowers every spring. The tree
was constantly surrounded by pilgrims and tourists, each
cherishing it equally.

In  contrast,  our  second  destination  that  day,  the
home  of  Dr.  Joseph  F.  Rock,  was  rarely  visited.  With
some  difficulty  we  found  Nguluko,  the  small  village
where  Rock,  one  of  the  greatest  plant  explorers  of  the
twentieth century, had spent twenty-nine years of his life.
His house was no different from others in the village. A
wall surrounded it, a gateway opening onto a three-sided
courtyard,  with  the  residence  ahead  and  the  wood  and
animal shelters to the side. One of the shelters is now a
small museum displaying photographs and a few personal
items, including Rock’s much worn coat. The residence is
mostly  empty,  though  Rock’s  bed  and  curious  folding
table remain.

121

A specimen of Camellia reticulata, claimed to be six hundred years
old, grows on the grounds of Jing Le Yan, a Buddhist nunnery
west of Kunming. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

China

Protected by monks and nuns
Our route changed direction again, and on 29 February
we began traveling south to Kunming. On the way there
we stopped at Zixi Shan, one of Buddhism’s holy moun-
tains, located near Chuxiong. It escaped deforestation in
the  past  thanks  to  several  temples  situated  there.  Our
guide for the day was Zhang Fangyu, who had dedicated
many years of his life to the preservation of Zixi Shan and
had  coauthored  a  biological  survey  of  the  mountain,
which listed twelve hundred species of flowering plants,
including eight species of camellias. This mountain is also
home to numerous ancient cultivars of Camellia reticu-
lata, which differ from the wild plants in having larger,
double flowers.

Before  returning  to  Kunming  on  3  March,  we
stopped at Jing Le Yan, a Buddhist nunnery, to see an old
specimen of Camellia reticulata. While hiking up the hill
we  admired  massive  trees  of  Calocedrus  macrolepis that
looked  to  have  been  at  least  several  hundred  years  old.
Their  trunks  were  decorated  with  colorful  sticks  of
incense left by pilgrims, who, in our view, could not have
chosen  a  more  appropriate  tree  for  such  a  ritual,  this
being  the  Asian  counterpart  to  the  American  incense
cedar, C. decurrens. Inside the nunnery we found a speci-
men  of  Camellia  reticulata claimed  to  be  six  hundred
years  old,  sheltered  by  high  walls.  Understandably,  no
collecting was permitted on this sacred ground.

Epimedium remedy
On  5  March  we  left  Yunnan  and  flew  to  Guilin,  the
capital of Guangxi Province. The next morning we trav-
eled  by  boat  along  the  famous  Li  River  to Yangshuo,  a
small town four hours away. The boat ride provided us an
opportunity to admire the scenery so often depicted on
Chinese paintings. Li River passes through an area where
limestone hills exposed to erosion have acquired fantastic
shapes. To add to the mystique of the landscape, the hills
are bathed in mist and fog most of the year, as they were
on the day of our visit.

“Leaving the boat in Yangshuo, we ran the gauntlet
of  hawkers,  wandering  through  the  old  city  streets,”
remembers Rabideau. “As we made our way further from
the dock, we found ourselves in a large, busy, and color-
ful  produce  market.  One  section  was  devoted  to  tradi-
tional Chinese medicine. To us, these baskets and bowls
of dried bark, sticks, fungi, and numerous other things,
were interesting places to look for plants. It was at one of

these  vendors  where  Lynch  pointed  out  to  me  a  fresh
leafy bundle he had recognized as Epimedium, a genus I
had been looking for and had not yet found in the wild.
Excitedly yet discreetly so as not to negotiate the price too
high, I called over Xiao to bargain for me. They talked for
a while, with the vendor exchanging odd glances at me
occasionally. Next I was asked how much I wanted. ‘The
whole bunch,’ I said. My response led to more discussion
between  Xiao  and  the  vendor,  and  even  more  odd
glances. I could tell my friend was driving a hard bargain.
Xiao, a fervent believer in traditional Chinese medicine
himself,  began  to  throw  curious  looks  my  way  as  well.
‘Why  do  you  want  it  all?’  he  asked.  ‘Well,  to  grow,  of
course,’ I replied. He looked as though he doubted my
intentions. ‘Do you know what it is for? No? Well, it is an
aphrodisiac,’ he laughed. Aphrodisiac or not I wanted to
grow it, so I bought the whole bunch and my purchase
went into a plastic bag. Some time later, while at another
stall, I received a curious knowing smile from the female
shopkeeper.  I  glanced  down  and  noticed  one  of  the
Epimedium leaves was showing!”

Grown in Bojia
On 7 March we drove north to the neighboring province
of Hunan. In the town of Dongan, where we were staying
for the night, we met with Gao Jiyin of the Subtropical
Forestry Research Institute in Fuyang, Zhejiang, who had
been collaborating with Dr. Clifford R. Parks, Longwood
Gardens, and Descanso Gardens on a joint project aimed
at collecting all the species of camellias native to China.
Gao  was  returning  from  one  of  his  collecting  ventures
and shared with us a number of camellia seeds and cut-
tings he had found.

The  next  day  we  explored  Shunhuang  Shan  Forest
Park, situated near Damiaokou, not far from the border
between Hunan and Guangxi. Hiking in constant rain,
we  were  surprised  to  meet  a  group  of  women  from  a
nearby  town  celebrating  International  Women’s  Day  in
the park. They were equally intrigued by our group, who
had traveled halfway around the world to look for camel-
lias in their park. With the help of a park ranger skilled
in climbing, we were able to collect flowers of Camellia
tunganica. The best spectacle, however, was produced by
trees  of  Litsea  cubeba, which  even  on  that  gloomy  day
glistened with creamy yellow flowers. In the afternoon we
were  taken  to  nearby  Camellia  Mountain.  After  a  brisk
and strenuous hike, we found a stand of Camellia hunan-

122

China’s Camellia Lands

Limestone hills along Li River near Guilin, Guangxi, shrouded in fog and mist, evoke impressions of fantastic creatures. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

ica. But  the  most  exciting  find  of  the  day  was  a  small
shrub bearing iridescent blue fruits of great beauty, iden-
tified as Dichroa febrifuga (00251).

The following morning began with a visit to the local
Forestry Institute, where we were greeted by the director
emeritus, Lou Zhongchun, who in the 1950s discovered
a  new  species  of  coniferous  tree,  Cathaya  argyrophylla,
belonging  to  a  previously  unknown  genus.  Only  about
three  thousand  trees  have  been  found  in  the  wild  since
then.  The  Forestry  Institute  works  on  developing
methods of propagation and utilization of these rare trees
in  reforestation.  Lou  accompanied  us  to  nearby  Lang
Shan National Park, known for its dramatic scenery, with
limestone mountains immersed in fog and rain most of
the  year.  There  we  found  Camellia  handelii, a  species
smaller in stature, with diminutive leaves and flowers.

This  month-long  expedition  culminated  on  11
March with a trip to Bojia Township in Liuyang County,
near Changsha, the capital of Hunan Province. Bojia is
said to have the highest concentration of nursery produc-
tion in China. In a township with an area of 90 km2 and
twenty-one  thousand  inhabitants,  there  are  sixty-one
hundred nurseries. In a meeting with the mayor we were
told that twelve hundred kinds of plants were produced
there, but as far as we were able to determine the over-
whelming  majority  of  these  plants  come  from  a  very
limited  selection  of  several  genera,  including  Camellia,
Ginkgo, Loropetalum, Magnolia, Osmanthus, Pinus, and
Podocarpus. All the nurseries we visited offered large spec-
imens of trees transplanted from the wild, among them
Loropetalum, which had scions of purple-leaved selections
grafted onto them.

123

China

Trees of Litsea cubeba glisten with creamy yellow flowers in 
Shunhuang Shan Forest Park near Damiaokou. Photo by 
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Lou with young trees of Cathaya argyrophylla, a species he 
discovered in the 1950s. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

We  left  Bojia  with  mixed  feelings.  Transplanting
mature  trees  from  the  wild  did  not  meet  with  our
approval. On the other hand, the remarkably high success
rate  in  moving  such  large  trees,  when  no  specialized
equipment  was  available,  astounded  us. Who  could  tell
what this spontaneous outburst of nursery entrepreneur-
ship might lead to in the future? Maybe there would no
longer  be  any  need  for  Westerners  to  travel  halfway

around  the  globe  to  collect  plants  in  China.  Instead,
mail-order  catalogs  of  Bojia  nurseries  could  offer  any-
thing one could ever wish to grow.

We departed Changsha on 12 March and returned to
the  United  States  with  fifty  collections  of  cuttings  and
seeds,  including  twenty-six  camellias,  in  addition  to
twenty-six collections of camellia pollen.

124

AUSTRALASIA

DOWN UNDER

The first Longwood plant-collecting expedition to Aus-
tralia  was  organized  in  1958  under  the  auspices  of  the
USDA-Longwood  plant  exploration  program.  Two
explorers selected for this expedition were Dr. Walter H.
Hodge,  head  of  education  and  research  at  Longwood
Gardens, and George H. Spalding, superintendent of the
Los  Angeles  State  and  County  Arboretum  in  Arcadia,
California.

Explaining  the  rationale  for  the  trip,  Spalding
remarked  that  “Australia,  with  a  highly  endemic  flora,
was selected as the locale of the expedition, because the
flora of this continent ‘down under’ has long been appre-
ciated as one of the richest in the world. . . . Obviously,
it was impossible to visit all of the Australian States on the
five-month trip. Only those areas where we could fulfill
our  objectives  most  profitably  were  visited.  Principal
areas  selected  for  exploration  included  parts  of Western
Australia,  South  Australia,  Victoria,  Australian  Capital
Territory, and New South Wales” (Spalding 1962).

The rarest of the lot
Western  Australia  is  the  largest  of  the  Australian  states,
about 2400 km long north to south and 1600 km wide
east  to  west.  “The  northern  one-third  is  a  tropical
summer rainfall area,” wrote Spalding (1962), “gradually
changing  to  a  warm-temperate  and  temperate  winter
rainfall  area  in  the  southern  part.  The  State  can  be

divided,  very  broadly,  into  two  physical  regions—an
inland tableland (Great Plateau) and a low-lying coastal
strip (Coastal Plain).”

Hodge and Spalding arrived in Perth, Western Aus-
tralia, on 3 September. The next day they headed north
to Three  Springs,  some  320  km  north  of  Perth,  in  the
company of Neil Gayfer, an agriculturist with the Com-
monwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organiza-
tion  (CSIRO).  At  Coorow,  about  24  km  from  Three
Springs, they left the main highway and turned west on
the road to the coastal town of Green Head. At this point
they found wild flowers in great profusion, but the trip
ended abruptly after about 16 km when flooding made
the road impassible. “On the return to Perth via Moora,
Mogumber,  Gingin,  and  Yanchep,  we  traversed  large
areas  cleared  of  native  vegetation  to  permit  grazing  of
sheep,” noted Spalding (1962). “In several places we were
pleased to discover that an uncleared strip, varying from
50 to 100 feet [15–30 m] in width, is preserved on both
sides of the road where native plants abound.”

On 8 September, Hodge and Spalding headed north
again,  this  time  for  a  three-day  trip  in  the  company  of
Charles A. Gardner, state government botanist, “who is
reputed  to  know  the  native  plants  of Western  Australia
better  than  anyone  else,”  commented  Hodge  (1958b).
“He is a self-trained Englishman who fell in love with the
plants  hereabouts  and  has  spent  his  life  studying  them.
He also is self-assertive and lets everyone know that he is
without  peer  in  this  field.”  Hodge  added:  “We  were

125

Australia, with an area of 7.7 million km2, extends latitudinally
from about 10º south to 44º south and shows considerable diver-
sity in climates and soils. It is a relatively arid land except for
mountainous areas, largely limited to the Great Dividing Range
along the east coast, and the wet coastal areas of Queensland and
the Northern Territory. Most of Australia is frost-free. Snow is a
yearly feature only in parts of the Australian Alps in the southeast
corner of New South Wales. The total number of vascular plants
growing in Australia is estimated at about twenty thousand.
Because of its long isolation, the flora of Australia has been free to
develop without contact with other areas; therefore it is character-
ized by a very high proportion of endemic species. At the same
time, it has common relationships with certain groups of plants in

South Africa and South America, which date back to the time
when these landmasses were part of the ancient continent Gond-
wanaland. Dry climates, poor soils, and frequent fires also con-
tributed to the uniqueness of growth forms and flower types of
Australian plants. While the remnants of tropical forests can be
found only in the north, the forests of the east and southwest are
dominated by Eucalyptus, and those of the southeast and Tasmania
by Nothofagus. Southern heaths of Epacridaceae are common in
the south and southwest. The semiarid interior of Australia is
covered by savanna of scattered Eucalyptus and grasses, while in the
central desert areas savanna is replaced by scrub of low-growing
Acacia.

Down Under

Blackboys, Xanthorrhoea preissii, growing on a hill near Bindoon.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Flowers of Byblis gigantea (59203), a giant sundew found near
Mogumber by Hodge and Spalding. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

happy to return to the same area we had been since now
we  could  be  with  someone  who  literally  knew  all  the
plants  he  saw.  It  was  an  advantage  for  us  for  we  now
could put names on a number of the showy things that
we had seen a few days before. Even better, we could learn
whether there were better plants than even the ones we
saw” (1958c).

At Bindoon near Mingenew, located 400 km north
of Perth, “a large group of blackboys (Xanthorrhoea preis-
sii Endl.) made an impressive sight on the slope of a hill,”
noted Spalding (1962). “This arborescent member of the
Liliaceae stands 6 to 8 feet [1.8–2.4 m] high with simple
or unbranched trunks, often blackened by frequent fires
which sweep the region. The common name ‘blackboys’
for this species was coined by the early settlers in allusion
to the appearance of this bizarre plant in late afternoon as
the sun casts spearlike shadows through the grassy foliage
in contrast with the thick black trunks.”

Hodge and Spalding’s next journey into the hinter-
land  took  them  north  from  Perth  to  Coorow,  Waddi
Forest, Maya, Buntine, Wubin, Miling and back to Perth
via the Great Northern Highway. Among the most excit-
ing finds of that trip was spotted near Mogumber, about
80  km  north  of  Perth.  Hodge  wrote  of  it  in  a  letter  to
Longwood: “Today George and I had the good fortune to
locate a colony of Byblis gigantea [59203], an insectivo-
rous  plant  which  looks  like  a  giant,  erect,  linear-leaved
sundew. This is one of the genera we would like to get
established  at  Longwood  so  George  is  planning  to
forward about nine small plants on by air tomorrow via
the USDA Inspection House to Longwood. We hope at
least some of them will make it and can be established.

They grow in almost pure sand (wet) with good drainage.
Their  roots  are  long  and  fragile  so  handle  with  care”
(1958d). Hodge thought Byblis was “a collector’s item not
only because of the interest generated by its carnivorous
habit, but also for its very showy flowers” (1960a). These
are  borne  on  loose  racemes,  average  about  3.5  cm  in
diameter,  and  show  various  shades  of  rose-purple.  The
flowers are backed by yellowish green leaves covered by
minute  glands  which  secrete  a  glistening  mucilaginous
substance  attractive  to  small  gnatlike  insects,  which  are
effectively “snared as on flypaper.”

On  11  September,  Hodge  hired  a  car  and  drove  to
Albany on the south coast while Spalding stayed behind
in  Perth.  The  prime  purpose  of  this  trip,  as  Hodge
explained  (1958e),  was  in  “seeing  a  district  famous  in
Western Australia for its wildflowers as well as being the
site of an especially interesting endemic genus, Cephalo-
tus follicularis, the Albany pitcher plant.” He “arrived in
Mount  Barker,  about  30  miles  [48  km]  from  Albany,
around 6 p.m. so took time out to eat. In Australia one
has to be sure and stop to eat between 6 and 7 else every-
thing is shut down (even in the hotels) and you are out of
luck. Mostly one depends upon the hotels to eat for there
are few, if any, restaurants, especially in small towns and
in Australia, outside of Perth, Adelaide, Melbourne, Can-
berra, Sydney and Brisbane, all other places are small.”

The next day Hodge headed to Denmark, a hamlet
about 50 km west of Albany, “looking all the way into all
the  swampy  areas  for  Cephalotus which  I  had  a  pretty
good idea of its looks though not its size. Finally stopped
at a farm near Denmark and asked the farmer if he was
familiar with this local pitcher plant. Luckily he was, so

127

Australasia

Lothian, left, and Spalding cook lunch by the roadside near Cape
Jervis. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

pitcher which appears on the outer margins of the rosette
in late winter and spring in ample time to be ready to trap
prey in the main insect-hunting season of summertime”
(Hodge  1962).  Hodge  took  notice  of  the  most  exotic
morphological  features  of  this  plant:  “The  diminutive
pitchers  (actually  transformed  leaf  petioles)  are  elegant
structures, well designed for holding water for trapping
such terrestrial game as ants. Three girder-like structures
aid not only to strengthen the one-to-two-inch-long [2.5
to 5 cm] vessel, but also serve as a sort of living ‘barbed-
wire  fence,’  directing  insects  upwards  to  the  ‘one-way-
only’  orifice  of  the  trap.  A  formidable  barricade  of
down-pointing  teeth  at  the  trap  mouth  plus  the  usual
slick surface on the upper inner walls of the pitcher assure
that entering prey will seldom escape” (Hodge 1962).

Their lovely natives
On  13  September,  Hodge  and  Spalding  relocated  their
headquarters to Adelaide, the capital of South Australia.
The explorers were greeted there by Noel Lothian, direc-
tor of the Adelaide Botanical Garden. “Upon our arrival
in town Lothian incidentally had supplied us each with a
typed  day-by-day  program  for  our  Adelaide  visit,  plus
maps of South Australia and the city of Adelaide, plus a
typed account of the vegetation of the State—all of which
was a very nice thing to have to get us oriented. It indi-
cates the type of chap he is—on the ball!” wrote Hodge
(1958f).

Collecting in South Australia covered about 800 km
over some of the more interesting floristic areas east and
southeast of Adelaide. The first trip south from Adelaide
took  Hodge  and  Spalding  through  Yankalilla  to  Cape

Albany pitcher plants, Cephalotus follicularis (581780), collected by
Hodge near Denmark. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

sent his young son and daughter to show me a location
about 2 ½ miles [4 km] back on the road I had just come
on”  (Hodge  1958e).  There  they  found  the  elusive
Cephalotus follicularis (581780), “the rarest of the pitcher
plant lot,” as Hodge described it (1962).

“For a stranger to find plants in the wild is not always
an easy matter,” he wrote, “for although Cephalotus grows
in  peaty  soil  in  moist  open  spots  along  streams  and
swamps, its earth-hugging rosettes are hidden beneath an
overgrowth of grasses and sedges which usually dominate
the scene. . . . Unlike our American pitcher plants, two
types of leaves are produced. One is a normal, flat, some-
what fleshy, green foliage leaf, ovate or elliptical in shape
and  produced,  in  the  fall,  in  the  center  of  the  rosette;
these  function  as  photosynthetic  over-wintering  leaves.
The  other  leaf  type  is  the  curious  little  carnivorous

128

Down Under

Jervis. They reached Cape Jervis about noon, “in time to
cook  out  our  lunch  by  the  roadside  in  eucalypt  bush,”
wrote Hodge (1958g). “Made ourselves a fire of eucalypt
wood and grilled (with sticks) the standard fare of tender
lamb chops (wonderful!) along with ‘billy tea’—tea made
in a pot over a campfire.” From Cape Jervis they contin-
ued east to the shores of Lake Alexandrina. In Welling-
ton, on the north end of the lake, the explorers crossed
the Murray River over a cable ferry and reached Tailem
Bend before nightfall.

The following day they headed northeast to Loxton.
On  the  way  they  traversed  parklike  countryside,  with
shrubby  species  of  Eucalyptus, called  mallee,  covering
large  tracts  interspersed  with  other  shrubby  vegetation.
“In the early days before roads, many people without ade-
quate  vantage  points  were  lost  in  the  almost  unbroken
cover of mallee in gently rolling countryside,” explained
Spalding  (1962).  “The  slender  mallee  trunks  are  too
limber to support the weight of a man for climbing.”

From Loxton the explorers continued north to Berri,
where they turned west to return to Adelaide. While in
Adelaide,  Hodge  and  Spalding  visited  several  private
gardens of “special interest to plantsmen.” One of them
was  Alison  Ashby’s  garden  in  Blackwood,  an  Adelaide
suburb,  known  for  its  collection  of  myrtaceous  plants,
especially Callistemon and Melaleuca, described by Hodge
as “really outstanding.” Among the species procured from
Ashby’s  collection  were  Callistemon  phoeniceus (59551),
with brilliant red inflorescences, and Melaleuca pentagona
(59788), with profuse heads of pink flowers. Hodge and
Spalding  also  stopped  at  the  Sanctuary,  a  nursery  in
Ashton,  recognized  for  its  collections  of  Australian  and
South African plants. The owner of the Sanctuary, F. C.
Payne, “has been at the job of growing natives for some
thirty years, so knows a bit about them,” noted Hodge
(1958h), “and by so doing he is encouraging by demon-
stration and by the sale of plants—the planting of natives
in Adelaide gardens. By and large few Australians would
think of growing their lovely natives. . . . The great advan-
tage of a nursery of this type is that it saves plant collec-
tors a great deal of time in looking up the plants in the
wild and they can be seen all in one spot.”

Swanson’s flower beds
On 21 September the explorers arrived in Melbourne, the
capital of Victoria, located on the southeastern tip of the
continent. “Many areas of the State are favored by a rela-

tively  high  rainfall  and  fertile  soil,”  noted  Spalding
(1962). “Farming and grazing, although rewarding occu-
pations,  in  many  areas  have  brought  about  widespread
destruction of vast tracts of native vegetation.”

Hodge  and  Spalding  spent  the  first  several  days  in
Melbourne  scouting  collections  of  plants  at  the  Royal
Botanic  Gardens,  the  second  oldest  botanic  gardens  in
Australia, founded in 1846, and described by Spalding as
the  “world’s  most  beautiful.”  Around  Melbourne  they
visited a number of nurseries, including Swanson’s Native
Plant Nursery in Frankston, specializing in South African
and  Australian  species,  grown  primarily  for  cut  flowers
for  the  florist  trade  in  Melbourne.  “The  plants  he  has
now in bloom,” wrote Hodge (1958i), “are gorgeous, and
we were able to see many things that we had seen in the
wild  but  not  always  in  as  good  condition.”  Spalding
added,  “For  color  effect  only  the  wildflower  fields  of
Western  Australia  surpassed  Mr.  Swanson’s  cut-flower
beds”  (1962).  Hodge  thought  it  noteworthy  that  “the
land  on  which  this  material  is  being  grown  is  a  light
sandy  soil  much  like  the  areas  in  which  you  find  the
things in nature. The soil is of little value for other agri-
cultural use and so makes a wonderful sort of location for
growing these plants.”

The  wealth  of  plants  in  Swanson’s  nursery  inspired
the  explorers  to  modify  their  plans:  “Upon  seeing  this
place, George, who had planned to go on with me to Tas-
mania,  decided  to  withdraw  and  stay  on  in  the  Mel-
bourne area while I go on. This will enable him to absorb
a  little  better  some  of  the  things  we  had  been  seeing
around the Melbourne area” (Hodge 1958i).

Tasmania’s eucalypts and acacias
On  27  September,  Hodge  flew  from  Melbourne  to
Hobart, Tasmania, where he was met by Dr. Don Martin
of  CSIRO.  The  next  day  Hodge  and  Martin  joined
several local botanists on an excursion to the Florentine
Valley and Frenchman’s Cap National Park. “We traveled
northwest of Hobart up the valley of the Derwent River
which is the main river, emptying into Hobart harbor. . .
.  Our  destination  was  the  so-called  Florentine  Valley
which has some of the finest temperate rain forest in Tas-
mania. . . . In the trip up from Hobart to the Florentine
we ran from a rather low rainfall to a rainfall which was
upwards of 70 inches [1800 mm] a year which is rather
considerable for this part of the world. The giant eucalyp-
tus trees which were to be seen ran on an average of from

129

Australasia

A forest of Nothofagus cunninghamii at Frenchman’s Cap, 1444 m. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

220 to 250 feet [65–75 m] high with an age of around
350 years” (Hodge 1958j).

After lunch the group drove north, turning off on a
road  running  up  from  the  river  valley  to  the  plateau
country and leading to the national park. “The forests in
the  river  valley  where  the  rainfall  begins  to  increase  are
largely mountain ash, Eucalyptus regnans, which reaches
pretty  maximum  size  in  such  areas,  but  as  one  moves
upwards to the plateau country, the trees are replaced by
other  types  of  eucalyptus,  particularly  subalpine  forms
and including such species as Eucalyptus urnigera, E. coc-
cifera [582168],  and  E.  gunnii [582170],  all  three  of
which are among the hardiest of the Tasmanian eucalypts.
As one got higher, the rain and wind began to increase
and the weather was really rotten, blowing and cold and
feeling like the ‘Roaring Forties.’ There was a great deal of
beauty in the eucalyptus trunks at this higher elevation,

because  in  the  wet  the  blotched  grey  or  yellow  or  even
reddish  trunks  showed  up  beautifully  in  the  eery  light”
(Hodge  1958j).  Among  several  of  the  most  promising
Tasmanian  species  of  Eucalyptus that  Martin  collected
later and sent to Longwood were E. gigantea (582169), E.
pauciflora (582171),  E.  perriniana (582172),  E.  sim-
mondsii (582173–4), and E. tasmanica (582177).

On  the  morning  of  29  September,  Hodge  and
Martin started on a trip through the plateau country of
Tasmania. They began by heading northwest on a main
highway  to  Queenstown,  located  about  midway  on  the
west  coast  of  Tasmania,  but  it  soon  turned  into  a  dirt
road. “We traveled over the highland areas following the
headwaters  of  the  Derwent  River  as  far  as  Derwent
Bridge which is nothing much more than a wide spot in
the road with a gasoline station and a hotel which is more
a place for people to get lunch rather than to overnight.

130

Down Under

Forest of stately trees of mountain ash, Eucalyptus regnans.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Acacia dealbata, one of the large tree acacias, still standing despite
forest clearing in the Golden Valley in Tasmania. Photo by 
Walter H. Hodge.

Most of this highland area is covered either with a sclero-
phyll eucalypt forest or with moorlands, wherever it is too
wet for eucalypts to grow. . . . In former years, when the
native Tasmanians used to live here, these were regularly
fired since they were the only source of herbage for game
and  consequently  this  is  where  the  natives  caught  their
wallabies or other animals” (Hodge 1958j).

Then  Hodge  and  Martin  proceeded  to  the  western
side of the Great Lake. “The lake itself lies at about 3000
feet [900 m],” explained Hodge (1958j), “and so to get
out of its basin one has to go up to about 4000 feet [1200
m] on a pass and then down an escarpment which drops
one immediately to the northern lowlands of Tasmania.
At this pass there is a great deal of the native pencil-pines,
Athrotaxis, which are typical high country trees, scrubby,
often with unusual form caused by wind. . . . At the pass
level  we  came  across  a  small  mountain  tarn  called  Pine

Lake from these pencil-pines, so we stopped and spent a
couple of hours here collecting and looking at the plants.
It is from such a place that one might expect to find hardy
materials.  One  of  the  things  was  an  alpine  podocarp,
Podocarpus  alpinus, which  forms  little  mats  growing
among  big  masses  of  rocks.  Drimys bushes  are  also
common, growing to perhaps a maximum of 8 to 10 feet
[2.4–3  m],  but  with  very  nice  form,  very  much  like
Drimys winteri of South America.”

From Pine Lake, Hodge and Martin started down the
escarpment  which  brought  them  to  the  lowland  area.
“The  valley  into  which  we  were  descending  was  called
Golden Valley because at this time of year in former years
it  was  occupied  almost  solely  by  gorgeous  display  of
Acacia  dealbata which  even  now  was  just  coming  into
good color,” recorded Hodge (1958j). “These are beauti-

131

Australasia

inland to the Cambewarra Mountains for a short inspec-
tion of the vegetation growing there. The terrain is very
steep with a dense covering of evergreen shrubby vegeta-
tion covering part of the area. . . . We proceeded north,
still along the coast, through the scenic Kangaroo Valley,
an agricultural area, to Bulli Point. In the National Park
north of Bulli Point, Doryanthes excelsa Correa (Amaryll-
idaceae) [59990] is a prominent plant of the bush. This
striking member of the amaryllis family with broad strap-
like leaves about 4 feet [1.2 m] long, produces a globular
head of red flowers about 1 foot [30 cm] in diameter at
the summit of leafy stalks 8 to 10 feet [2.4–3 m] long; the
flowers are each subtended by colored bracts.”

Upon reaching Sydney, Hodge and Spalding paid a
visit to the Royal Botanical Gardens, located on the fore-
shore  of  Port  Jackson.  From  their  base  in  Sydney  they
undertook excursions to several sites in the northern part
of New South Wales. Just north of Sydney they explored
the  Ku-ring-gai  Chase,  an  area  set  aside  as  a  national
park.  “Here  we  saw  the  waratah,  Telopea  speciosissima
[59718],  Proteaceae,  the  state  flower  of  New  South
Wales,” recorded Spalding (1962). “This highly attractive
protead is an evergreen multiple-stemmed shrub to 6 feet
[1.8 m] high with large heads of bright red flowers. In the
wild  the  waratah  prefers  the  light  shade  of  ravines,
although  in  cultivation  near  Gosford  we  saw  this  plant
thriving in light sandy soil in full sun.”

Queensland’s rain forest
In mid-October, Hodge and Spalding made a trip to Bris-
bane, located in the southeastern corner of Queensland.
“The climate here is warm-temperate to subtropical with
comparable vegetation to be seen in gardens and parks of
the area,” noted Spalding (1962). “On both visits to Bris-
bane, the botanic gardens were the principal center in our
search for ornamentals.”

One of the exceptionally showy plants obtained from
the  Brisbane  Botanic  Gardens  was  Tecomanthe  venusta
(59519), a vigorous woody vine native to New Guinea.
“The  main  ornamental  feature  of  the  plant,”  wrote
Hodge (1960b), “lies in the beautiful, pendant, trumpet-
shaped flowers which appear in axillary, umbell-like clus-
ters (up to 16 in a cluster on our specimen) on the old
wood of the climbing stems.” The tubular flowers, about
8 cm long, are a light magenta-rose on the outside of the
tube,  fading  to  a  paler  rose  and  creamy  yellow  on  the
inner  surfaces  of  the  spreading  lobes  and  inside  of  the

Flowers of Doryanthes excelsa (59990) encountered by Hodge and
Spalding near Bulli Point. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

ful acacias, the largest growing species that I have seen,
growing probably to 50 or 60 feet [15–18 m] tall with
trunks one or two feet [30–60 cm] in diameter presum-
ably, and completely covered with yellow flowers at this
season of the year. Apparently the people, in clearing the
forests, spare this acacia and so even on the cleared areas
which we ran into below, these trees would stand out on
the beautiful green slopes which were devoted to fatten-
ing or feeding lambs and sheep as well as cattle.” Hodge’s
trip  to Tasmania  came  to  a  close  when  he  and  Martin
reached Launceston, the island’s second largest city. The
following  morning  Hodge  flew  out  of  Launceston  to
Melbourne  and  then  Canberra,  where  he  was  reunited
with Spalding several days later.

North to Sydney
In Canberra, the capital of the Commonwealth, Hodge
and  Spalding  consulted  with  Dr.  William  H.  Hartley,
principal  plant  introduction  officer  of  CSIRO,  who
helped  to  plan  and  organize  the  expedition.  Accompa-
nied  by  Hartley  and  Nancy  T.  Burbidge,  botanist  in
charge  of  the  CSIRO  herbarium,  Hodge  and  Spalding
drove  to  Sydney  on  8  October. The  party  followed  the
coastal route via Braidwood to Batemans Bay, Ulladulla,
Nowra, and Bulli.

“The  coast  range  begins  just  east  of  Braidwood,”
noted Spalding (1962). “Here, on the western slopes, the
forest is composed largely of Eucalyptus maculata Hook.
In  several  localities  the  cycad,  Macrozamia  spiralis Miq.
(Cycadaceae)  forms  a  nearly  solid  understory.  .  .  .  At
Nowra,  we  diverted  the  route  slightly  with  a  short  trip

132

Down Under

Specimens of Tecomanthe venusta (59519) that were collected by
Hodge and Spalding at the Brisbane Botanic Gardens were 
exhibited in Longwood conservatories for thirty years. Photo by
Walter H. Hodge.

tube,  which  also  sports  numerous  narrow  red  lines
running down to its base.

Outside Brisbane, the explorers visited Mount Glori-
ous  in  the  Maiala  National  Park,  located  some  50  km
northwest of the city, for a brief survey of the rain forest
vegetation there. “As we got higher up and the amount of
rainfall increased, we began seeing characteristic signs of
wetness such as tree ferns and some of the palms, in par-
ticular  species  of  Archontophoenix and  Livistona, both
growing together in more open eucalypt areas,” remarked
Hodge  (1958k).  “It  was  immediately  evident  that  this
was not a rain forest in the sense of a tropical American
or  tropical  Malayan  rain  forest  in  that  the  rainfall  very
definitely was not as heavy.”

On 17 October the explorers separated again. Hodge
left  Australia  for  Indonesia,  from  whence  he  continued
on  to  Singapore.  Spalding  retraced  their  routes  across
Australia to return to the sites visited by both explorers
since late August, this time to collect seeds.

Everything so green
Arriving the next morning in Jakarta, Hodge was picked
up by Jan Schuurman of the Bogor Botanic Garden, the
former  Dutch  Buitenzorg  Botanical  Garden.  Together
they drove to Bogor, about 80 km to the south. En route,
Hodge immediately noted how “everything appeared so
green after Australia, a light, bright green which hits you
right in the face. Apparently, there is never any shortage
of  water,  and  crops  can  be  grown  continuously  around
the year” (Hodge 1958k).

Palm collection in Bogor Botanic Garden. Photo by Walter H.
Hodge.

Driving  to  Bogor,  Hodge  and  Schuurman  left  the
coastal  plains  of  Java  and  gradually  ascended  the  high-
lands, with an elevation of about 360 m. Bogor Botanic
Garden  was  situated  in  the  center  of  the  city.  “From
books  of  David  Fairchild  and  the  like,”  wrote  Hodge
(1958k), “I was prepared for the majesty of the plantings
which are very mature, having been there in many cases
for 100 or 150 or perhaps more years. Mature rainforest
trees  with  great  buttresses,  wonderful  lianas,  and  a
medley of palms greeted the eyes as we drove up to the
Treub  Laboratory.”  In  the  garden  they  were  met  by
Anwari  Dilmy,  keeper  of  the  herbarium,  and  Soedjana-
Kassan, curator of living plants.

The  following  morning  Hodge,  accompanied  by
Dilmy  and  Soedjana-Kassan,  set  off  for  Cibodas,  a
branch  of  the  garden  at  Bogor,  also  established  by  the
Dutch and situated about 300 m higher on the slope of

133

Australasia

Dimorphic flowers of Dimorphorchis lowii (582051) acquired 
by Hodge from Singapore Botanic Gardens. Photo by 
Richard F. Keen.

and  Mucuna  bennettii and  sealing-wax  palms  [Cyr-
tostachys lakka] and certain ferns and lycopodiums that I
knew would be of interest,” he wrote (1958k). “Probably
the  most  interesting  collections  from  our  standpoint  at
the gardens are the fine collections of monocots, particu-
larly gingers, Marantaceae, Araceae, and the like. There
are  a  number  of  species  in  these  groups  that  I  do  not
think  I  have  ever  seen  before  and  some  of  them  would
make  very  attractive  ornamentals  in  tropical  gardens
though space would be required for many since they are
large terrestrial things.”

Plagued by monkeys
On  21  October,  Hodge  returned  to  Jakarta  and  from
there flew to Singapore. The following morning he paid
a  visit  to  the  Singapore  Botanic  Gardens  and  met  with
George Addison, acting director.

“In  general,”  noted  Hodge  (1958k),  “the  garden
looked well-cared for and attractive, but Addison tells me
that the place chosen was unfortunate for such an organ-
ization since the soil is very poor and it is difficult to grow
almost  anything  without  continuous  heavy  fertilizing.
On account of this, many things cannot be grown here
and even many Malayan things will not do well. Because
of this, the representation in the garden is rather poor. It
is probably because of this that the development of the
large  orchid  collection  and  the  production  of  hybrids
especially for growing in the Singapore area, has received
a great deal of attention for, of course, these plants do not
need to be put in soil and thus can be readily handled in
pots. . . . There is a great deal of trouble in protecting the

Mature specimens of sealing-wax palm, Cyrtostachys lakka, in
Bogor Botanic Garden. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Mount Gede-Pangrango. At Cibodas, in addition to the
developed part of the garden, a large tract of native forest
had been set aside as the Wild Garden. “Here one really
can get a glimpse of what is true rain forest, not the sort
seen  in  Queensland,”  commented  Hodge  (1958k).
“None of the visitors to the garden go into this part any
longer because rumor has it that it’s infested with bandits.
Apparently, there are bandits and what they are I do not
know, whether they are just plain bandits or nationalists
or  anti-communists,  or  what  have  you.  No  one  was
willing to explain except to state that there was nothing
to be concerned about because they [the garden staff ] like
this rumor since it keeps the public from destroying wild
things.”

Back in Bogor the next day, Hodge continued brows-
ing  through  the  garden’s  collections.  “I  looked  up  such
things as the jade vine [Strongylodon macrobotrys 582061]

134

Indonesia’s Kebun Raya

rafflesiana, which  looks  like  the  hybrid  types  which  we
have growing at Longwood. We were also lucky enough
to see a natural hybrid, N. ×hookeriana, which is a hybrid
between rafflesiana and ampullaria” (Hodge 1958k).

On 23 October, Hodge concluded his visit to Singa-
pore and the entire two-month trip. After a brief stopover
in  Ceylon  (Sri  Lanka),  he  returned  to  Philadelphia  a
couple  of  days  later.  Spalding  stayed  in  Australia  for
another three months and returned to the United States
in February 1959, having collected nearly four hundred
plants.

INDONESIA’S KEBUN RAYA

The brief stay at the Bogor Botanic Garden in October of
1958 inspired Hodge to return to the Kebun Raya, as this
garden  is  now  known  in  Indonesia,  the  following  year.
This  time  he  was  accompanied  by  his  wife,  Barbara
(Bobbie), who served as “chief assistant, general package
carrier, and enthusiastic enjoyer.”

“Although  plant  exchanges  effected  by  correspon-
dence between botanic gardens can be fruitful,” reasoned
Hodge (1961a), “nothing can equal an on-the-spot visit
by a plant hunter, particularly if he is looking for orna-
mental  plants  which  must  be  tailored  to  specific  needs. 
. . . With new conservatory space available for display of
tropical ornamentals, Longwood Gardens . . . was inter-
ested  in  a  sampling  of  unusual  Indonesian  plants.  My
visit to the Kebun Raya saved endless weeks or months of
activity in the field.”

Great garden
The Hodges arrived at Jakarta on 29 September. Follow-
ing  a  few  hours’  drive  south  from  the  capital,  they
reached Bogor in early afternoon, met Dr. Kusnoto Sety-
odiwiryo, director of the garden, and checked into one of
the guesthouses for visiting scientists.

“In the Indonesian language,” wrote Hodge (1961a),
“Kebun Raya denotes ‘great garden.’ To most Indonesians
the phrase refers to but one spot, the beautiful Javanese
garden  at  Bogor,  known  in  Dutch  colonial  days  as
Buitenzorg. Today, after nearly 150 years of existence, the
Kebun Raya at Bogor, still is the most famous of all trop-
ical gardens. . . . During its long existence, thousands of
different kinds of plants have been cultivated at Bogor. At
the  present  time  about  10,000  to  12,000  living  species

Nepenthes ×hookeriana, a natural hybrid between N. rafflesiana and
N. ampullaria, found by Hodge in a secondary scrub woodland
outside Singapore. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

collections not only from man, since many of the plants
are worth hundreds of dollars, but even more so from the
monkeys which plague the gardens.”

One of the noteworthy plants Hodge collected at the
Singapore Botanic Gardens was Hoya lacunosa (582062),
native  to  Indonesia.  “In  habit  and  foliage  this  woody
climber  is  much  prettier  than  the  familiar  wax-plant
[Hoya  carnosa],”  wrote  Hodge  (1960c).  The  delicately
fragrant flowers of this plant have greenish yellow petals
whose  inner  surfaces  sport  a  corona  of  velvety  hairs.
Among other botanical gems uncovered by Hodge in Sin-
gapore  were  Acrotrema  costatum (582049),  Mussaenda
philippica ‘Doña  Aurora’  (582054),  and  a  number  of
orchids, including Dimorphorchis lowii (582051), Oncid-
ium ‘Golden  Showers’  (582055),  and  ×Vandachnis
Premier grex (582058).

The  next  day  Addison  took  Hodge  to  a  secondary
scrub woodland on the outskirts of the city to show him
wild  species  of  tropical  pitcher  plants  of  the  genus
Nepenthes. “One could tell from the height of the forest
that the land was rather poor because most of the trees
did not grow much more than 40 or 50 feet [12–15 m]
tall and the underbrush was rather open. The soil was a
red clay. As we walked into the scrub area we found quite
a number of pitcher plants trailing along the ground or
scrambling into the low bushes and sometimes even up
the  trees.  The  species  involved  were  Nepenthes  gracilis
with  a  slender  pitcher,  N.  ampullaria which  has  little
short stubby pitchers many of which are arranged in con-
centric rings, it would seem, around the stems of what-
ever the plant is climbing upon, and the largest of all, N.

135

Australasia

Indonesia, the largest country in Southeast Asia, composed of
13,667 islands in the Indian and Pacific oceans, extends from east
to west for about 5400 km and covers more than 2 million km2.
The major islands feature rugged, volcanic mountains, which slope
down to coastal plains with frequent alluvial swamps. Indonesia’s
position astride the equator assures that temperatures are high and
fairly uniform throughout the year, and that they are moderated
only at higher elevations. Most of Indonesia receives heavy rainfall,
with the highest amounts from December to March. From central
Java eastward, the dry season becomes more pronounced. The
annual precipitation ranges from more than 2000 mm in Borneo,

Sumatra, and Java to 1000 mm in parts of the Lesser Sunda
Islands. Most of Indonesia is covered by tropical rain forest. About
thirty thousand species of flowering plants are native to Indonesia,
including about five thousand orchids. The most prevalent type of
vegetation is mixed lowland and hill tropical rain forest, character-
ized by the presence of a large number of buttressed trees, woody
lianas, epiphytes, saprophytes, and parasites. Above 1500 m,
mountainous evergreen rain forest composed of oaks and laurels
dominates, while mangrove forests are widespread along the
swampy shores.

are inventoried on the Kebun Raya’s grounds, and others
are found at branch gardens in Indonesia.”

The  day  after  the  Hodges  arrived,  Walter  Hodge,
armed with lists of plants desired for Longwood, “roamed
the garden and mapped out his plan of attack” (B. Hodge
1959a).  He  later  explained  his  strategy:  “From  a  pub-
lished catalogue of plants available at the Kebun Raya as
well as from notes taken during a prior visit, I already had
upon my arrival at Bogor completed lists of plants that
were  to  be  collected.  I  was  interested  in  conservatory
plants  that  could  be  grown  at  Longwood  Gardens  or
sister  establishments,  or  species  that  could  be  planted
outdoors  in  tropical  or  subtropical  locations  in  the
United States” (Hodge 1961a).

Work begins
The next five weeks were dedicated to scrupulous studies
of  the  collections  in  the  garden  and  choosing  the  most

desired species. In their daily routines the Hodges were
helped by Soedjana-Kassan and Tati, his assistant.

“Our  workday  here  starts  at  7  a.m.  like  all  over
Indonesia  where  people  work  till  2  p.m.  then  have  the
balance  of  the  day  off,  when  it  is  hottest,”  Hodge
reported to Longwood (1959c). “Weather here is not as
hot and sticky as in Jakarta, an hour away, but it is still
warm,  running  probably  between  78º  and  90ºF
[26ºC–32ºC]. Usually it rains in the late afternoon and
this brings a little cooling weather for sleeping. Otherwise
you  can  depend  on  fair  weather  every  morning  when
work has to be done.”

The  first  shipment  of  plants  was  sent  out  to  the
United States on 5 October. “We had a regular produc-
tion  line  going,”  noted  Bobbie  Hodge  (1959b).  “Soed-
jana-Kassan  and  his  men  brought  material  from
greenhouses  and  gardens  for  us,  Walt  selected  and  pre-
pared, I wrote necessary slips, etc.” Preparation of plant

136

Indonesia’s Kebun Raya

Torch-ginger, Etlingera elatior (592335), was one of many 
ornamental gingers native to Indonesia and procured by Hodge at
Bogor. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Hodge and Tati, curatorial assistant, who helped the Hodges with
their work at the Kebun Raya. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

shipments  had  to  be  synchronized  with  airline  flight
schedules  in  Java,  and  special  arrangements  had  to  be
made for living plants to be carried in the plane’s heated
compartments. “The rapidity of modern air transport is
assurance that certain plants, that can be shipped only as
seeds (palms, for example), will reach their destination in
living  condition,”  explained  Walter  Hodge  (1961a).
“This is important, for seeds of some palms remain viable
for scarcely more than a week or so after collection. The
majority  of  plants  could  be  sent  as  fresh  cuttings.
Wrapped  in  plastic  bags,  vegetative  propagations  are
almost assured of safe arrival.”

World’s largest orchid
On 7 October the Hodges traveled, in the company of
Soedjana-Kassan,  to  Cibodas,  a  satellite  garden  of  the

Bobbie Hodge cleaned seeds collected at the Kebun Raya and 
prepared them for shipment. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Kebun Raya. “Cibodas is located on the eastern slopes of
the Gedeh mountains at an elevation of just over 1500
m,” Hodge explains. “It was established to accommodate
introductions requiring a cooler and rainier climate than
at  Bogor—such  as  Cinchona, source  of  quinine,  which
was first introduced into Java from Peru and Bolivia in
the 1850s.”

Hodge  was  familiar  with  the  collection  at  Cibodas
from his previous visit to Java. “Walt had hoped to stay
two  days  there,”  wrote  Bobbie  Hodge  (1959b),  “but  as
there are supposed to be robbers which descend on the
place at night, we were not allowed to stay.” Despite these
restrictions, Walter Hodge managed to collect a number
of interesting plants at Cibodas, including Medinilla ver-
rucosa (592307),  an  epiphyte  with  showy  blue  fruits;

137

Australasia

Wild Vietnamese banana, Musa coccinea (592295), ornate with
scarlet bracts, was acquired by Hodge at the Cibodas branch of the
Kebun Raya. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Dipteris conjugata (592287), a large terrestrial fern collected by
Hodge at the Cibodas branch of the Kebun Raya. Photo by 
Walter H. Hodge.

Musa  coccinea (592295),  a  showy  wild  banana  with
upright scarlet inflorescences, native to Vietnam; Rhodo-
dendron  javanicum (592299),  an  epiphytic  species  with
orange flowers, found growing wild around Cibodas; and
several attractive large ferns native to Java, among them
Dipteris conjugata (592287), Leucostegia hymenophylloides
(592284), and Oleandra neriiformis (592285).

Upon  their  return  from  Cibodas  to  Bogor,  the
Hodges  prepared  another  consignment  of  seeds  and
living plants to be shipped to Longwood. Subsequently
the shipments were made at about weekly intervals. In a
letter  sent  to  Seibert  at  Longwood,  Hodge  reported  on
the progress they were making: “Of special items for us I
have  gotten  seed,  seedlings,  and  small  plants  of  Cyr-
tostachys [592225–6,  592296,  592319];  a  good  sized
Grammatophyllum [G.  speciosum 592274];  seeds  and

seedlings of Victoria amazonica [592317] (do not know
whether the latter will carry well as plants); several inter-
esting  epiphytic  species  of  Lycopodium [592300–1,
592342]; and a very nice selection of large-leaved mono-
cots” (1959b).

One extraordinary plant collected at Kebun Raya was
Grammatophyllum  speciosum, sugarcane  orchid,  consid-
ered to be the world’s largest epiphytic orchid, growing
on a number of the larger trees in the garden. “This is a
spectacular  thing  with  the  mottled  brown  flowers  and
very large leafy stems which may be 10 feet [3 m] long,”
wrote Hodge (1958k).

Scraping the surface
By  20  October,  Hodge  had  finished  up  his  collecting
activities  in  Bogor.  “As  originally  planned  I  have  been

138

Indonesia’s Kebun Raya

Sugarcane orchid, Grammatophyllum speciosum (592274), the
largest of the epiphytic orchids, with an inflorescence up to 3 m in
length, and each plant with up to a hundred flowers, was collected
by Hodge at Kebun Raya. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Impressive clumps of palms, Oncosperma horridum, grace an alley
at the Bogor Botanic Garden. A single seedling acquired by Hodge
was forwarded to Fairchild Tropical Garden in Miami. Photo by
Walter H. Hodge.

focusing  primary  attention  on  the  foliage  plants,”  he
wrote to Seibert, “particularly the showy monocots, and
including some of the rarer palms that are in seed. A lot
of the latter are best for the Fairchild Tropical Garden but
there  are  several  very  nice  small  palms  endemic  to
Indonesia and New Guinea that I have been able to get
and which would be nice for us to try. . . . To date I have
close to two hundred things collected and by tomorrow
or the next day (my deadline for final collecting here) that
total may increase perhaps twenty-five to fifty numbers.
If we get out of this a dozen nice things we should be sat-
isfied” (1959b).

After  making  the  last  shipment  on  22  October,
Hodge  wrote  to  Longwood:  “Something  over  two
hundred species have been collected. There still remains a

gold  mine  of  material  here.  I  have  only  scraped  the
surface though much could not be used under glass and
would be better for outdoor gardens in the subtropics or
tropics of America” (1959c).

The Hodges’ time in Indonesia came to an end on 26
October, when they said farewells to their hosts at Kebun
Raya, and returned to the United States by way of Thai-
land and Japan. A total of 218 species were collected in
Indonesia. A large number of these were shared with the
Fairchild  Tropical  Garden.  Palms,  orchids,  gingers,
arums, ferns, and club-mosses were all prominently fea-
tured among the collections.

One  of  the  more  intriguing  collections  made  by
Hodge  on  this  trip  were  seeds  of  an  unknown  Amor-
phophallus (592216)  native  to  Sumatra.  When  germi-

139

A titan arum, Amorphophallus
titanum (571638), received
from Sumatra in 1957, 
flowered at Longwood in April
1961. Hodge photographs the
tiny flowers inside the leaflike
spathe of the inflorescence,
while Elaine Hampfler,
research assistant, and Richard
W. Lighty, geneticist, observe.
This was only the second time
such an event took place in
the Western Hemisphere, after
the 1937 blooming of a titan
arum at the New York 
Botanical Garden. Photo by
Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

Flowers of a titan arum 
inflorescence, Amorphophallus
titanum (571638), as seen on
the spadix through a hole cut
in the leaflike spathe. Contrary
to its being sometimes pro-
claimed “the world’s largest
flower,” the titan arum has
thousands of tiny flowers
tightly arranged on the spadix
and forming an inflorescence.
Unopened male flowers are
seen above the much larger,
jug-shaped female flowers.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

A Big Lump of Country

nated at Longwood the species was identified as A. forbe-
sii. It  produced  quite  imposing  inflorescences.  These,
however,  paled  in  comparison  to  those  produced  by
another  Sumatran  native,  titan  arum,  A.  titanum
(571638),  which  had  arrived  at  Longwood  from  that
island two years earlier.

A BIG LUMP OF COUNTRY

The first opportunity to acquire plants from New Guinea
for  Longwood’s  collections  came  when  a  letter  arrived
from Dr. Leonard J. Brass one winter day in 1959. Brass,
an Australian botanist, was a member of Archbold Expe-
ditions  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History.
“We  are  planning  a  Sixth  Archbold  Expedition,”  Brass
wrote  to  Seibert,  “and  on  the  recommendation  of  Dr.
Swallen of the U.S. National Herbarium and Dr. Harold
E.  Anthony  of  our  Museum,  I  should  like  to  offer  to
collect  and  send  you  seeds  of  ornamental  herbaceous
plants”  (Brass  1959).  As  Seibert  was  away  at  that  time,
collecting plants in South America, Hodge replied enthu-
siastically to Brass’s offer: “I believe it would be safe to say
that, realizing the limitations of greenhouse culture, we
are interested in anything (except large trees) which could
be considered of outstanding ornamental value” (Hodge
1959a).

Although,  in  the  end,  Brass’s  1959  collections  for
Longwood  were  limited  almost  exclusively  to  ferns—
Papuapteris linearis (591781), Leptopteris alpina (59458),
and several Cyathea species (591776–80) among them—
he  managed  to  convince  Seibert  of  New  Guinea’s
immense  floristic  resources.  “One  can  achieve  a  lot  in
specialized,  not  bulky,  collecting  in  a  month  or  two,”
wrote Brass (1960), “but New Guinea is a big lump of
country,  and  very  diversified  ecologically,  and  a  longer
period could well be spent in it for ornamental plants.”
Brass advised Seibert that an expedition to collect orna-
mental  plants  in  New  Guinea  was  “quite  feasible  in
concept, and one which should prove very profitable for
the gardens.”

It was not, however, until ten years later, when Long-
wood  and  the  USDA  launched  an  expedition  to  New
Guinea  that  these  ideas  would  come  to  fruition.  Two
explorers, Harold F. Winters, research horticulturist, and
Dr. Joseph J. Higgins, plant physiologist, both from the
USDA New Crops Research Branch in Beltsville, Mary-
land, were selected to undertake this trip.

Rhododendron zoelleri and the other 156 species of New Guinea
rhododendrons belong to section Vireya, named after French 
naturalist Julien Joseph Virey. Of nearly three hundred species of
Vireya rhododendrons, all but seven are found in Malesia, com-
prising the Malay Peninsula and Malay Archipelago, of which 
New Guinea is a part. Vireya rhododendrons distinguish them-
selves by flowering repeatedly throughout the year, producing
flowers in colors of a clarity and intensity not seen in other 
rhododendrons, and by their ability to grow epiphytically. 
Photo by Joseph J. Higgins.

Winters  explained  the  rationale  for  selecting  New
Guinea: “It was chosen for exploration because it is one
of  the  world’s  most  primitive  regions  and  has  been  less
thoroughly explored for plants than most other parts of
the  world.  It  was  largely  bypassed  during  the  colonial
expansion  period  of  European  nations  until  late  in  the
nineteenth century. Some of its highland tribes were not
pacified  until  air  transportation  opened  up  the  country
during and after World War II. . . . Ornamental plant col-
lection from this area was timely. The inland peoples of
New Guinea support themselves entirely by agriculture.
Civilizing  influences  of  the  Australian  administration
have stopped cannibalism and tribal wars, and instituted
health  programs.  The  resulting  increase  in  population
causes  greater  pressure  on  the  land  for  food.  Conse-
quently,  forested  land  is  being  cleared  for  gardens  at  a
greater  rate  than  previously;  and  the  cleared  areas  are
extending farther up the mountain sides. Even above the
frost  line  the  native  vegetation  is  being  destroyed  by
logging and wood cutting operations and by roving herds
of pigs” (Winters 1970f).

The expedition’s collecting was fairly broadly defined
but rhododendrons were given high priority. “Of approx-
imately  850  known  species  in  this  genus,”  explained
Winters (1970f), “about 157 occur in New Guinea. All

141

The Island of New Guinea lies between the equator and latitude
11º south, directly north of Australia. Its flora bears affinities to
that of Southeast Asia, the Greater Sunda Islands, and Australia.
New Guinea ranks among the most diverse regions of the world,
with twenty-one thousand plant species. The dominant physio-
graphic feature of New Guinea is a rugged central mountain range
stretching over the entire island. This consists of a complex series
of ranges trending east to west, intervening upland plains, and fre-
quent volcanic cones and domes. Parallel to the central ranges are
the much narrower northern ranges, separated by the intermon-
tane valley, which also runs the entire length of the island. Western
New Guinea is part of the Indonesian province of Irian Jaya, while
the eastern half of the island, together with the Bismarck Archipel-

ago, and North Solomon Islands, forms the state of Papua New
Guinea. The main island, which occupies more than 808,000 km2,
is the second largest island in the world, after Greenland. Most of
the land area is covered by forest. Rain forest develops in lowland
areas below 1000 to 1400 m that receive annual rainfall in excess
of 2500 mm. It is floristically very rich, with more than twelve
hundred species of trees forming canopy and subcanopy. In
regions receiving less rainfall, a dry evergreen forest develops,
which is replaced by savanna in areas with a marked dry season.
Above 1000 to 1400 m, montane rain forest predominates, inter-
spersed by man-induced grasslands, largely in the valleys. Upward
from the natural tree limit at 3000 to 3900 m is the subalpine veg-
etation of low shrubs, herbs, and grasses.

142

A Big Lump of Country

Winters, left, assisted by Michael Corabasson, collects samples of
Neocallitropsis araucarioides in New Caledonia. Photo by 
Joseph J. Higgins.

Millar, who assisted Winters and Higgins in their collecting in
New Guinea, holds a flowering specimen of Saurania. Photo by
Joseph J. Higgins.

Wau Valley viewed from a road leading to Edie Creek. Photo by
Joseph J. Higgins.

but two are endemic. Of the 157 species only thirty to
forty  species  have  been  introduced  to  horticulture  but
probably not more than a half-dozen are in U.S. collec-
tions today.”

Ten cents an armload
Departing  from  Baltimore  on  4  January  1970,  Higgins
and Winters stopped in Hawaii in order to consult with
experts  on  the  New  Guinea  flora.  On  8  January  the
explorers  continued  their  journey  across  the  Pacific  to
Noumea in New Caledonia. The purpose of their visit in
New  Caledonia  was  to  collect  samples  of  two  endemic
conifers,  Neocallitropsis  araucarioides and  Austrotaxus
spicata, needed  for  a  cancer  screening  program  in  the
United States.

Leaving New Caledonia, Higgins and Winters paid a
brief  visit  to  the  Queensland  Herbarium  in  Brisbane,
Australia,  and  a  few  day  later  landed  in  New  Guinea,
arriving  at  Lae,  the  second  largest  city,  situated  on  the
coast  of  Huon  Gulf.  At  Lae  they  were  most  cordially
received by John S. Womersley, chief of the Division of
Botany  in  the  Department  of  Forests,  and  by  Andrée
Millar, curator of Lae Botanic Garden. “This area of Lae
resembles  coastal  Puerto  Rico  to  a  great  extent,  warm,
humid,”  wrote  Winters  (1970a),  describing  his  first
impressions. “It is in the dry season so we have had only
a little rain so far.”

For their first field trip the explorers were taken by
Millar to Wau, a town south of Lae, situated at the foot
of Mount Amungwiwa, 3277 m. Operating out of Wau,

143

Australasia

Flowers of Rhododendron aurigeranum (73567–8) collected on the
grassy slope of Beenleigh Peak varied in color from pure yellow
and orange to apricot. Photo by Joseph J. Higgins.

Various forms of Impatiens hawkeri found at Namie Creek showed
intriguing variation in flower color. Photo by Joseph J. Higgins.

Rhododendron konori (73573) impressed the explorers with its
huge flowers up to 15 cm wide. Higgins considered it among the
most beautiful rhododendrons in New Guinea. Photo by 
Joseph J. Higgins.

they  made  several  excursions  to  various  sites,  including
Edie Creek, Meri Creek, and Bulolo River gorge.

“On our first excursion out of Wau, we collected our
first rhododendron on the grassy slope of Beenleigh Peak,
at  about  1450  m,”  recalls  Winters.  “Some  years  previ-
ously the area had been cleared of forest. Rhododendron
seeds, being winged and light in weight, are easily carried
to  such  areas  by  the  wind.  Vireya  rhododendrons  are
good  colonizers,  readily  establishing  themselves  in  such
locations. We had a picnic collecting seeds and cuttings of
Rhododendron aurigeranum (73567–8) in colors ranging
from pure yellow and orange to apricot.”

As Higgins remembers, when they stopped at Namie
Creek, on the way from Wau to Edie Creek, at an eleva-

tion of about 1200 m, “Impatiens hawkeri appeared, the
first of many impatiens collected. We were attracted to its
potential  for  horticultural  value  because  of  the  large
flowers,  some  7  cm  in  diameter.”  They  found  various
forms of this species growing along wet stream banks, the
flowers ranging from pink (71202) and rose (71203–9)
to pale salmon and white (71210–14).

“In  search  of  other  plants  we  climbed  to  2100  m,”
notes Higgins, “where one of the most beautiful rhodo-
dendrons  was  encountered  of  the  many  we  were  ulti-
mately to collect. This was Rhododendron konori (73573).
Its  white  flowers  were  nearly  15  cm  across  and  had
unusually numbered seven petals flaring at the end of its
tube.”  More  rhododendrons  were  collected  from  old

144

A Big Lump of Country

were  numerous  orchids,  such  as  Acanthephippium
papuanum (701191), Coelogyne pustulosa (701214), and
Grammatophyllum  papuanum (70851);  ferns,  including
Drynaria  sparsisora (701265);  and  gingers,  such  as
Curcuma longa (72686). After ten days of what Winters
(1970b) described as “frantic collecting” in the Wau area,
the explorers had gathered two hundred plants.

Little tree with flowers
On  2  February  the  expedition  headed  northwest  from
Lae up the Markham Valley, through the Kassam Pass, to
the  eastern  highlands.  There  Higgins  and  Winters
worked  for  several  days  around  Kainantu,  Aiyura,  and
Arona. On Kassam Pass and along the road from Aiyura
to Arona they collected a couple of undetermined Impa-
tiens with flowers ranging in color from rose to creamy
white (71223–4). In the hills above Aiyura, Higgins and
Winters  found  blue-flowered  Dianella  ensifolia (7360),
an  imposing  flax-lily,  and  Rhododendron  macgregoriae
(73575–6),  along  with  several  other  rhododendrons  of
uncertain  identity  (871120–2).  Near  Kainantu  they
found a single small plant of a particularly attractive form
of R. zoelleri (871118), which had flowers with a broad
golden  throat  and  petal  tips  marked  with  dark  salmon,
and  a  form  of  R.  macgregoriae (73577)  with  rose-pink
flowers, larger than typical for this species.

Upon their return from the highlands, Higgins and
Winters  scheduled  a  charter  flight  for  9  February  that
would  take  them  south  to  Woitape;  from  there,  they
planned to walk up Mount Albert Edward, 3993 m, in
the  Owen  Stanley  Range.  At  the  last  minute,  however,
they  had  to  change  plans.  “Our  trip  to  Mount  Albert
Edward  fell  through  because  of  continued  bad  weather
there,” explained Winters (1970c). “As an alternate plan
we chartered a plane to take us to Mindik Village, north
of here [Lae] in the Saruwaged Range.”

Upon landing in Mindik, a Swiss Lutheran mission-
ary station, on a narrow grass strip, the explorers hired a
dozen bearers to carry 500 kg of gear to the village of Are-
genang, 20 km away. “After a half day’s hike up and down
and around many mountains we reached the village and
were abandoned immediately by our bearers after receiv-
ing each of their seven shillings,” recalled Higgins (1970).
“Our new natives gave us one of their village huts to stay
in for the next several days. Here, again, in all directions
we struck out to gather all the plants we could. The hut
was quite a dwelling to behold, naturally a thatched hut.

Many children in Patep II joined Higgins and Winters in plant
hunting and soon inundated the explorers with their own 
collections. Photo by Joseph J. Higgins.

gold-mine diggings in that area in the next several days,
including R. gracilentum (73571), R. herzogii (871095),
and R. macgregoriae (73574).

For their next foray, Higgins and Winters, accompa-
nied  by  Millar,  ventured  into  the  backcountry  between
Lae  and  Wau.  “Andrée  obtained  permission  from  the
elders of Patep II, a village about midway between these
two  towns,  to  utilize  their  coffee  warehouse  area  as  a
camp,” remembers Winters. “Luckily, it was not harvest
season for coffee. Andrée proved a master at organizing a
camp. She had brought along two young men from the
Botanical  Garden  crew  to  assist  in  collecting  plants  as
well as her own cook, and we had our mid-morning tea
in short order.”

Patep II was the explorers’ first experience living in a
native  village.  “For  three  days  we  collected  in  all  direc-
tions, spending the nights in our mummy sleeping bags
in a native hut,” wrote Higgins (1970). “Each trip into
the bush four to six natives followed along to carry our
bundles and scamper up trees and through heavy bush to
get plants for us.” Being near sea level, Patep II area was
heavily forested. As Higgins remembers, “The exotic dis-
tractions  of  the  jungle  whetted  my  interest  in  tropical
ferns while Harold was enamored of the flowering mate-
rial.  Interested  indigenous  natives  began  to  catch  on  to
what we were doing. They proceeded in nearly inundat-
ing  us  with  their  own  collections  so  that  we  were  busy
curating this appreciated bonus. We paid them 10 cents
for each armload.”

The environs of Patep II turned out to be very rich
floristically  and  yielded  many  discoveries.  Among  them

145

Australasia

Higgins washes his hands with water brought to Aregenang in
bamboo poles. The villagers called him Masta Mausgras, Mister
Mouth Grass, for the bushy beard he had developed by that time.
Photo by Harold F. Winters.

The  walls  and  floor,  however,  were  fashioned  by  hand
hewn boards which were flat only in a general way! Our
air mattresses and mummy bags gave us excellent sleeping
quarters in the rear half of the native dwelling. One man
from the Lae Botany Division accompanied us, who was
pretty good with his Pidgin English. In the front half by
the door the cooking and eating took place, while one-
third  of  the  native  village  stood  outside  by  the  door
watching  our  every  move.  We  got  to  know  quite  well
several of the natives who went out in the bush with us
each day.”

Winters remembers how over the course of the next
couple  days  they  became  acquainted  with  the  villagers:
“We  purchased  excellent  pineapples  and  papayas  from
the natives who were generous with what they had. One
evening they built a fire on the ground in front of our hut
and roasted sweet potatoes for our dinner. Unfortunately,
there were so many natives that we could not reciprocate
with food, our supplies were too limited. However, they
seemed pleased with a few sheets of newspaper from our
supply for plant pressing. These they cut into strips and
rolled  cigarettes  using  home-grown  or  crumblings  from
stick tobacco.”

This daily going out “in the bush” around Aregenang
resulted  in  numerous  valuable  collections,  including
orchids such as Dendrobium neo-guineense (701222), ferns
such as Blechnum dentatum (701204) and Marattia brassii
(701269),  aroids  such  as  Holochlamys  beccarii (701242),
Impatiens
and 
(71229–31). But they had not found any rhododendrons.

several  undetermined 

species  of 

Winters and the native bearers return to Aregenang after a day of
collecting in the surrounding hills. Photo by Joseph J. Higgins.

“Searching  for  rhododendrons  during  our  first  two
days  at  Aregenang  had  been  disappointing,”  recalls
Winters. “It was difficult to make the natives understand
what  our  priorities  were.  None  of  the  natives  spoke
English but most spoke and understood Pidgin. None of
our party was really proficient in that lingua franca of the
islands, so I drew a picture of an arborescent rhododen-
dron, showed it to the usual evening assembly in front of
our house and using the few words of Pidgin that I knew,
told them that we wanted to find a lik-lik dewai im e gat
powers, meaning  little  tree  with  flowers,  such  as  I  had
drawn. One dignified older man evidently of some stand-
ing in the village nodded his head and indicated that he
knew where to find these plants. We arranged for him to
guide us there the next morning.”

Higgins  describes  that  memorable  day:  “From  our
thatched  home  at  about  3000  m,  we  hiked  down  the
steep trail through spectacular scenery to stride a razor-
back  ridge.  Heavily  forested  peaks  rose  above  our
curving, twisting footpath as we progressed through the
great  diversity  of  flora.  Lush  isolated  valleys  fell  away
before  us.”  Following  a  rather  torturous  hike,  the  older
guide  led  the  explorers  to  the  top  of  a  narrow  ridge.
“There he pointed to a spectacular clump of Rhododen-
dron  zoelleri (73579),  just  what  we  hoped  to  find,”
remembers Winters. “Some plants were 3 m tall, in full
bloom with clusters of magnificent flowers each 8 cm in
diameter  with  butter  yellow  throats  and  bright  salmon
limbs of five petals. If this were the end of our expedition,
I think we would have been happy.”

146

A Big Lump of Country

Winters takes cuttings from Rhododendron zoelleri (73579) found
growing near Aregenang. Photo by Joseph J. Higgins.

The lower of two glacial lakes on Mount Wilhelm, where Higgins
and Winters camped for several days. Photo by Joseph J. Higgins.

Thrilled  by  this  discovery,  Higgins  and  Winters
rushed to gather the seeds and cuttings, and to prepare
herbarium specimens and photographic documentation.
“It became a Hollywood production considering all the
color  shots  we  took  at  different  distances  and  angles,
Harold and I exchanging places for ‘human interest.’ It
was one great day,” remembers Higgins.

Western highlands
In  late  February,  Higgins  and  Winters  returned  to  the
highlands,  this  time  the  western  part. They  began  with
exploring areas around Kundiawa, a town built on an old
Lutheran mission site. “After spending several days going
out  from  our  motel  in  Kundiawa  into  very  rugged  and
beautiful  mountains,”  wrote  Higgins  (1970)  to  Seibert,
“we  began  one  of  our  grandest  ventures.”  This  started

with a half day’s drive on one of the most daring roads of
New Guinea to Keglsugl. Their destination was Mount
Wilhelm, 4509 m, the tallest peak in Papua New Guinea.
“Our carriers were waiting at Keglsugl so we started
right  off,  6.5  miles  [10.5  km],  mostly  up,”  recorded
Winters (1970d). “We must have crossed the same stream
fifteen times and for part of the way the stream was the
trail. After a few times of jumping from rock to rock you
give up and slosh through as do the barefoot natives. It
rained  most  of  the  way  but  we  arrived  at  the  camp,
11,800 feet [3600 m], about 5:20 p.m. Since it was too
late for them to return, all the natives stayed with us the
first night. It is a dramatic setting. The camp is located
near  the  lower  of  two  glacial  lakes. The  water  cascades
down Mount Wilhelm into the upper [lake], falls to the
second, then another series of rapids and falls below the

147

Australasia

Porters who accompanied Higgins and Winters on their hike
down from Mount Wilhelm to Keglsugl. Photo by 
Joseph J. Higgins.

lower  lake.  Finally  it  flattens  out  and  flows  through  a
beautiful  alpine  meadow  for  1.5  miles  [2.4  km]  before
entering the forested area below. The mountain rises stark
and bare behind the lakes.”

Despite frequent rain, the exploration of the flora on
the  mountain  continued.  “One  native  man  was  in  our
company from the Lae Botanical Division who took care
of  the  language  problem  and  stayed  with  us  to  help
collect and carry during our several days’ stay on Mount
Wilhelm,” recalled Higgins (1970). “A wood stove in the
house kept fired most of the time chased away the 48ºF
[9ºC]  recorded  in  the  a.m.  inside  as  we  got  up  each
morning.  Although  fog  and  rain  were  much  more  on
hand than we would like to remember in the afternoon
and  evening,  we  did  manage  to  get  several  different
species  of  Rhododendron from  the  surrounding  hills  as
well as a number of others.”

One  of  the  rhododendrons  collected  on  Mount
Wilhelm was R. gaultheriifolium (871094), a small, dense
shrub with dark purple-red flowers. Among other plants
found there was an orange-flowered orchid, Dendrobium
flammula (70837), forming dense mats on tree branches,
and Dimorphanthera leucostoma (701234), an ericaceous
vine with tubular, 5 cm long, red flowers, which Winters
later called “one of the most showy species we saw on the
entire trip” (1970g).

On the morning of 5 March the porters returned and
the whole group hiked down, taking longer on the return
trip  because  they  collected  along  the  way.  By  previous
arrangement they were met by a single-engine plane at a
small landing strip in Keglsugl, which at 2445 m in ele-

One of the unidentified Impatiens (71233) collected by Higgins
and Winters along the road from Mount Hagen to Mount Kum.
This clone was later distributed as a cultivar, ‘Mt. Kum’. Photo by
Joseph J. Higgins.

vation  is  the  highest  in  New  Guinea,  and  flew  back  to
Kundiawa.  Their  work  in  the  highlands  continued  for
several more days in the area around Mount Hagen, 4000
m,  west  of  Mount  Wilhelm,  and  in  the  Chimbu  and
Waghi valleys.

It  was  in  this  area  that  Winters  noticed  that  “the
highland peoples of New Guinea have a great apprecia-
tion for flowers, particularly in the Chimbu and Mount
Hagen areas. Here roadsides and gardens often are bor-
dered  with  such  introduced  flowers  as  cosmos,  dahlias,
and marigolds. Numerous native varieties of Impatiens are
cultivated, also” (1970f). In fact, the western highlands
turned out to be the most fruitful grounds for collecting
impatiens. Of the fourteen collections made near Mount
Hagen,  all  but  two  were  from  cultivated  plants.  Some
were  recognized  as  forms  of  I.  schlechteri (71236–7,
71240)  and  I.  linearifolia (71220–2);  others  remained
unidentified  (71232–5,  71238–9,  71241–2).  Their
flowers were exceptionally large and in various shades of
salmon, pink, red, and orange. Many also had foliage var-
iegated with tones of yellow, pink, or red. This area was
also rich in rhododendrons. Pink-flowered Rhododendron
dielsianum (73569–70) was collected along the road from
Goroka  to  Kundiawa,  while  red-flowered  R.  rarum
(871100) was seen in several locations in the highlands.
Returning from the highlands on 17 March, the explor-
ers added a few hundred plants to their collections. “We
did pretty well collecting in the highlands and these rep-
resent  some  of  the  best  rhododendron  materials  assem-
bled to date,” wrote Winters from Lae (1970d).

148

A Big Lump of Country

The impatiens collected in New Guinea, first placed in quarantine at the USDA Plant Introduction
Station in Glenn Dale, Maryland, were sent to Longwood Gardens in March of 1971. They exhibited
great genetic variability with respect to growth habit, leaf size, shape, and color. Since little was known
about breeding New Guinea impatiens, Robert J. Armstrong, Longwood’s geneticist, began crossing
the plants in every possible combination. By the summer of 1972, seven hundred first-generation
hybrid seedlings had been raised. By intercrossing among these, an additional three thousand seedlings
were available the following year. From among these, the ten best plants were selected for naming and
introduction. This first set, released in 1974, was called the Circus Series and included ‘Carousel’
shown here. Armstrong continued his breeding work on impatiens during the 1970s. Ten more 
cultivars were released in 1977 and an additional six in 1979. Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

only a few fruits of the last
but  will  try  to  return  to
Brown  River  again  if  the
rain  lets  up.  We  were
rained  out  yesterday  and
left  shortly  after  noon
before  the  road  became
completely impassible.”

The  unknown  wild
lime found by the explor-
ers  on  one  of  their  scout-
ings  near  Brown  River
turned  out  later  to  be  a
new 
species  and  was
named by Winters Microc-
itrus  papuana. “The  exis-
of  Microcitrus
tence 
population at Brown River
has  been  known  to  local
botanists  for  some  years,”
recalled  Winters  (1976),
“but it was thought to be a
variant of Microcitrus war-
burgiana . . . the only other
species  of  Microcitrus
known  from  Papua  New
Guinea. The collection site
for  M.  warburgiana was
Milne  Bay,  approximately
364  km  southeast  of  the
Brown River site.”

Wild lime discovered
On 22 March, Higgins and Winters departed Lae for the
last time and flew south to Port Moresby, the capital of
Papua New Guinea, built on several hills surrounding a
natural harbor opening to the Coral Sea. Much of their
collecting  around  Port  Moresby  concentrated  near  Itik-
inumu Hill, east of the city, and along Brown River to the
north.

“Even though this is the hot, dry side of the island it
has rained every day since we have been here,” recorded
Winters  (1970e).  “Here  in  Port  Moresby  I  am  giving
emphasis to the request for citrus relatives. So far I have
not found Microcitrus warburgiana, but did find one wild
lime (budwood), a Microcitrus or Eremocitrus with leaves
like the latter and fruits like the former, and another with
foliage as in Atalantia but fruits as in Triphasia. We found

On 1 April, Higgins and Winters shipped the last of
their New Guinea collections from Port Moresby. Before
returning  to  the  United  States  they  stopped  in  both
Manila and Jakarta to pick up additional plants. In the
end the expedition brought back 868 collections, which
included  140  Vireya  rhododendrons.  “The  rhododen-
drons were later distributed to various botanical gardens,
arboreta, and individual collectors around the country,”
recalls Winters. “They seemed to perform best in the San
Francisco Bay area of California, probably because of fre-
quent  fogs  and  low  night  temperatures.  But  even  there
the  outdoor  plantings  were  eventually  damaged  by  an
unusual cold spell. Although some of the collections were
from  near  or  even  above  the  frost  line  in  New  Guinea,
they proved not to be sufficiently hardy. However, Vireya
rhododendrons from New Guinea can be grown indoors

149

Australasia

Petunia integrifolia (871181) collected by Armstrong and Lawson
at Chiba University. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Lawson, left, and Wong in the Singapore Botanic Gardens. 
Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

with special attention to control of shade, humidity and
temperature  as  for  tropical  orchids  throughout  the
United States.”

Among  Higgins  and Winters’s  collections  were  also
twenty-five impatiens. Little did the explorers anticipate
that  this  modest  representation  of  impatiens  from  New
Guinea would give rise to a whole new group of summer
bedding  plants.  The  early  indications  of  what  would
become of these plants appeared two years after the expe-
dition.  “Impatiens has  really  become  a  popular  item,”
wrote  Winters  (1972)  to  Seibert.  “To  date  the  New
Guinea  impatiens  collections  have  created  more  excite-
ment than any of our other groups of introductions from
there.” And this was only the beginning. In 1974, Long-
wood Gardens released the first generation of ten hybrids
called Circus Series, developed by intercrossing the New
Guinea collections. These were followed soon by an ava-
lanche of introductions from breeders at other organiza-
tions. Fifteen years later New Guinea impatiens matured
into an industry producing millions of plants annually in
the United States and Europe and, together with Sultana
impatiens, became the number one bedding plant.

AROUND THE PACIFIC

In  1987,  Longwood  and  USDA  personnel  joined
together  on  a  month-long  trip  around  the  Pacific  that
provided  an  opportunity  to  observe  ornamental  plants
cultivated  in  several  countries  and  to  procure  the  most
promising ones for introduction into the United States.

The team included Dr. Roger H. Lawson, research leader
at the USDA Florist and Nursery Crops Laboratory, and
Dr. Robert J. Armstrong, research horticulturist at Long-
wood Gardens. “The overall goal of this trip was to find
and  collect  plants  that  would  have  potential  as  florist
crops,”  explains  Armstrong.  “I,  of  course,  would  be  on
the lookout for plants that I thought might be useful in
Longwood Gardens displays. We visited mostly nurseries,
gardens, some universities, and private individuals in five
countries:  Japan,  Singapore,  Indonesia,  Australia,  and
New Zealand.”

Chiba’s petunia
After  arriving  in  Tokyo  on  9  August,  Armstrong  and
Lawson paid a visit to Chiba University, where they met
with  researchers  from  the  Faculty  of  Horticulture  and
later toured the nursery. “In Japan we visited many nurs-
eries and seed companies,” recollects Armstrong, “but I
think the most significant place visited was Chiba Uni-
versity  where  we  collected  Petunia  integrifolia (871181)
which  had  been  collected  by  Professor Toshio  Ando  in
Argentina.  In  the  trial  garden  at  Chiba  University  this
petunia did not exhibit, to me at least, any particularly
outstanding  qualities,  but  our  hosts  wanted  us  to  take
something  along  with  us  and  it  was  a  nice  looking
petunia.  This  species  was  later  to  exhibit  remarkable
resistance to drought, and was distributed by Longwood
Gardens  in  its  plant  exchange  program  where  it  was
picked up by breeders and used to develop drought resist-
ant  hybrid  petunias.  It  was  also  used  extensively  in  its
original state in outdoor displays at Longwood.”

150

Around the Pacific

Aquatic collection at the Bogor Botanic Garden. Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

Another plant spotted at Chiba University that later
turned  out  to  be  a  very  successful  introduction  was
Lantana trifolia (881224), a small shrub native to Central
America that produces a beautiful combination of laven-
der flowers and lavender fruits. This plant later became a
permanent feature of various display areas at Longwood
Gardens.

Armstrong and Lawson spent the following two days
in the Yokohama area visiting nurseries and various estab-
lishments of Sakata Seed Corporation, including Sakata
Garden Center, Chogo Research, and Chigasaki Breeding
Station. “Sakata is the largest producer of flower seeds in
the world,” explains Lawson. “At the company’s breeding
station in Chigasaki we were shown many new pot plants
including  dwarf  Clematis, such  as  C. ‘Hakuba’  (93227)
and C. ‘Misette Blue’ (93228). These dwarf cultivars are
the result of more than thirty years of breeding at Sakata.

In addition to being grown as pot plants with multiple
flowers, they are also trained to a single stem and sold as
cut flowers.”

On 15 August, Armstrong and Lawson departed for
a  short  visit  to  Singapore.  Located  only  a  couple  of
degrees  north  of  the  equator,  Singapore  welcomed  the
explorers  with  oppressively  hot  and  humid  weather.  At
the airport they were greeted by Dr. Seth M. Wong of the
National  University  of  Singapore.  Wong  arranged  for
Armstrong  and  Lawson  to  tour  the  Singapore  Botanic
Gardens  and  a  number  of  nurseries,  including  Plantek
International and Multico Orchids.

Adventuresome Java
On  19  August,  Armstrong  and  Lawson  left  for  Java,
Indonesia. “Java turned out to be quite an experience,”
remembers Armstrong. “The number of plants collected

151

Australasia

Succulent house at the Cibodas Botanic Garden. Photo by 
Robert J. Armstrong.

Robby Kerst and his wife shared with Armstrong and Lawson
several plants from Kerst’s nursery at Cikopo Selatan. Photo by
Roger H. Lawson.

Heterocentron macrostachyum ‘Nanum’ (871166) collected by Arm-
strong and Lawson at the Cibodas Botanic Garden. Photo by
Robert J. Armstrong.

was modest, but Java did prove to be the most adventure-
some part of the trip.” Upon their arrival in Jakarta, the
travelers headed south for Bogor. There they checked into
a hotel and the next morning “set out on foot to find the
Bogor Botanic Garden,” remembers Armstrong. “We sort
of had a map, but not a good one. We found what we
thought was the entrance to the garden, but as we walked
in we were suddenly surrounded by armed soldiers. There
was a certain amount of consternation, and we eventually
figured  out  we  were  in  the  presidential  palace  grounds
which were adjacent to the botanic garden. We eventually
did find the administrative offices of the gardens where
we met the director Dr. Sampurno Kadarsan who intro-
duced us to Baskoro who was to be our guide. We were
shown around the gardens and after that Baskoro hired a

taxi for us and we drove up to Robby Kerst’s nursery at
Cikopo Selatan. This was a very nice nursery with a lot of
interesting plant materials. We collected there Heliconia
wagneriana (871167), Pteris quadriaurita (871175), and
noted several other plants we would like to obtain, espe-
cially a dwarf lavender Anthurium (900914).”

After lunch the explorers drove with the Kersts up the
mountain  to  the  Cibodas  Botanic  Garden.  “This  was  a
very  pleasant  place,”  recalls  Armstrong.  “We  collected
there seeds of several Mexican Cuphea species, including 
C.  micropetala (871168)  and  various  color  selections  of 
C.  procumbens (871170–2),  and  Heterocentron  macro-
stachyum ‘Nanum’ (871166), shrub of Melastomataceae,
also native to Mexico.”

152

Around the Pacific

Poinsettias, Euphorbia pulcherrima, grown at the Horticulture
Experiment Station in Cipanas. Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

Bush in the Brisbane Water National Park near Gosford. Photo by
Robert J. Armstrong.

“On 21 August Baskoro picked us up at the inn in a
four-wheel-drive Toyota and we drove up the mountain
to Cipanas to visit the Horticulture Experiment Station,”
remembers  Armstrong.  “There  was  interesting  work
going  on  there  and  some  interesting  plants.  We  were
shown  poinsettias,  Euphorbia  pulcherrima, unlike  any  I
had  ever  seen  before.  These  plants  had  many  layers  of
bracts and came in several different colors. We collected
seed  from  several  promising  plants  around  the  experi-
ment  station,  including  Browallia  americana (871176),
covered  with  small  blue  flowers,  and  Pitcairnia  punicea
(871173), a red-flowered bromeliad.”

Armstrong  and  Lawson  dedicated  their  last  day  in
Java to making the final inspection of the collections at the
Bogor  Botanic  Garden.  It  resulted  in  a  number  of  seed
collections. Among them were an undetermined species of
Abutilon (871163) with small yellow flowers, Hibiscus ace-
tosella (871162), a native of Africa, and Oxalis corniculata
var. atropurpurea (871177), with small orange flowers.

Golden air
“We flew to Sydney in the morning of 23 August when
spring flowering was at its height,” remembers Lawson,
“and we were introduced to Australia’s flora even before
we  landed.  As  the  airplane  descended,  bright  yellow
patches within the city beneath us resolved into masses of
flowering acacias, one of the dominant trees on the Aus-
tralian east coast. So colorful and profuse were the flowers
that the air was golden with their reflected color.”

After  going  through  customs  and  securing  a  rental
car,  the  explorers  proceeded  up  the  coast  to  Gosford

where they were to meet with Angus Stewart and his wife
Jennie.  “Angus  is  a  keen  Australian  naturalist  who  lives
about 60 km north of Sydney where he operates a tissue
culture  laboratory  specializing  in  Australian  native
plants,” explains Lawson. “By previous agreement, Angus
had put into tissue culture a number of Australian plants
that were thought to have potential as florist crops,” adds
Armstrong.  “Bringing  plants  back  in  tissue  culture  was
ideal since they were easily transported in this condition.
Among  these  were  Philotheca  myoporoides (88697)  and
Philotheca ‘Stardust’ (88696).”

The next day Armstrong and Lawson paid a visit to
Bryan Parry’s Nursery, a commercial tissue culture facility
in  the  Gosford  area,  where  they  acquired  a  number  of
tissue  cultured  Grevillea,
including  G.  dallachiana
(88681), G. lanigera (88698), and G. ‘Poorinda Tranquil-
ity’ (88679). Later that day the explorers made their way
to  the  Brisbane  Water  National  Park  to  see  the  native
flora.  “Here  the  ridges  of  the  Hawkesbury  Sandstones
soar  dramatically  above  tidal  mudflats,  waterways,  and
mangrove stands,” Lawson recalls. “Curious honeycomb-
like formations reflect centuries of extensive weathering.
Despite shallow soil, a rich variety of flora occurs in the
park. Many of the plants grow in crevices and indenta-
tions in the rocks, supported only by wind-blown soil or
loose rocks that have eroded from larger outcrop forma-
tions. Aboriginal carvings of birds, animals, and human
figures adorn broad expanses of sandstone, adding to the
wild and primitive atmosphere.”

Botanizing  in  the  Brisbane  Water  National  Park,
Armstrong and Lawson marveled at the diversity in plant

153

Australasia

Beds of South African Leucadendron orientale grow at Proteaflora.
Mathews, shown, founded the company. Photo by Robert J. Arm-
strong.

A dark blue selection of Lechenaultia biloba ‘Moora’ (881155) pro-
cured by Armstrong and Lawson from Plant Growers Australia in
Park Orchards. Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

height, flower size, form, and color within a single genus.
“We  observed  several  of  these  natural  variants  in  the
Hawkesbury Sandstones,” remembers Lawson. “Within a
few  hundred  meters  of  one  another  we  saw  Eriostemon
australasius ranging  from  dark  to  light  pink,  to  nearly
white. A few kilometers distant we saw red-flowered and
pink-flowered  Grevillea growing  within  a  couple  of
meters  of  each  other.  Mixed  in  this  prolific  population
was the single bright red pink flower of a natural hybrid.
Many of the popular plants sold in the Australian nurs-
eries represent careful selection from these populations.”
On  26  August,  Armstrong  and  Lawson  left  the
Gosford area to head back to Sydney, and flew to Mel-
bourne the next day. From Melbourne they drove east to
Monbulk.  “We  made  our  way  to  Bush  Gems  Garden
Nursery, where we were met and entertained by Mervyn
Turner and his wife Nyare,” recalls Armstrong. “Turner
was responsible for the development of the Bush Gems
series of hybrid kangaroo-paws, Anigozanthos. One of his
selections called ‘Baby Roo’ (90913) has become a regular
feature of Longwood’s Mediterranean House display.”

The following day the explorers drove down to Long-
ford to visit James Frew at his nursery. “The diversity and
uniqueness  of  the  plant  material  in  Frew’s  nursery  was
almost unbelievable,” explains Armstrong. “Frew is a real
plant collector and lover. He spends his holidays in the
bush looking for new and better plants and then the rest
of the time working his nursery and harvesting the plants
for  cut  flowers.  We  were  indeed  privileged  to  see  this
nursery, since Frew is very protective of his material and
does not wish other nurserymen to know what he has. He

gave  us  a  number  of  South  African  Erica, including  E.
cerinthoides (881213), E. persoluta (881215), and E. per-
spicua (881216).”

On 29 August, Armstrong and Lawson drove to Pro-
teaflora near Monbulk, where they met Peter Mathews,
founder  of  the  company,  who  gave  them  a  tour  and
shared  a  number  of  plants.  From  there  they  drove  to
Plant  Growers  Australia  in  Park  Orchards,  owned  by
Rodger and Natalie Peate. There the explorers were again
given a number of plants, the most notable of which were
Lechenaultia  biloba (88686)  and  its  superior  dark  blue
selection ‘Moora’ (881155).

The  explorers’  next  stop  was  in  Montrose  at  Aus-
traflora. “This is the nursery that was originally started by
the  well  known  authors  Rodger  and  Gwen  Elliot,”
explains  Armstrong.  “This  nursery  had  an  incredible
variety of plant materials. A number of these were given
to us to take back with us. By this time we were develop-
ing  quite  a  collection  of  plant  materials,  both  in  tissue
culture  and  plants  mostly  in  tubes.  The  tissue  culture
tubes we carried in our suitcases. These were taken out
each night and placed under a light in the motel room in
order to help keep the material in good condition.”

Jury on magnolias
On 30 August, Armstrong and Lawson flew from Mel-
bourne  to  Sydney  and  then  on  to  Auckland,  New
Zealand. They began their exploration in the Auckland
area, where they visited several nurseries. At Dawn Nurs-
eries,  Armstrong  collected  seeds  of  Sophora  tetraptera
(871164) “covered with yellow flowers.” Then, on 2 Sep-

154

Around the Pacific

New Zealand is situated in the Pacific
Ocean more than 1600 km southeast of
Australia. It comprises two main
islands—North Island and South
Island—as well as a number of small
islands. The combined area of the islands
making up New Zealand exceeds
270,000 km2. Both North and South
islands are bisected by mountains and
hills. The tallest of them, the Southern
Alps, with the highest peak Mount Cook,
3764 m, form a nearly 500 km long
mountain chain on the South Island.
Because the mountains obstruct the pre-
vailing westerly winds, the contrast in
climate from west to east is more pro-
nounced than that from north to south.
The rainfall ranges from 330 mm east of
the Southern Alps to 7600 mm on the
western slopes of the mountains. Temper-
atures are moderated by the surrounding
ocean, and their annual mean values
decrease from 15ºC in the far north to
9ºC in the far south. For its size, New
Zealand has a relatively small flora of
about two thousand species of vascular
plants, but some 84 percent of them are
endemic to these islands. The prolonged
isolation of the country has led to the
development of such a unique flora. The
indigenous vegetation consisted mostly of
mixed evergreen forest of predominantly
Nothofagus species, remnants of which
can be seen only in areas unsuitable for
development or protected as national
parks.

tember, the explorers flew south to New Plymouth. There
they  visited  the  nursery  of Ted  and  Nolene  Roberts,  “a
remarkable couple,” according to Armstrong, specializing
in  growing  bulbs,  mostly  of  Amaryllidaceae,  and  later
that day went to Duncan and Davies nursery to see New
Zealand native foliage plants.

“While in New Zealand we toured many nurseries,
garden centers, and gardens,” recalls Armstrong. “Many
of these had wonderful collections of plants. Probably the
most  notable  of  these  places  visited  was  the  Felix  and

Mark Jury Garden in Tokorangi near Palmerston North.
The  collections  of  bulbs,  camellias,  Vireya  rhododen-
drons, and magnolias were really quite good. The magno-
lias developed by Felix were nothing short of spectacular,
and  they  were  being  grown  in  the  middle  of  a  sheep
paddock! After much discussion Roger was able to con-
vince Mark Jury that he should send some of his magno-
lias  with  us  to  see  what  they  would  do  in  the  United
States  (900572–9).  Unfortunately,  these  magnolias

155

Australasia

Mark Jury presents one of his spectacular hybrid
magnolias. Photo by Roger H. Lawson.

Rugged shores of Lake Taupo, New Zealand’s largest lake, located in the center of
the North Island. Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

turned out not to be hardy in the climate of Longwood
Gardens.”

On 5 September the explorers drove north to Taupo,
on the shore of Lake Taupo, located in the center of New
Zealand’s North Island in the midst of remarkable hot-
springs country. “The lake is very beautiful,” comments
Armstrong.  “It  is  said  to  be  2000  feet  [600  m]  deep
shortly from shore. It is a drowned volcanic crater. Earth-
quakes are said to occur almost constantly in the area.”
The  reason  for  their  visit  was  the  Geotherm  Exports,  a
company  specializing  in  Phalaenopsis orchids.  “The
greenhouses at the Geotherm Exports are heated by vol-
canic steam,” explains Lawson. “Ground vents occur all
over  this  area  to  relieve  the  underground  pressure.
Because  of  the  advantage  of  the  natural  source  of  heat,
there  are  many  specialty  growers  in  the  vicinity  who
produce high value crops such as orchids.”

Two days later Armstrong and Lawson drove north
from Taupo to the coast of Bay of Plenty to visit several
nurseries. The next day they closed the loop and returned
to Auckland, stopping at the Auckland Regional Botanic
Garden, where they met George Rainey, past president of
the New Zealand Nurserymen’s Association. “Rainey led
us all around Auckland showing us various plants before
he finally led us to his house, garden, and nursery,” recalls

Armstrong. “It was a very special house and garden. The
nursery  had  some  neat  things  also.  Rainey  gave  us  a
number of plants to take back with us, including Virgilia
divaricata (871176), a South African shrub with very fra-
grant rose-colored flowers.” The visit to Rainey’s garden
concluded the expedition. Later that day Armstrong and
Lawson left New Zealand and returned to the east coast
of the United States, with Armstrong making short stops
to pick up plants in Hawaii and California.

AUSTRALIA’S DRIVE-BY FLORA

The  increasing  use  of  Australian  plants  in  Longwood’s
conservatories  led  to  yet  another  plant  exploration  trip,
only four years after Armstrong and Lawson visited that
continent.  In  1991  Rick  Darke,  curator  of  plants  at
Longwood, and Kathy Musial, curator at the Huntington
Gardens in San Marino, California, teamed up for a four-
week  trip  that  would  take  them  across  Australia,  from
Perth  to  Sydney.  Since  there  were  many  restrictions  on
collecting  Australian  plants  in  the  wild,  the  trip  was
planned to allow the collectors to acquire choice plants
from  botanical  gardens  and  nurseries  specializing  in
native plants.

156

Australia’s Drive-by Flora

Hardenbergia comptoniana (911101), a vine acquired by Darke and
Musial at the Lullfitz Nursery. Photo by Rick Darke.

Agrostocrinum scabrum was among the plants Darke and Musial
encountered growing on the sandplains of the Chittering Valley.
Photo by Kathy Musial.

Sandplains and the wheatbelt
Darke and Musial arrived in Perth on 5 September. They
decided to follow a route that would give them an oppor-
tunity to see several types of vegetation, including sand-
plain  (known  as  kwongan),  wheatbelt,  mallee-heath,
jarrah forest,  and  karri forest.  “Wildflower  viewing  is  a
major tourist attraction in Western Australia, and readily
available  locally  produced  brochures  describe  driving
routes  for  prime  wildflower  sightings,”  explains  Musial.
“Western Australia has pretty much a ‘drive-by’ flora, as
most  can  be  seen  right  from  the  roads,  and  indeed  in
many areas the only native bush is in roadside verges, the
rest  having  been  cleared  for  agriculture.  In  some  cases,
these  roadside  verges  are  the  last  habitats  of  critically
endangered species.”

First  the  explorers  set  out  on  7  September  heading
north  to  Wanneroo,  some  20  km  from  Perth.  They
stopped at Lullfitz Nursery, which sold Australian native
plants  and  was  surrounded  by  a  demonstration  garden.
“Later continuing north just a short distance, we spotted
along  the  road  a  nice  stand  of  Xanthorrhoea  preissii,
Anigozanthos  humilis, and  A.  manglesii,”  remembers
Musial. “Driving up the Chittering Valley, we came upon
another  open  sandplain  with  Agrostocrinum  scabrum,
Lechenaultia  biloba, and  Diuris orchids.  Our  next  stop
was at a rare Hibbertia miniata population, one of the few
orange-flowered species in that genus. A little further on
was a large stand of Dryandra polycephala and D. cardu-
acea, species popular for cut flowers. Wild populations of
many  Western  Australia  plants  have  been  damaged  by

157

Australasia

A colony of sky-blue Lechenaultia biloba was seen in the Chitter-
ing Valley north of Perth. Photo by Rick Darke.

Eucalyptus pyriformis trees with flowers ranging in color from
cream to red were observed in the Alexander Morrison National
Park located southwest of Three Springs. Photo by Kathy Musial.

cutting for the flower trade but cut flower farms are now
reducing this problem.”

The  following  morning  Darke  and  Musial  stopped
along the coast at Nambung National Park, famed for its
stark  landscape  of  thousands  of  limestone  pillars.  From
there they headed to the South Eneabba Nature Reserve,
where they observed many fire followers, including Ver-
reauxia reinwardtii, blooming after a recent burn. On 9
September the team detoured east off the Brand Highway
to see the Howatharra Hills Reserve, abloom with Verti-
cordia  chrysantha. Then  they  continued  to  the  Kalbarri
National Park, about 160 km north of Geraldton, where
they  studied  extensive  northern  sandplain  vegetation,
including  Geleznowia  verrucosa, Grevillea  dielsiana, and
several smokebushes, Conospermum spp.

“The  next  day  on  our  way  back  south  along  the
Brand Highway, we again detoured inland at Northamp-

ton toward Mullewa via Yuna,” says Musial. “Near Yuna
we  saw  spectacular  carpets  of  annual  Helipterum  splen-
didum and Podolepis canescens, but the main objective this
day was to find Lechenaultia macrantha between Mullewa
and Morawa. Before the trip I recorded collecting locali-
ties for this species from herbarium specimens held at the
Royal  Botanic  Garden  in  Melbourne.  Despite  this
detailed information it still took us driving up and down
the Mullewa–Morawa road a few times before we spotted
an excellent stand late in the day.”

On 11 September the collectors botanized along the
unpaved  roads  southward  between  Three  Springs  and
York,  stopping  at  several  national  parks  and  reserves  in
the  heart  of  the  wheatbelt.  “We  found  a  number  of
Hakea species with interesting foliage as well as an excel-
lent stand of Eucalyptus pyriformis, with individual trees

158

Australia’s Drive-by Flora

East Mount Barren is the dominating landform in the eastern end
of the Fitzgerald River National Park. Photo by Rick Darke.

Banksia repens was among the species inhabiting mallee-heath just
east of Esperance on the south coast of Western Australia. 
Photo by Kathy Musial.

Eucalyptus preissiana is a prominent species of mallee-heath in the
Fitzgerald River National Park. Photo by Rick Darke.

with a range of flower colors from cream to red,” recalls
Musial. “Armed with locality details gleaned from herbar-
ium sheets, I was thrilled to spot the highly endangered
Grevillea dryandroides growing in a small roadside reserve
near the town of Ballidu.”

The next day they continued southeast from York to
the town of Esperance on the south coast of Western Aus-
tralia. “Driving through the Lake Grace and Lake King
regions—which  are  lakes  in  name  only,  nearly  always
being  dry—we  observed  much  salt-damaged  land,”
recalls Musial. “The damage was caused when land was
cleared of native vegetation and irrigated for agricultural
crops. Irrigation water evaporating from the soils exposed
to direct sun carried salts to the surface, while the rainfall
was too low to leach them out, raising salt concentration
to toxic levels. South of Lake King we started to see the

southern  sandplain  vegetation,  with  distinctly  different
species composition than the northern sandplain.”

Eucalyptus heaths and forests
The main destination for 13 September was the Fitzger-
ald  River  National  Park,  southwest  of  Ravensthorpe,  a
World Biosphere Reserve noted for its unique flora and
fauna. “While we were driving south toward Hopetoun,
East Mount Barren, 299 m, came into view, one of the
quartzite coastal hills and the main landform at this end
of  the  national  park,”  remembers  Musial.  “The  region
encompassing the national park is known as the barrens,
with vegetation primarily of mallee-heath, with mallee or
Eucalyptus densely  scattered  throughout  the  heath,  low
shrub vegetation morphologically similar to the heaths of
Europe,  but  made  up  of  plants  from  different  families.

159

Darke and Musial spotted Adenanthos obovatus in Torndirrup
National Park, south of Albany. Photo by Kathy Musial.

Kingia australis flowers following a recent fire in the Stirling Range
National Park, north of Albany. Photo by Kathy Musial.

Darke and Musial encountered Acacia drummondii ssp. elegans
while botanizing at the foot of Mount Toolbrunup in the Stirling
Range National Park. Photo by Rick Darke.

Isopogon latifolius flowering in the flats surrounding Mount 
Toolbrunup in the Stirling Range National Park. Photo by 
Kathy Musial.

Australia’s Drive-by Flora

The most noticeable species of mallee were E. preissiana
and  E.  tetragona, but  in  the  east  end  of  the  barrens  we
found the rare endemic E. sepulcralis.”

Darke and Musial made Albany, the main city on the
south  coast  of Western  Australia,  their  base  for  the  fol-
lowing several days. On 16 September they went to the
Stirling Range National Park, north of Albany, featuring
the only significant mountains in the otherwise flat land-
scape of Western Australia. “Bluff Knoll, at 1073 m the
highest  peak  in  southern Western  Australia,  is  home  to
some of Australia’s rarest plants,” explains Musial. “As it
came into view on our drive into the park from the south,
I was dismayed to see that there had been a very recent
and  devastating-looking  fire.  All  of  Bluff  Knoll,  clearly
visible as we approached, as well as the surrounding area,
had  been  torched.  On  the  flat  terrain  along  the  road,
Kingia australis, which typically flower only after a fire,
were  in  bloom  everywhere.  So  were  many  other  plants
including  Acacia  drummondii ssp.  elegans, Hakea  cucul-
lata, and Isopogon latifolius.”

The following day the pair left the Stirlings and drove
west to Northcliffe. “This part of Western Australia is the
realm of Eucalyptus diversicolor, known as karri, one of the
world’s  tallest  trees  and  an  important  timber  tree,”  says
Musial. “Typical associates of karri are Acacia pentadenia,
Banksia  grandis, and  Casuarina  decussata, with  Harden-
bergia  comptoniana and  Kennedia  coccinea found  in  the
understory. This area, just on the southwest tip of Aus-
tralia, receives 1000 mm of rain per year, supporting the
luxuriant forest of giant eucalypts.”

On their way north back to Perth, Darke and Musial
drove  through  the  jarrah forests.  “Adjacent  and  inland
from  karri
forest,  is  jarrah or  Eucalyptus  marginata
forest,” notes Musial. “Receiving about 750 mm of rain
per year, jarrah is not as tall as karri but is also prized for
its  timber,  especially  for  furniture. Today,  much  of  the
jarrah forest  is  closed  to  entry  to  prevent  the  spread  of
Phytophthora  cinnamomi, a  soil-borne  fungal  pathogen
introduced from Asia in the early part of the twentieth
century and wreaking havoc on the vegetation of Western
Australia.”  Darke  and  Musial  dedicated  their  last  two
days  in  Western  Australia  to  purchasing  and  shipping
plants. On 21 September they flew to Adelaide.

Silver goes to Longwood
In  Adelaide,  Darke  and  Musial  were  joined  by  Claire
Sawyers,  director  of  Scott  Arboretum  in  Swarthmore,

Collection of South African Erica species at the Wittunga Botanic
Garden near Adelaide. Photo by Rick Darke.

Pennsylvania. Together they visited several gardens in the
area.  “We  started  with  a  visit  to  the  Wittunga  Botanic
Garden, one of the annex gardens of the Adelaide Botanic
Garden,” remembers Musial. “In a hot, dry, low elevation
of  the  Adelaide  Hills,  Wittunga  features  Western  Aus-
tralian and South African plants, and is noted for its col-
lection of South African Erica, said to be one of the finest
outside of South Africa. Then we went to Mount Lofty
Botanic Garden, another of the annex gardens, located in
the Mount Lofty Ranges east of Adelaide. At 200 m ele-
vation with annual rainfall of 1000 mm, this garden has
a cool temperate climate and features plants such as mag-
nolias and rhododendrons, as well as an excellent collec-
tion of South African Proteaceae. Finally, we visited the
Adelaide  Botanic  Gardens  in  downtown  Adelaide.
Walking around the gardens, we spotted a fabulous silver-

161

Australasia

Banksia dryandroides (911120) was obtained from White Gums
Nursery in Stawell. Photo by Kathy Musial.

cializing in Grevillea. Neil’s nursery and lovely garden sur-
rounded  his  home. The  garden  was  built  on  low  raised
mounds and featured many plants we had not seen else-
where. We took the opportunity to purchase plants from
the nursery, Banksia dryandroides (911120), Grevillea vic-
toriae (911121), and Dampiera linearis (911110) among
them.”

The group’s travels in Australia ended with a drive to
Melbourne. There they were invited to stay with Rodger
and Gwen Elliot in their home in the outer suburbs of
the city. The next day Darke shipped to Longwood sixty-
one plants he had procured from the nurseries along the
way. On 29 September he and Sawyers departed for New
Zealand,  while  Musial  stayed  behind  in  Melbourne.  In
New Zealand, Darke and Sawyers traveled for ten days,
stopping  in  Christchurch,  Dunedin,  and  Auckland,
adding another twelve choice plants to their collections.
A visit to the Titoki Point Garden and Nursery operated
by Gordon and Annette Collier in Taihape on the North
Island, resulted in a collection of the much desired silver-
leaved Plectranthus argentatus (92275), seen previously in
Adelaide Botanic Garden. This plant was later widely dis-
tributed  in  the  United  States,  gained  popularity  among
the gardening public, and has since been offered by some
nurseries under the name ‘Longwood Silver’.

Dampiera linearis (911110) seen by Darke and Musial near Albany
was later purchased from White Gums Nursery in Stawell. 
Photo by Rick Darke.

leaved plant, Plectranthus argentatus, growing under a tree
in the shade. We all marveled at the plant, and vowed to
seek it out and bring one back to the United States.”

Later  that  day  the  group  headed  east  to  Pinaroo,
some 240 km east of Adelaide. “We crossed into Victoria
via  the  Big  Desert  Wilderness,  Ngarkat  Conservation
Park,  and  Little  Desert  National  Park,”  remembers
Musial. “Some of the interesting plants seen were Callitris
preissii ssp. verrucosa and Carpobrotus modestus, one of the
few succulent plants in Australia. The next day we visited
the Grampians National Park. The Grampians, a series of
north–south parallel mountain ranges in western Victo-
ria, are home to many interesting plants, including Euca-
lyptus  alpina, one  of  the  smallest  species,  and  Restio
tetraphyllus. We stayed in Stawell that night for our visit
the next day to Neil Marriott’s White Gums Nursery, spe-

162

Plectranthus argentatus ‘Longwood Silver’ (92275), spotted by Darke and Sawyers in Titoki Point Garden, is frequently featured in 
Longwood’s seasonal plantings. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Rodger and Gwen Elliot,
Darke, and Musial, left to
right, at the Elliots’ house in
the Melbourne suburbs. 
Photo by Rick Darke.

AFRICA

PLANTSMAN’S SAFARI

“Charming hosts, tremendous eaters, energetic conserva-
tionists, enthusiastic about their indigenous plants, with a
wonderful  sense  of  humor,  extreme  segregationists,
rapidly industrializing their country, with excellent land-
scaped highways, an abundance of cars, rapidly expanding
suburbs,  with  a  stable  economy,  excellent  standard  of
living, with little inflation (less than 2 percent since 1958),
with shark infested beaches, and a tremendous capacity to
consume the results of a large and growing wine industry.”
This  is  how  Dr.  Russell  J.  Seibert  (1963e),  Longwood’s
director, described his hosts in South Africa after return-
ing from a five-week tour of that country. An invitation to
visit had come in 1963 from Professor H. Brian Rycroft,
director  of  Kirstenbosch  National  Botanical  Garden,  at
the foot of Table Mountain near Cape Town. That year
the garden and the Botanical Society of South Africa cele-
brated  their  Golden  Jubilee.  To  mark  the  occasion,
Rycroft invited fifty prominent botanists from twenty-one
countries to participate in the celebration from mid-Sep-
tember through October. The celebrations included two
busy weeks of lectures and symposia held at the University
of Cape Town, followed by an extensive botanical tour of
the country.

Seibert  saw  this  as  an  opportunity  to  become
acquainted with the botanical riches of the African conti-
nent  and  to  acquire  new  plants  for  Longwood.  “South
Africa has many interesting flowering plants,” he wrote,

“the majority of which are rarely seen in America because
their  requirements  are  so  different  from  the  conditions
under  which  we  are  accustomed  to  grow  plants.  Take
Alberta magna of the Rubiaceae—it is seldom seen even
in California. We finally flowered it once at Longwood
Gardens.  Many  have  tried  and  as  many  have  failed  to
grow South Africa’s most beautiful and most frustrating
orchid,  Disa  uniflora. However,  a  few  South  African
plants are among some of our favorites for Longwood’s
horticultural  exhibits:  Veltheimia  viridifolia, nemesia
hybrids,  freesias,  clivias,  pelargoniums,  gladiolus  species
and hybrids, and Gerbera jamesonii” (Seibert 1965d).

Bougainvillea street trees
On his way to South Africa, Seibert stopped for a couple
of days in Nairobi, Kenya, arriving on 14 September. In
Nairobi he was greeted by Peter Greensmith, parks super-
intendent, who gave him a grand tour of the city’s parks.
Seibert also paid a visit to the Nairobi Arboretum and to
the  private  garden  of  George  Classen,  vice  president  of
the Kenya Horticultural Society, who had assembled an
extensive collection of succulents, one of the best in East
Africa.

Seibert  was  clearly  taken  by  the  selection  of  plants
cultivated in Nairobi, as indicated by the long litany of
plants  he  requested  from  Greensmith.  Writing  back  to
Longwood, Seibert exclaimed, “What a wonderful collec-
tion of plants here!” and “This place is the most amazing
source of good ornamentals!” (1963b).

164

South Africa has a flora of more than twenty-four thousand
species. Climates range from the extremes of the Kalahari Desert
in the north, through the vast expanses of plateau grassland (high-
veld), unique bushland (fynbos), the semidesert of the Karoo
tableland, the alpine regions of the Drakensberg mountains, and
the coastal forest in the south. Colorful fynbos, with some seven
thousand species, is the key element of Cape Province in the
south. This region receives between 400 and 1500 mm of rain
each year. Regular fires are essential to the existence of this unique
flora. North of the Cape lies the Karoo, where an open bushland is
interspersed with a few scattered trees and more common succu-
lents. This area receives only 200 to 450 mm of rain annually. The
Great Karoo in the northeast receives most of its rain in summer
and is dominated by small trees, shrubs, and long-lived grasses.
The Little Karoo to the south and Namaqualand to the west
receive rain primarily during the winter months. This gives rise to
flora of mostly stemless rosette plants and succulents. Namaqua-

land is rich with bulbous and rhizomatous plants, which immerse
the landscape in a sea of color in early spring. Further north, in
the Namib Desert, where less than 100 mm of rain falls each year,
even succulents are smaller and sparser. Fires are a rare phenome-
non here. Highveld covers the high interior plateau of South
Africa, from the eastern Cape to the Drakensberg mountains.
Most of the rainfall here, 600 to 800 mm, occurs during summer.
Grasses dominate, but bulbous and rhizomatous plants are abun-
dant. Savanna of the lowveld and Kalahari basin occupies more
than a third of the area of South Africa. It receives on average 250
mm of rain annually, mainly in summer. It is characterized by a
ground layer of grasses and an upper layer of shrubs or trees.
Forests in South Africa are fragmented, occurring only in small
patches in areas that burn rarely and receive at least 800 mm of
rain. The last remaining strip of indigenous forest is found in the
center of the long southern coastline between the Knysna and Tsit-
sikamma regions.

Africa

Lush meadows dotted with white blooms of calla-lily, Zantedeschia aethiopica, at the foot of Table Mountain, 1086 m, south of Cape
Town. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Greensmith  later  sent  to  Longwood  twenty-four  of
the ornamentals requested by Seibert. Among them were
eleven varieties of Bougainvillea. The collection of these
spectacular  vines  developed  in  Nairobi  by  Greensmith
was  considered  among  the  finest  in  existence.  “I  have
never seen anything like the varieties or the way they are
grown  here,”  admitted  Seibert  (1963b)  in  a  letter  sent
back  to  Longwood.  His  praise  for  the  skills  of  Kenyan
gardeners  was  inspired  by  the  unusual  techniques
employed in growing a bewildering array of bougainvil-
leas around the city. In addition to enveloping all sorts of
structures, as one would expect vines to do, bougainvil-
leas  in  Nairobi  grew  as  ground  covers,  creating  massive
floral carpets. Living fences, dazzling with vibrant colors,
were  fashioned  out  of  them,  too.  Most  remarkable,
however,  were  the  bougainvilleas  trained  as  4  m  high
street trees, truly stunning when in full bloom.

Many  of  the  bougainvilleas  received  from  Nairobi
were later exhibited in Longwood’s Rose House, although
limited space prevented Longwood’s gardeners from dis-
playing the vines in a manner that would rival those seen
by  Seibert  in  Nairobi.  Nevertheless,  these  Kenyan
bougainvilleas formed a cascading backdrop in the Rose
House for some thirty-five years.

Pride of Table Mountain
Upon arriving in Cape Town, South Africa, on 18 Sep-
tember,  Seibert  was  quickly  immersed  in  an  intense
program of Golden Jubilee symposia held at the Univer-
sity of Cape Town. The symposia were interspersed with
short excursions within Cape Province. Among them was
an “exhilarating trip” to Table Mountain and a tour of a
“marvelous”  spring  wildflower  show  at  Goodwood
(Seibert 1964f). Other destinations included the Cape of

166

Plantsman’s Safari

Cape of Good Hope, south of Cape Town, was a destination for one of Seibert’s field excursions. Photo by Rick Darke.

Good Hope Nature Reserve, the Harold Porter Botanic
Reserve,  the  Karoo  Garden  in Worcester,  and  the  Paarl
Nature Reserve.

While visiting the Bolus Herbarium at the University
of Cape Town, Seibert met with the herbarium curator,
Professor Edward A. Schelpe. This meeting made possible
a collaboration between Seibert and Schelpe, which led to
the  most  significant  introduction  resulting  from  the
South  African  trip,  that  of  Disa  uniflora, commonly
called the Pride of Table Mountain.

Disa is invariably considered the most beautiful and
spectacular of all wildflowers of South Africa. In the past
it had a reputation for being impossible to maintain in
cultivation; with few exceptions, even experienced orchid
growers  gave  up  in  despair.  Although  introduced  to
Europe  as  early  as  1825,  Disa  uniflora did  not  become
firmly  established  in  cultivation  outside  its  country  of

origin.  Writing  in  1967,  Kenneth  Johnson,  who  pio-
neered  work  on  growing  this  orchid  in  South  Africa,
described the success thus far as “spasmodic and transi-
tory.” On many occasions he had been told of someone
growing Disa, but whenever he tried to follow up on the
information, he “invariably received the depressing news
that whilst they did once grow a few, unfortunately they
all died!”

Lack of success in growing this orchid and indiscrim-
inate  collecting  in  the  wild  led  to  its  relative  obscurity.
Johnson was alarmed by the dwindling of the wild Disa
population: “In the short space of one hundred years this
wonderful flower has almost disappeared from the nearby
haunts where it once flowered so prolifically. . . . It is both
a pressing need and at the same time a great challenge to
horticultural ingenuity to evolve simple methods of culti-
vation  and  so  make  possible  the  propagation  of  this

167

Africa

Seibert in the Cape of Good Hope Nature Reserve. Photo by
Russell J. Seibert.

Seibert considered Disa uniflora (64900), acquired from the 
University of Cape Town, the most significant introduction from
his trip to South Africa. Photo by Rondel G. Peirson.

superb  indigenous  orchid  on  the  widest  possible  scale”
(1967).

Was it the unmatched beauty of Disa or the frequent
failures  of  others  who  tried  to  grow  it  that  motivated
Seibert  to  take  on  the  challenge? We  do  not  know.  He
did,  however,  with  help  from  Schelpe,  procure  a  dozen
small offshoots of this rare orchid (64900). They arrived
at Longwood in June of 1964, and in September of 1965
Seibert proudly reported back to Schelpe: “Through the
use of great T.L.C. (tender loving care) and our facilities
for  growing  in  a  mechanically  air-conditioned  green-
house, thus compensating for our naturally hot, humid
summer  nights,  we  have  now  flowered  Disa  uniflora”
(1965a).  Schelpe  instructed  Seibert  about  the  main
points  of  growing  Disa, including  “maintaining  moist
and cool conditions during the summer, watering by cap-

illarity  from  below  during  the  spring  and  summer,  and
[overcoming]  their  extreme  susceptibility  to  fungal
attack, especially just prior to flowering” (1963). Of the
original twelve offshoots, four survived under the watch-
ful eye of Clarence Deckman, Longwood’s orchid grower.
Although the future of this orchid still remained uncer-
tain,  Seibert  was  cautiously  optimistic:  “There  is  good
reason  for  feeling  that  cool  night  conditions,  brisk  air
movement  and  low-pH  growing  media,  are  helpful
factors for Disa’s successful growth. . . . With present-day
modern techniques of artificial climate control, this plant
should  receive  added  cultural  attention  and  should  be
induced to produce viable seeds” (1966a).

Three  years  later  Lois  W.  Paul  (1969),  Longwood’s
supervisor  of  education,  reported  on  the  progress  made
with Disa: “From this shaky start, Mr. Deckman flowered

168

Plantsman’s Safari

four plants, pollinated them and collected the seeds. He
now has close to three hundred plants from this first gen-
eration.  A  second  and  third  generation  are  being  pro-
duced. Through experimentation the dreaded fungus on
the soft stem has been eliminated. Thanks to up-to-date
air-conditioning, a moist, cool atmosphere is maintained
during the hot summer months.” In 1969 all this work
finally paid off. In May and June of that year, visitors to
Longwood  Gardens  could  view  possibly  the  grandest,
showiest  terrestrial  orchid  as  a  mass  display.  As  Paul
noted, it was “a first in this country.”

Cadillac of proteas
Seibert  compared  his  South  African  experience  to  a
“plantsman’s safari” and later reminisced about “trophies”
he hoped to acquire: “I am sure that everyone on the trip
had  different  primary  interests  and  was  impressed  with
different  plants—for  there  were  thousands  of  them  of
interest. For my own part, three groups seemed to stand
out as special. The ericas, or South African heaths; blood-
lilies in the genus Haemanthus (Amaryllidaceae); and the
family Proteaceae, with particular emphasis on the genera
Protea and  Leucospermum because  of  their  spectacular
flower heads” (1964f).

Of  all  the  plants  of  South  Africa,  Seibert  was  most
impressed with Proteaceae, some of which have been tried
at Longwood Gardens since 1956 but with only limited
success.  “A  number  of  them  have  been  flowered  and  an
occasional  one  exhibited,”  recalled  Seibert  (1965d).
“Proteas require nearly four to five years before they begin
flowering. The big problem is to keep them growing that
long (since their growing requirements are very exacting)
and that is just the opposite from our natural as well as
most of our greenhouse conditions.” After the first round
of trials Seibert admitted that proteas “have proved to be
a challenge as conservatory plants—usually dying consid-
erably  prior  to  their  four–five  year  maturing  period  for
flower expectation” (1964f).

He  was,  however,  determined  to  continue  experi-
menting with this group of plants to overcome “the innu-
merable  problems  with  which 
the  American
horticulturist  is  faced  in  attempting  to  grow  them”
(Seibert 1965d). There could be no better opportunity to
study conditions under which these plants flourish than
to  observe  them  in  their  natural  environment  in  South
Africa. Visits to Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden,
renowned for its collection of Proteaceae, allowed Seibert

Seibert acquired giant protea, Protea cynaroides (631272), from the
Municipal Arboretum in Paarl. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

to  see  these  plants  at  their  best.  A  tour  of  a  botanical
reserve on Paarl Mountain, northeast of Cape Town, led
Seibert to believe that proteas can be “well grown under
cool, dry nights and constant breezes, and in acid soil.”

Seibert  was  encouraged  by  what  he  learned  in  the
field in Kirstenbosch and Paarl. He later wrote to Rycroft
about  his  hopes  related  to  proteas:  “They  are  indeed  a
very  challenging  group  and  one  with  which  I  think  we
can  have  a  certain  amount  of  success”  (1964b).  On
Seibert’s request, Rycroft sent seeds of thirteen species of
Protea along with fifty-five species of other South African
plants.

This  generous  offering  from  Kirstenbosch  inspired
frequent  correspondence,  in  which  Seibert  brought
Rycroft  up  to  date  with  regard  to  proteas:  “Since  last
writing  you,  we  now  have  several  additional  species  of

169

Africa

Leucadendron discolor (64726) was among the many South African
plants procured by Seibert from Kirstenbosch National Botanical
Garden. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Protea which have come into bloom; namely, P. compacta,
P. susannae, and P. obtusifolia. Our problem, of course, is
that we have usually only one plant or very few seedlings
to  germinate  and  experiment  with,  so  we  do  hope  that
before  too  long,  we  can  germinate  sufficient  plants  of
each species to allow us to do a bit of experimental com-
parative growing of the various species” (Seibert 1964a).
Longwood growers hoped to receive from Rycroft hints
on the cultivation of these plants. However, Rycroft could
not offer much help, since, as he noted, “We have never
grown proteas in pots under glass and, therefore, have no
experience of this type of culture” (Rycroft 1964).

Seibert  observed  numerous  species  of  proteas  in
South Africa but was especially impressed by Protea aris-
tata: “The finest of all, P. aristata, has been almost anni-
hilated in nature, but it is hoped that this species can be
successfully grown and saved. The beauty of its buds is
outstanding  in  the  genus”  (1965d).  He  considered  this
species  to  be  the  “Cadillac  of  proteas”  (1963c)  and
exalted its qualities: “I think that is one of the most mag-
nificent things I have ever seen” (1964b). Seibert eagerly
requested  the  seeds  of  P.  aristata from  Rycroft,  but
Kirstenbosch at that time had only three plants in its col-
lection, and these seldom produced seeds. Rycroft did not
know  when  he  would  be  able  to  send  a  few  seeds  to
Seibert.

Horticultural virtues of this family are not limited to
Protea alone. Upon his return from South Africa, Seibert
shared his impressions on some of the other proteaceous
plants he acquired for Longwood: “One of the most pub-
licized trees of that far-off part of the world is the ‘silver

Silver trees, Leucadendron argenteum (631271), are among the
most recognizable trees of South Africa. Photo by 
Walter H. Hodge.

tree,’  Leucadendron  argenteum [631271].  It  really  does
appear to be of silver, leaves flashing in the sun and wind.
Unfortunately,  the  tree  has  all  but  disappeared  in  the
wild; however, it is being planted wherever it can be cul-
tivated successfully. The Proteaceae include the silver tree
and the very interesting Leucospermum reflexum [631106,
631150–1] and L. nutans [631148–9, 631195]. The leu-
cospermums or ‘pincushions’ are among the favorites of
the  family.  L.  reflexum has  great  possibilities  for  use  in
arrangements, since it will last for a month as a cut flower.
L.  nutans is  planted  a  great  deal  along  the  landscaped
modern highways of South Africa” (1965d).

Once Seibert had brought the wealth of both plants
and firsthand field observations back from South Africa,
the  experimentation  being  conducted  at  Longwood  on

170

Plantsman’s Safari

Leucospermum nutans (631148–9, 631195) was among Seibert’s
favorite proteaceous plants. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

House,  where  proteas,  their  relatives,  and  other  South
African plants formed the core of a permanent exhibit.

Cross-country escapade
Having two weeks of symposia behind him, Seibert and
many of the other Golden Jubilee participants embarked
on a grand tour of some of the most botanically interest-
ing  sites  in  South  Africa.  This  month-long  tour  took
them across the country, from Cape Town to Johannes-
burg.

During the first three days the group went through
the dry tableland region of Karoo along the south coast.
Turning  south  allowed  them,  after  crossing  Outeniqua
Pass, to reach Knysna, a small town on the coast of the
Indian  Ocean. Vegetation  around  Knysna  could  not  be
more different from that seen in Karoo. Here lush tem-
perate  rain  forest  thrived  and  provided  home  to  many
tree  ferns.  On  4  October,  driving  from  Knysna  to  Port
Elizabeth, further east, the group stopped to explore the
vegetation  at  the  foot  of Tsitsikamma  Mountain. There
Seibert  collected  seeds  of  Protea  latifolia (631111). The
following day was dedicated to visiting the parks of Port
Elizabeth,  said  to  be  the  very  finest  in  South  Africa.
Seibert  acquired  seeds  of  several  species  from  Saint
George’s Park. Among them was Jubaeopsis caffra, which
he  described  as  “one  of  the  really  rare  South  African
botanical treasures” (Seibert 1964c). This palm, related to
the coconut, is found only at the mouths of the Umsik-
aba and Umtentu rivers and at Mkambati in Pondoland.
On 6 October the group continued their drive east-
ward through Grahamstown and Great Fish River valley
to the coastal town of East London. Before reaching the

The stunning inflorescence of Leucospermum reflexum (631106,
631150–1) has a most unusual architecture and makes a long-
lasting cut flower. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

growing  proteas,  leucodendrons,  and  leucospermums
gained  new  momentum.  “Gradually,  at  Longwood
Gardens,” recalled Seibert (1964f), “we have been able to
simulate  conditions  which  appear  to  allow  an  ever-
increasing amount of success and, at least, the enjoyment
of seeing a few of the protea species flower. Essential to
the growth of Protea and Leucospermum would seem to be
a well drained acid soil. Conditions of their indigenous
South African climate indicates that they will not tolerate
warm,  humid  nights.  Of  equal  importance,  is  their
requirement to grow in moving air. Our mechanically air-
conditioned Experimental Greenhouse appears to supply
some  of  the  basic  requirements  for  their  growth.” That
work was to continue for another thirty years, culminat-
ing  with  the  opening  of  Longwood’s  Mediterranean

171

Africa

Seibert considered Aloe ferox (631145), which he had collected
near the Great Fish River, to be one of the best in the genus.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Seibert collected Encephalartos villosus (631240) near Port Saint
Johns in Pondoland. Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

Great  Fish  River  valley,  Seibert  collected  Aloe  ferox
(631145), which he praised: “Of the hundreds of species,
I still think A. ferox is one of the best” (1965d). In the
Great  Fish  River  Valley  he  collected  Senecio  herreianus
(631146),  a  desert  ground  cover.  After  spending  a  day
visiting sites around East London, the group continued
traveling  along  the  coast  to  Port  Saint  Johns  in  Pon-
doland. There Seibert collected seeds of Encephalartos vil-
losus (631240) and Clivia miniata (631245–6).  Further
north,  after  crossing  the  Umtamvuna  River  into  Natal
Province,  they  reached  Port  Edward,  where  Seibert  col-
lected  bulbs  of  Lachenalia  tricolor var.  aurea (631239).
Later, on 10 October, the group arrived in Durban.

The two days spent in Durban allowed for a visit to
the Bews Botanical Laboratory of the University of Natal
in Pietermaritzburg and to the Durban Botanic Garden.

With  help  from  Dr.  K.  D.  Gordon-Gray  and  Olive
Hilliard  of  the  Bews  Botanical  Laboratory,  Seibert  was
able  to  procure  seeds  of  several  species  of  Acacia and
many  other  plants.  When  visiting  the  Durban  Botanic
Garden, Seibert noted the remarkable selection of Canna
grown there. Upon his return to Longwood, he wrote to
F.  W.  Thorns,  director  of  Durban  Botanic  Garden:
“While there, I was quite impressed with your collection
of cannas and wonder if it would be possible for you to
send  a  start  of  the  cream  colored  canna  as  well  as  your
best yellow, neither of which do we seem to have in this
country” (1963d). Ernest Thorp, curator of the garden,
sent  rhizomes  of  three  varieties:  ‘Ambassadour’  (642),
‘Banner’  (64934),  and  ‘King  Midas’  (641). Three  years
later  crosses  made  between  ‘Ambassadour’  and  ‘Banner’
(as  well  as  ‘Lunniy  Svet’,  received  from  the  Nikitsky

172

Plantsman’s Safari

On occasion the muddy roads of Zululand became impassable 
for the bus carrying the group of botanists. Photo by 
Russell J. Seibert.

Seibert collected Mussaenda erythrophylla (641299), a native of
tropical West Africa, at the Holy Cross Mission in Kolahun. 
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Botanical  Garden  in Yalta,  Ukraine)  marked  the  begin-
ning of a canna breeding program at Longwood that was
to continue for some twenty years, ultimately producing
eighteen new selections.

On 13 October the group left Durban to travel north
through  Zululand  to  Mbabane  in  Swaziland.  From
Mbabane they continued north to Kruger National Park
in  Transvaal  on  the  border  with  Mozambique.  After
spending  four  days  botanizing  and  collecting  plants  in
the  park,  the  group  arrived  in  Pretoria,  the  capital  of
South Africa, on 20 October.

While  in  Pretoria,  Seibert  visited  the  Botanical
Research  Institute,  the  National  Herbarium,  and  the
Botanical Gardens, where he acquired bulbs and seeds of
several plants, including Haemanthus magnificus (64262),
Protea caffra (641093), and Vellozia retinervis (64263). The
following couple of days were dedicated to visiting places
of botanical interest around Pretoria. The most memorable
for  Seibert  was  The  Wilds,  a  South  African  wildflower
garden  developed  in  Johannesburg.  In The Wilds,  many
indigenous plants from all over South Africa and Namibia
(formerly  South-West  Africa)  have  been  introduced  and
cultivated successfully in spite of the fact that the Transvaal
climate is quite different from other parts of the country.
In the garden, Seibert especially admired an extensive col-
lection of proteas, ericas, and cycads.

In  the  next  few  days  the  tour  was  to  continue
through the Orange Free State back to Cape Town, but
Seibert  decided  instead  to  leave  South  Africa.  On  24
October he flew to Monrovia in Liberia. Because of his

173

previous research on the rubber tree, he knew about the
Firestone  Company’s  immense  rubber  plantations  in
Liberia and wanted to see the botanical garden associated
with the plantations in Harbel and other sites of horticul-
tural interest in the area. Seibert was especially interested
in  observing  which  native  and  introduced  plants  were
being used there as ornamentals. Dr. Ger Verhaar, direc-
tor  of  research,  took  Seibert  in  tow,  showing  him  the
botanical garden, the 32,0000-hectare rubber plantation,
some of the forest edges, and the Holy Cross Mission in
Kolahun,  before  letting  him  depart  for  Philadelphia  on
27 October.

Among  the  most  remarkable  trees  Seibert  saw  in
Harbel  was  the  West  African  native  Erythrina  altissima
(66100), a truly magnificent sight when in flower. This
tree  is  deciduous,  opening  dusty  pink  flowers  after  the
leaves fall. Verhaar later forwarded to Longwood seeds of
Erythrina as well as several other large trees from Harbel.
Seibert, thrilled with the prospect of growing it at Long-
wood,  wrote  back  to  Verhaar:  “It  is  always  interesting
trying these unknown quantities for their adaptability to
greenhouse conditions. . . . It may well be necessary to
raise the roof in our hothouse prior to having it flower.
We are just completing the new conservatory in which we
will be featuring the palm family. Among other things in
that house, it may be possible to grow and flower a few of
these very rare, spectacular, tropical trees” (1966b).

Africa

Gardening Mother Nature’s way
Darke and Scarlett arrived in Cape Town, the capital of
Cape Province, in mid-August, just in time to watch the
spring floral spectacle unfold. They started off by joining
a tour with the Botanical Society of South Africa, which
soon brought them to northern Cape Province, into the
heart of the area where one of South Africa’s floral gems,
Bulbinella floribunda, occurs naturally. “We were stunned
by  countless  acres  brightened  by  the  sturdy,  candle-like
clusters  of  yellow  Bulbinella flowers,”  wrote  Darke
(1987a). “The local naturalist surprised us by saying that
we were a little early, and that the display would be even
more  spectacular  two  weeks  later.  The  flowers  of  Bul-
binella open gradually, from bottom to top, a process that
takes more than a month.”

Before the tour ended, Darke and Scarlett were taken
to a private wildflower reserve set up by Neil McGregor
on his farm Glenlyon near Nieuwoudtville in the north-
ern  Cape,  where  a  strikingly  attractive  orange  form  of
Bulbinella floribunda occurred. “Mother Nature, with the
help of a determined farmer and his sheep, created there
an  astonishing  display  of  Bulbinella  floribunda,”  recalls
Scarlett.  “Always  appreciative  and  supportive  of  the
natural Bulbinella display, McGregor explained that orig-
inally he had prevented his sheep from grazing there and
found the display diminished a little each year. Figuring
that  herds  of  bok,  indigenous  antelope,  had  migrated
freely over his farm in pursuit of food for millennia before
the coming of farm fences, he adjusted his management
approach,  letting  his  sheep  graze  on  the  bulbs  after  the
current year’s seed had ripened. Gradually the Bulbinella
population increased. McGregor’s theory was that like the
hooves  of  the  bok,  the  sheep’s  hooves  helped  plant  the
seeds at the optimal depth for their survival and subse-
quent  germination.  The  sheep’s  droppings  probably
helped  too.  To  my  mind,  this  was  gardening  of  the
highest order.”

Cape gardens
Back in Cape Town, Darke and Scarlett dedicated several
days  to  visiting  places  of  horticultural  interest  in  and
around  the  city.  Time  spent  at  the  world-renowned
Kirstenbosch  National  Botanical  Garden  resulted  in
more  than  a  hundred  new  plants  obtained  from  this
garden’s  vast  collections.  “We  were  blessed  with  good
advice in planning this trip that led us to people in South
Africa who helped us in immeasurable ways,” remembers

Darke, left, and McGregor among orange blooms of Bulbinella
floribunda near Nieuwoudtville. Photo by Rick Darke.

TAKING CUES FROM MOTHER NATURE

“Anyone  sensitive  to  landscapes  and  plants  of  extraordi-
nary beauty should experience spring in South Africa. It
blew me away!” remembers Landon Scarlett, planning and
design  manager  at  Longwood  Gardens,  who,  together
with Rick Darke, Longwood’s curator of plants, embarked
on a plant-collecting trip to South Africa in 1986.

“Early  in  1986  Frederick  E.  Roberts,  Longwood’s
director,  proposed  a  collecting  trip  to  South  Africa  and
asked me to join that endeavor,” recalls Scarlett. “He saw
a value in having a designer as part of the team. One of
Longwood’s  greatest  strengths  is  that  the  displays  for
which it is so well known are the result of a dynamic col-
laboration  of  plantsman,  grower,  and  designer  utilizing
plant  materials  from  around  the  world,  and  the  1986
expedition was a great example of that collaboration. For
both myself and Rick it was also an opportunity to see
Mother Nature in the roles of chief designer, plantsman,
and grower. We were inspired!”

As Darke explains, “At the time, Roberts was leading
the initiative to reduce Longwood’s dependence on fossil
fuels  required  to  heat  conservatories  to  temperatures
required  to  sustain  tropical  plant  displays. The  goal  for
the  South  Africa  trip  was  to  replace  tropical  plants  dis-
played  in  some  of  the  conservatories  with  species  that
would thrive at lower temperatures.”

Darke  and  Scarlett  prepared  an  itinerary  for  a  six-
week trip that would allow them to sample the floristic
richness  of  the  diverse  South  African  landscapes. Their
plan  included  visits  to  the  Cape,  Little  Karoo,  Great
Karoo, and Natal, each region with a distinct flora.

174

Taking Cues from Mother Nature

This particularly silver form of Athanasia parviflora (861310),
which Darke and Scarlett collected in Kirstenbosch National
Botanical Garden, has become an important feature of 
Longwood’s indoor Silver Garden. Photo by Rick Darke.

Old Nectar, home and garden of van der Spuy near Stellenbosch,
east of Cape Town. Photo by Rick Darke.

Protea cynaroides was among the species flowering in Rustenberg’s
reserve for proteaceous plants. Photo by Landon Scarlett.

Scarlett. “I will always treasure the cups of tea and great
conversation  on  the  front  porch  of  the  van  der  Spuy’s
Cape Dutch home Old Nectar near Stellenbosch, 20 km
outside  Cape  Town.  Una  van  der  Spuy,  one  of  South
Africa’s top plant experts, would pack the trunk of her car
with picnic food and take us around. One day she took
us  to  Rustenberg,  the  home  and  garden  of  Peter  and
Pamela Barlow, makers of the famous Rustenberg wines.”
“The  design  inspiration  for  Rustenberg’s  garden
appeared to have come from the early twentieth century
British  examples,”  recalls  Scarlett.  “The  garden  was
embellished  with  some  of  the  showier  South  African
native  plants,  but  mostly  contained  non-native  imports
to simulate the British style. There was an impressive, but
totally  separate  from  the  English-styled  garden,  reserve

area for proteaceous plants. Although they were not con-
sidered compatible with the English garden aesthetic, the
Barlows felt they were just too good to resist!” At Rusten-
berg the group was met by Jim Holmes, manager of the
gardens and reserve. While touring the garden, Holmes
showed  the  collectors  some  of  his  botanical  treasures,
which  included  a  yellow-flowered  Veltheimia  bracteata
(861011).

Silver of Little Karoo
On 14 September, Darke and Scarlett traveled east from
Cape Town to the tableland region of Little Karoo paral-
leling  the  south  coast.  “My  lasting  impression  of  Little
Karoo was of a magnificent, empty, open space filled with
stop-you-in-your-tracks plants, where once or twice a day

175

From left to right, Holmes, Darke, and van der
Spuy admire a yellow-flowered plant of Veltheimia
bracteata (861011). Photo by Landon Scarlett.

Bayer and Forrester at the Karoo Desert
National Botanical Garden in Worcester.
Photo by Landon Scarlett.

The yellow-flowered
Veltheimia bracteata obtained
by Darke and Scarlett became
one of the most successful
South African plants displayed
in Longwood’s conservatories.
Photo by Larry Albee.

Little Karoo is an arid tableland region with an elevation of 300 to 600 m along the south coast of
Cape Province. Photo by Landon Scarlett.

Taking Cues from Mother Nature

Silver-leaved plants fill rock crevices in mountain
passes of Little Karoo. Photo by Landon Scarlett.

The Indian Ocean coast of South Africa east of Knysna. Photo by Landon Scarlett.

the brightly colored bulbous plants and pelargoniums for
which it was, and is, so famous. “My awareness of the aes-
thetic possibilities of gray and silver foliaged plants blos-
somed  in  South  Africa,”  recalls  Scarlett.  “Such  plants
flourish  in  Mediterranean  and  desert  regions  around  the
world  with  low  rainfall  and  intense  sunlight,  where  gray
and silver serve to reflect the sun and thus preserve mois-
ture.  Prior  to  this  trip,  I  had  thought  of  silver  and  gray
plants as texturally interesting, but dull. Mother Nature in
South Africa changed that. The mountainous, folded rock
passes  in  Little  Karoo  were  stuffed  with  stunning  silver
foliaged plants. The impression these plants made on me
there, along with the powerful image of succulents growing
in a northwestern Great Karoo landscape, eventually led to
the creation of Longwood’s Silver Garden.”

Traveling along the south coast, Darke and Scarlett
arrived in Knysna, where some vestiges of native South
African forest can be seen. “We tracked down centuries
old Podocarpus latifolius and Ocotea bullata near Knysna,”
Scarlett remembers. “Both were fenced off for their own
protection.  The  indigenous  forests  had  been  seriously
over-timbered by 1815 and were replaced over time with
plantations of fast growing trees like pine which we see
today.”

Pamela Barlow, left, and van der Spuy in Barlow’s garden at
Rustenberg. Photo by Landon Scarlett.

we  might  pass  another  car,”  says  Scarlett.  “We  visited
with Bruce Bayer, curator, and Jane Forrester, horticultur-
ist, at the Karoo National Botanical Garden in Worcester,
some 60 km east of Cape Town, with its display of aloes
and other succulents for which South Africa is famous.
Some  of  the  plants  Bayer  and  Forrester  shared  with  us
included  Aloe  ciliaris (861260),  Cyphostemma  juttae
(861258), and Erythrina humeana (861259).”

The native vegetation of Little Karoo convinced Darke
and Scarlett that South Africa had more to offer than just

177

Africa

A wide variety of American cacti and succulents grew at Giddy’s
Nursery in Umlaasweg, Natal. Photo by Landon Scarlett.

turn enclosed in old cigar boxes, met all USDA require-
ments for approved packaging.”

This memorable encounter with such a fine example
of the Echium tribe later led to many other species of the
genus  being  incorporated  in  Longwood’s  conservatory
displays. “From that moment on, Echium of many sorts
would get major attention when foreign seed lists circu-
lated at Longwood,” explains Scarlett.

Reunion in Durban
From Knysna, Darke and Scarlett continued east to Port
Elizabeth, where they flew 700 km northeast to Durban,
the largest city of Natal Province. “We were greeted there
by  a  group  of  former  students  trained  at  Longwood
Gardens,” remembers Scarlett. “They looked after us in
Durban  and  organized  a  small  reunion  party. Then  we
visited  the  famous  specimen  of  Encephalartos  woodii at
the  Durban  Botanic  Garden. This  lovely  cycad  has  not
been seen in the wild since 1916, and only male forms
exist.” An offset from Durban obtained by Seibert follow-
ing his trip to South Africa in 1963 still grows at Long-
wood (69941).

“Next we accompanied one of the former Longwood
students,  Trevor  Hornby,  on  a  jaunt  to  Giant’s  Castle
Reserve,  a  stunning  combination  of  rugged  mountains
and rolling grassland in the Drakensberg on the border of
Natal and Lesotho,” remembers Scarlett. “Getting there
was  the  longest,  dustiest  ride  of  my  life  to  date.  Being
there was worth every mile. We then made a stop to see
Giddy’s  Cactus  and  Cycad  Nursery  in  the  town  of
Umlaasweg  in  Natal  where  we  were  surprised  to  find  a

This Echium simplex (87126) brought Darke and Scarlett to “a
squealing stop” while traveling to Knysna. Photo by Rick Darke.

Darke and Scarlett’s discoveries on the trip were not
limited to indigenous plants. “A long tradition of garden-
ing in South Africa was obvious,” Scarlett explains. “On
roadsides, non-native plants seeded themselves. Some of
them, such as Echium, were strikingly beautiful. One par-
ticular  Echium  simplex (87126),  a  species  introduced
from  Madeira  and  the  Canary  Islands,  flowering  near
Knysna with its 2 m tall white flower spikes, brought us
to a squealing stop for an ogle.”

The  Echium plant  that  impressed  Scarlett  so  much
was  growing  in  a  private  garden.  “The  owner  was  not
home; therefore, we obtained his address and wrote him
for seed upon our return,” reported Darke (1987b). “He
kindly replied that he would collect seed when ripe. We
eventually  received  a  copious  quantity—neatly  stuffed
into two old socks! Apparently, the socks, which were in

178

Taking Cues from Mother Nature

Rolling grasslands in the Giant’s Castle Reserve in the northern end of Drakensberg. Photo by Landon Scarlett.

large  selection  of  American  cacti  and  succulents. There
we were, Americans seeking exotic plants in South Africa
visiting  South  Africans  who  were  seeking  exotic  plants
from  America.”  The  most  significant  acquisition  from
Giddy’s  Nursery,  however,  was  a  native  South  African
plant,  another  yellow-flowered  form  of  Veltheimia
bracteata (861075–7).

On  22  September,  Darke  and  Scarlett  flew  from
Durban  to  Johannesburg,  South  Africa’s  largest  city,  in
Transvaal  Province.  “In  Johannesburg  we  saw  more
private  gardens,  including  Brenthurst,  the  garden  of
Harry Oppenheimer, one of South Africa’s leading indus-
trialists,”  remembers  Scarlett.  “Dick  Scott,  estate
manager  at  Brenthurst,  was  justly  proud  of  his  native
cycads and the blaze of color provided by various South
African  bulbs  and  annuals.  Scott  shared  with  us  several
plants from Brenthurst’s collections, including Athanasia

parviflora (861271),  Scilla  natalensis (861269),  and
Wachendorfia thyrsiflora (861270).”

A few days later Darke and Scarlett departed for the
United States, carrying with them more than 135 collec-
tions. In addition they established links with top horti-
culturists in that country that would result in many more
South African plants being sent to Longwood in the years
that  followed.  “The  South  Africans  were  wonderful
hosts,”  says  Scarlett,  looking  back  at  the  trip.  “They
exhibited  intense  botanical  curiosity  which  has  resulted
in  a  wealth  of  publications  and  information  on  South
Africa’s native flora. Fine local institutions and individu-
als actively and willingly shared with us their enthusiasm
for their plants.”

“In my first job at Longwood,” adds Scarlett, “I grew
proteaceous plants brought from South Africa in 1963 by
Dr.  Seibert.  But  it  was  seeing  these  and  other  South

179

Africa

Also more emphasis was to be placed on trees and shrubs,
as  opposed  to  the  bulbous  plants  that  dominated  the
earlier trip.

Ault  and  Darke  were  joined  in  South  Africa  by
Melinda Zoehrer, horticulturist for the Delaware Center
for Horticulture in Wilmington. They intended to revisit
many of the sites included in the 1986 trip, but started
off by traveling on 7 September to a new location at the
Ramskop  Nature  Reserve  near  Clanwilliam,  about  200
km north of Cape Town. Since they arrived as most wild-
flowers were in their peak bloom, the explorers were able
to select twenty of the showiest species, including many
brightly colored perennials such as red- and orange-flow-
ered  Arctotis  gumbletoni
(93873–4),  red-flowered
Gazania krebsiana (93879), and yellow- to orange-flow-
ered Ursinia cakilefolia (93886).

During the following couple of days, Ault and Darke
visited two more nature reserves, one in Calvinia, about
120 km northeast of Clanwilliam, and another in Nieu-
woudtville,  60  km  west  of  Calvinia.  From  Nieu-
woudtville  they  returned  to  Cape  Town,  where
Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden served as their
base. From here they arranged excursions to places such
as  the  nearby  Table  Mountain,  Hottentots-Holland
Nature  Reserve,  and  Karoo  Desert  National  Botanical
Garden in Worcester, considered to have the best collec-
tion of succulents in the Southern Hemisphere.

On 19 September, Ault flew to Durban on the coast
of the Indian Ocean, while Darke and Zoehrer stayed in
Cape Town. In Durban, Ault spent a day studying plant
collections at the Durban Botanic Garden. In the gardens
he  spotted  a  number  of  promising  plants,  including
shrubs such as silver-leaved Barleria albostellata (93940),
which  flowers  all  summer  long;  Combretum  kraussii
(93941),  with  leaves  that  change  from  white  to  green
and, in fall, to red; and Polygala virgata (93944), which
produces  a  profusion  of  purple-pink  flowers  in  winter
and spring. Another day spent in the Fern Valley Botani-
cal Garden in the town of Kloof, 15 km outside Durban,
resulted  in  the  collection  of  two  showy  shrubs:  white-
fruited  Ardisia  crenata ‘Alba’  (93945)  and  blue-fruited
Dichroa febrifuga (93946), both introduced from Asia.

Back  in  Cape  Town  on  27  September,  Ault  and
Darke continued visiting places of botanical and horticul-
tural  interest  in  their  search  for  superior  ornamental
plants.  Kirstenbosch  National  Botanical  Garden,  which
has the most comprehensive collection of South African

Scarlett, left, and Darke with some of the plants they brought
from South Africa, here growing in Longwood’s experimental
greenhouses. Photo by Rick Darke.

African  plants  growing  and  thriving  in  their  natural
habitat that convinced me of their immense display pos-
sibilities. This trip gained Longwood the inspiration for
its new indoor Silver Garden, and a fresh look at ways to
grow  and  display  plants  taking  cues  from  Mother
Nature.”

SOUTH AFRICA REVISITED

The next chapter of exploration in South Africa involved
Darke and Dr. James R. Ault, plant physiologist at Long-
wood Gardens, who together traveled to that country in
early September of 1993. The purpose for their trip was
to  continue  the  investigations  began  in  1986,  but  this
time to observe plants that bloomed later in the spring.

180

South Africa Revisited

plants, offered the explor-
ers  an  opportunity  to
observe  and  study  the
wealth  of  the  country’s
flora under cultivated con-
ditions.  In  the  end  they
procured  nearly  eighty  of
the most promising plants
for trial at Longwood.

Day-trips out of Cape
Town 
took  Ault  and
Darke  to  several  nature
reserves 
the  area,
including  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  Fernkloof
near Hermanus, and Paarl
Mountain.  These  trips
were  then  supplemented
with  visits 
to  Harold
Porter  National  Botanical
Garden in Betty’s Bay and
Cape  Seed  and  Bulbs  in
Stellenbosch,  a  nursery
owned  by  Jim  and  Anne
Holmes.  This  nursery
developed  a  reputation  as
a  source  of  some  of  the
most 
South
African  bulbous  plants.
Holmes  shared  with  the
collectors  several  of  his
plants,  Dierama  medium
(9418),  Oxalis  palmifrons
(9421),  and  Watsonia
humilis (9420),  bringing
the 
total  number  of
plants  collected  to  120.
In  Cape  Town,  Ault  and
Darke  concluded  their
four-week 
and
returned to Philadelphia.

unusual 

in 

trip 

Ramskop Nature Reserve near Clanwilliam, north of Cape Town, welcomed Ault and Darke with a
profusion of spring flowers. Photo by James R. Ault.

A bizarre Cyphostemma juttae, prominently featured at the Karoo Desert National Botanical Garden in
Worcester, has also been exhibited in Longwood’s Silver Garden. Photo by James R. Ault.

181

Ault observed the show of Greyia sutherlandii (931063) flowers in
Drakensberg, a mountain chain along the border between Natal
and Lesotho. Photo by James R. Ault.

Eulophia speciosa (94610), a terrestrial orchid with fragrant flowers,
was among the plants Ault acquired from the Durban Botanic
Garden. Photo by James R. Ault.

Graham Duncan, left, of Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden,
converses with Zoehrer and Ault during their 1993 visit. 
Photo by Rick Darke.

A yellow-flowered selection of Strelitzia reginae ‘Kirstenbosch
Gold’ (93612) was among nearly eighty plants Ault and Darke
acquired from Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden in Cape
Town. Photo by James R. Ault.

Holmes with rare yellow-flowered Clivia miniata in his 
Stellenbosch nursery, Cape Seed and Bulbs. Photo by 
James R. Ault.

Reviving Cornflower Blue

The lush vegetation of the Fern Valley Botanical Garden, situated in the town of Kloof, near Durban, on the coast of the Indian Ocean,
contrasted dramatically with xerophytic flora of the Cape region. Photo by James R. Ault.

REVIVING CORNFLOWER BLUE

Since  their  opening  in  1921,  Longwood  conservatories
featured  a  mass  display  of  florist’s  cineraria,  Pericallis
×hybrida, every spring. In later years a blue-flowered strain
known as ‘Cornflower Blue’ was chosen for this purpose.
“Seed of this strain for years was obtained from a breeder
in Germany who in early 1990s discontinued it,” remem-
bers  Dr.  Robert  J.  Armstrong,  research  horticulturist  at
Longwood Gardens. “Since this was the only source, it fell
upon  Longwood  to  maintain  its  own  seed  supply  if  it
wanted to continue to exhibit this plant. At first seed was
produced by simply self pollinating the plants and collect-
ing  the  seed.  Unfortunately,  it  was  soon  discovered  that
the vigor of the resulting plants was being rapidly reduced
with each generation. This kind of loss of vigor is known
as  inbreeding  depression  which  often  results  when  nor-
mally highly out-crossed species are continually self-polli-
nated. It was decided that if this crop were to continue at
Longwood, drastic measures would need to be taken. To
remedy  the  situation  the  most  desirable  plants  were

selected  as  seed  parents  and  then  crosses  were  made
among  these  plants.  As  the  result  ‘Cornflower  Blue’
cineraria began to be stabilized again, but it was thought
that this strain could be improved if the plants were more
vigorous, more upright, and more open in habit.”

Florist’s cineraria is a hybrid that originated through
crossing among several species of Pericallis native to the
Canary Islands, but its exact parentage is not known. In
1995 Roberts suggested that a trip be organized in order
to collect some of the species that could be crossed with
‘Cornflower Blue’ to improve its vigor.

Darke and Gary R. Keim, indoor display specialist,
were  asked  to  take  part  in  the  endeavor.  The  main
purpose for the trip was to find the wild relatives of the
florist’s cineraria, but Darke and Keim intended to be on
the lookout for other ornamental plants as well, especially
the many Echium species native to the Canaries.

They  started  off  on  31  May  on  the  island  of  La
Palma. Over the course of five days of collecting, Darke
and  Keim  found  what  they  were  looking  for:  Pericallis
appendiculata (95506) and P. papyracea (95507), two of

183

Africa

Visitors to Longwood conservatories admire a display of florist’s
cinerarias, Pericallis ×hybrida, in 1958. Photo by 
Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

Darke, left, and Keim began their exploration of the Canaries on
the island of La Palma. Photo by Rick Darke.

The Canary Islands, an archipelago of the
northwest coast of Africa with an area of
more than 7200 km2, comprises a western
and an eastern group. The western group,
consisting of Tenerife, Gran Canaria, La
Palma, Gomera, and Hierro islands, fea-
tures tall mountain peaks rising directly
from the ocean floor, with Pico de Teide,
3718 m, the tallest among them. The
eastern group, consisting of Lanzarote,
Fuerteventura, and several smaller islets,
surmounts a submarine plateau rising to
about 500 m above sea level. The rich
volcanic soils and mild climate of the
Canaries support a diverse vegetation,
including about two thousand species, of
which 25 percent are endemic to the
islands. The Mediterranean climate of
hot, dry summers and warm, wet winters
is influenced by the close proximity of the Sahara Desert, rain-bearing north–west trade winds, and the high altitude of the mountains of
the western islands. While the trade winds may bring 800 to 1500 mm of precipitation to the highest peaks of the western islands, the
eastern Canaries experience extreme dryness due to hot Saharan winds. The main types of vegetation are distributed in altitudinal zones.
Xerophytic scrub occupies lower slopes up to 700 m; at its upper limit, it merges into a woodland. Evergreen forest, dominated by various
species of laurels, is found in the wetter areas of the western islands between 400 and 1500 m. From 1200 to 2000 m is an open, savan-
nalike pine forest, while above 1900 m the montane scrub vegetation features many of the islands’ endemic species.

the possible wild ancestors of florist’s cineraria, as well as
several  species  of  Echium,
including  E.  brevirame
(95496), E. gentianoides (95806), and E. webbii (95498).
On  5  June  the  travelers  made  a  brief  stop  on  the
island of Gran Canaria with the purpose of visiting Jardín
Botánico  Viera  y  Clavijo  in  Las  Palmas.  From  Gran

Canaria  they  relocated  to  Tenerife  to  spend  five  days
exploring the island’s flora. They began on Monte de las
Mercedes,  just  north  of  Santa  Cruz,  the  island’s  largest
city. Among the plants collected in the area were Isoplexis
canariensis (95503) and Ranunculus cortusifolius (95504).
Hiking along the cliffs near Puenta de Teno, the western-

184

Reviving Cornflower Blue

Mauve-flowered Pericallis papyracea (95507) growing in its native
habitat on La Palma. Photo by Rick Darke.

The taller, more open, vigorous cinerarias resulted from crossing
Pericallis ×hybrida ‘Cornflower Blue’ with P. papyracea (95507).
Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

most point of Tenerife, Darke and Keim found Euphor-
bia  canariensis (95499),  Lavandula  buchii (95501),  and
Vieraea  laevigata (95511).  Another  day  on  the  island’s
north coast, between Puenta del Hidalgo and Puenta de
Anaga,  resulted  in  collections  of  Lavandula  buchii
(95502) and Sideritis macrostachys (95508).

Returning  to  Philadelphia  after  two  weeks  in  the
Canaries, Darke and Keim carried with them two species
of Pericallis so eagerly awaited at Longwood, along with
collections  of  twenty-two  other  plants  native  to  the
islands. Out of the two species of Pericallis, P. papyracea
turned out to be more useful in restoring vigor to the blue
cinerarias. “It was a very tall plant with small rose-colored
flowers,” remembers Armstrong, who directed the breed-
ing  of  cinerarias.  “This  species  was  crossed  with  the
‘Cornflower Blue’ strain, with the first generation being
intermediate  between  the  parents.  Selected  plants  from

Echium gentianoides (95806), found on La Palma, is claimed to
have the deepest gentian-blue flowers of all Echium. Photo by 
Rick Darke.

Improved blue cinerarias, Pericallis ×hybrida, can be admired in
Longwood’s conservatories in early spring. Photo by 
Tomasz Ani´sko.

this first population were back-crossed to the ‘Cornflower
Blue’ several times. The resulting plants were then crossed
among themselves, which resulted in a new and improved
blue  cineraria  that  can  be  now  admired  in  Longwood’s
conservatories.”

185

RUSSIA AND 

ITS NEIGHBORS

Conservatory in the Botanical Garden of the Komarov Botanical
Institute in Leningrad (Saint Petersburg). Photo by 
Russell J. Seibert.

WORLD’S LARGEST COUNTRY

Following a high-level official visit to the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (USSR) by Orville L. Freeman, secre-
tary of the USDA, in 1962, an opportunity came about
to send to that country a team of American plant collec-
tors.  Longwood’s  director,  Dr.  Russell  J.  Seibert,  was
eager to see that the USDA-Longwood plant exploration
program took advantage of this possibility to gain access
to  the  vast  territory  of  the  USSR.  “We,  of  course,  are
especially pleased that this trip has promise of producing
plants of considerably more hardiness than a number of
the  other  trips,”  wrote  Seibert  (1963a)  to  Dr.  Carl  O.
Erlanson of the USDA New Crops Research Branch.

A cascade of fountains in front of the Grand Palace of Peterhof in
Leningrad (Saint Petersburg). Photo by John L. Creech.

Two  USDA  explorers  were  asked  to  undertake  the
mission,  Dr.  John  L.  Creech,  assistant  chief  of  the  New
Crops Research Branch, and Dr. Donald H. Scott, leader
of  the  Small  Fruit  and  Grape  Investigations.  On  rather
short notice an ambitious program was drafted for a six-
week trip starting in late August 1963. “The Soviet Union
is a country rich in potential ornamental plants,” Creech
later wrote (1988). “Many have not entered our gardens
because collectors have limited access. But the Soviets have
a great love of flowers and an exceptional awareness of the
importance of plants in their society.” The trip was to take
Creech  and  Scott  to  Moscow,  Leningrad  (Saint  Peters-
burg),  and  locations  in  the  southern  USSR,  from
Tashkent in Uzbekistan to Kishinev in Moldavia.

186

With an area of 22.4 million km2, the USSR was the world’s
largest country, covering a sixth of the planet’s land surface. About
a quarter of its territory lay in eastern Europe, while the rest lay in
northern Asia. Founded in 1922, the USSR comprised fifteen
republics, of which Russia was the largest with more than 17
million km2. Corresponding with such enormous territory was a
great variety of natural landscapes, complexity of relief, and large
climatic differences between the regions. Vast plains occupy the
western part of the former USSR, while plateaus and high moun-
tain ranges prevail in the east. The highest mountains are found
along the southern border, with Communism Peak at 7495 m in
the Pamirs in what is now Tajikistan. Vast latitudinal climatic
zones stretch from the arctic above latitude 70º north, the subarc-
tic between 60º north and 70º north, and the temperate zone
between 40º north and 60º north, to the subtropics in parts of
Transcaucasia and south-central Asia. Most of the territory has a

climate that is distinctly continental and marked with large tem-
perature differences between summer and winter. The regions
along the coast of the Black Sea are subject to a milder, maritime
climate, while those in the southern Far East, influenced by the
Pacific Ocean, have a monsoon climate. About seventeen thousand
species of plants native to the region of the former USSR are dis-
tributed in clearly defined latitudinal vegetation zones, ranging
from the arctic waste and tundra in the north, through forest and
steppe, to semideserts and deserts in the south. In mountainous
regions, especially those of the Caucasus, the Carpathians, and the
Primorye, vegetation types are arranged in altitudinal zones. In
addition, the humid subtropical climate of Kolkhida and Lenkoran
in Transcaucasia supports lush broad-leaved forests with an under-
growth of evergreen plants and lianas, while Mediterranean vegeta-
tion is found along the coast of the Black Sea.

Russia and Its Neighbors

“Uzbekistan has an arid climate where summer tem-
peratures  reach  45ºC,  while  in  winter  they  drop  to
-25ºC,”  recalls  Creech.  “It  is  a  vast  region  of  collective
and  state  farms  involving  45  million  hectares  of  culti-
vated  land.  Apples,  pears,  and  nut  crops  are  grown
around Tashkent, raisins and fresh grapes dominate in the
Samarkand  area,  whereas  peaches  and  apricots  in  the
Fergana Valley.”

Touring research institutes, experiment stations, and
horticultural enterprises, Creech and Scott saw a number
of promising fruits and some ornamentals, but they were
especially impressed with hardy drought-resistant Hibiscus
hybrids. “Because it is a major cotton growing area, there
was an ongoing program of breeding closely related Hibis-
cus as  ornamentals,”  explains  Creech.  “This  involved 
H.  coccineus and  H.  moscheutos. There  were  several  out-
standing dwarf varieties, of which we requested seeds from
the best ones, ‘Taj Mahal’ and ‘Shaliapin’.”

Visits to the R. R. Shreder Horticultural Institute in
Tashkent and to that city’s bazaar allowed them to sample
a variety of local produce, including watermelons, Citrul-
lus lanatus. “We have been promised anything we want in
the way of plant materials and have said we would like to
collect  their  best  melons,  onions,  certain  of  the  grapes
and  some  wild  species,”  Creech  reported  to  Erlanson
(1963a). “As a matter of fact we just made a melon col-
lection—with Dr. Pekhoto of Leningrad, we finished off
a fine round watermelon in our bathroom, collecting the
seeds  in  the  tub.  It  is  a  10  inch  [25  cm]  melon,  quite
round, and very high density. So we kept the seed.”

An  excursion  to  Bostandek  in  the  Chirchik  Moun-
tains provided the explorers with their first opportunity to
make collections of plants growing in the wild. “We went
into the mountains at Bostandek which is the western end
of the Tien Shan range and it is a barren, dry mountain
with mostly wild apples, Crataegus, and Prunus in several
sorts,  especially  almonds,”  recorded  Creech  (1963b).
“Everyone has tried their best to be helpful and in general
it has been an interesting stay. We have a large sample of
Prunus  mahaleb from  the  mountains  where  it  grows  on
barren  hillsides  with  a  rainfall  of  300  mm  and  that  in
winter.”  The  overall  impression  of  the  region  was,
however,  rather  discouraging  for  plant  collectors:  “The
land  was  barren,  dry,  and  devoid  of  extensive  forests.  It
suggested a sustained depleting of forests and over-grazing
of pastures by sheep and goats” (Creech and Scott 1963).

Sulfuring grapes for raisin production near Samarkand in 
Uzbekistan. Photo by John L. Creech.

Creech and Scott arrived in Moscow in mid-August
and  a  few  days  later  continued  on  to  Leningrad. There
they spent three days touring the Botanical Garden of the
Komarov  Botanical  Institute,  the  Vavilov  Institute  of
Plant Industry, a fruit experiment station in Pavlovsk, and
Peterhof,  a  residence  of  Peter  the  Great  founded  in  the
eighteenth  century.  “The  main  purpose  of  visiting
Leningrad  was  to  work  out  our  field  schedule  with  the
staff of the Vavilov Institute,” explains Creech. “All plant
exchanges  as  well  as  field  exploration  in  the  USSR
emanated  from  that  organization.  It  was  here  that  the
famous plant explorer Dr. Nikolai I. Vavilov established
in the first half of the twentieth century the concept of
geographical  centers  of  crop  diversity  on  which  all
modern plant exploration depends.” Following a memo-
rable visit to Peterhof, Creech wrote to Seibert: “The evi-
dence  of  sophistication  in  ornamental  horticulture
reflects the grand days of Czarist Russia. . . . The foun-
tains of Peterhof were beautifully done and far exceeded
what I saw at Versailles” (1963c).

Melons in the tub
On 29 August, Creech and Scott, accompanied by Dr. K.
Pekhoto of the Vavilov Institute, departed for Tashkent,
the capital of Uzbekistan, where they planned to spend
two weeks. Most of this central Asian republic is occupied
by  dry,  sun-baked  plains,  with  uplands  and  mountain
ranges dominating the landscape in the east. Uzbekistan
is  among  the  world’s  largest  producers  of  cotton  but  is
also renowned for its orchards and vineyards.

188

World’s Largest Country

A road leading to Bostandek in the Chirchik Mountains in the
western end of the Tien Shan range, Uzbekistan. Photo by 
John L. Creech.

Creech, Scott, and their colleagues from the Nikitsky Botanical
Garden collect on the dry, open hillsides above Yalta. Photo by
John L. Creech.

Wild apple trees, Malus sylvestris and M. pumila var. paradisiaca,
grow on the barren slopes of the Chirchik Mountains, one of the
centers of origin for cultivated apples. Photo by John L. Creech.

Nikitsky’s goodly share
On 14 September, Creech and Scott boarded a plane in
Tashkent and flew west over the Caspian and Black seas
to Simferopol on the Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula. The
Nikitsky Botanical Garden in Yalta, on the coast of the
Black Sea, was to serve as their base during the five-day
stay  in  the  Crimea.  “In  ornamental  horticulture  the
Nikitsky  Botanic  Garden  at  Yalta  is  on  a  par  with  any
arboretum in the United States or western Europe except
for Kew Gardens,” wrote Creech and Scott (1963). “It is
now  151  years  old  and  is  a  leading  institution  in  fruit
breeding,  introduction,  and  testing  ornamentals  and
breeding  of  new  woody  and  herbaceous  garden  plants.

Creech and Scott found Hedera helix var. taurica (65125), later
named ‘Yalta’, in moist riverside forest above Yalta. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

189

Russia and Its Neighbors

Nelumbo caspica (631268) grown from seeds procured by Creech
and Scott from the Nikitsky Botanical Garden. Photo by 
John L. Creech.

Their breeding program in cannas is excellent. It is appar-
ent from conversations and the condition that Nikitsky is
an institution with status and unlimited financial support.”
Staff from the Nikitsky assisted Creech and Scott in
their  travels  throughout  the  Krymskiye  Mountains,  a
mountain chain along the coast of the southern Crimea,
with  the  highest  peak  being  Chatyr  Dag  at  1525  m.
There  they  collected  a  number  of  wild  apple  and  pear
species, as well as ornamentals. In moist riverside forest
above Yalta they found Acer campestre (65111), coloring
bright  yellow  in  fall;  Cornus  mas (66125),  with  large,
sweet  fruits;  and  a  form  of  Hedera  helix var.  taurica
(65125) later named ‘Yalta’. On drier, open hillsides and
exposed  cliffs,  the  explorers  collected  A.  tataricum ssp.
semenovii (65414),  a  shrubby  form  with  small  leaves;
purple-flowered Crocus speciosus (631267); and Pinus pal-
lasiana (65127),  Crimean  pine  with  dense  crowns  and
ascending branches.

“In our short sojourn, I collected enough interesting
ornamental material to justify our effort,” wrote Creech
(1963c) to Seibert. “As a matter of fact, some of our col-
lections such as Crataegus microphylla and Acer stevenii are
not in cultivation. We gathered a number of collections
of Cornus mas which if hardier than current forms, would
‘pay  for  the  trip’  according  to  Don  Wyman  [at  Arnold
Arboretum of Harvard University].”

At the Nikitsky Botanical Garden, Creech and Scott
were  invited  to  take  cuttings  or  plants  of  any  material
desired.  “Of  immediate  interest  to  Longwood  are  two
items,”  noted  Creech  (1963c),  “a  cream-colored  Canna

Canna ‘Lunniy Svet’ (64292), brought by Creech and Scott from
the Nikitsky Botanical Garden, was used in 1967 by Robert J.
Armstrong, Longwood’s geneticist, in the first series of crosses
which eventually led to the development of eighteen new cultivars
released to the public. Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

hybrid called ‘Moonlight’ [‘Lunniy Svet’ 64292] and the
rare  Nelumbo  caspica [631268]  which  comes  from  the
mouth of the Volga river and is quite an attractive plant.
It is prohibited to collect this plant under ordinary cir-
cumstances but my new friends at the Nikitsky Botanic
Garden  furnished  me  with  a  goodly  share  of  seed  they
had just collected.” In addition, from the vast collection
in the garden, the explorers procured, among others, Exo-
chorda  tianschanica (65113),  a  spring-flowering  shrub
originally  from  the  Tien  Shan;  Pinus  stankewiczii
(65128), a pine species native to Crimea and noted for its
drought  tolerance;  and  Buxus  sempervirens  (67872),  an
especially hardy form of boxwood from the Caucasus.

190

From Siberia with Plants

Meandering through Moldavia
From  Yalta,  Creech  and  Scott  departed  for  Kishinev,
capital  of  Moldavia,  on  21  September.  Moldavia,  the
second  smallest  of  the  fifteen  republics,  occupies  about
33,700  km2 between  the  meandering  rivers  of  the  Prut
and the Dnestr along the border with Romania. Thanks
to its warm climate, with mild winters, sufficient rainfall,
and very fertile soils, Moldavia developed a sizeable hor-
ticultural industry. It became one of the main suppliers of
wine, fruits, and vegetables for the entire USSR.

Creech  and  Scott  intended  to  spend  a  week  there
touring experiment stations and collecting plants in the
foothills of the Carpathians. Although this region was less
varied botanically than the Crimea, the explorers found
interesting  apples,  pears,  and  cherries.  Traveling  north-
west from Kishinev, they explored native flora at several
locations.  Near  Strasheny,  about  20  km  from  Kishinev,
they collected Juglans regia (6459), a local selection with
large,  thin-shelled  fruits,  growing  near  a  farmhouse.  In
the surrounding forest they found Quercus robur (64303),
a  good  form  of  English  oak  with  a  tall,  straight  trunk.
The next stop was near Kalarash, another 20 km further
to the northwest, where Creech and Scott collected two
dogwoods, Cornus mas (66126), with large sweet fruits,
and  Cornus  sanguinea (66250),  with  reddish  stems  and
purple-black  fruits.  Finally  the  explorers  reached  Yed-
intsy, some 200 km north of Kishinev. There, on a dry,
exposed  hill,  they  collected  black-fruited  Viburnum
lantana (65116).

With September coming to a close, Creech and Scott
returned to Moscow and three days later left for Washing-
ton. “True to their word, when we were about to depart,
we received a large package of plants and cuttings from
each  of  the  various  locations  we  visited,”  remembers
Creech.  “In  all,  our  trip  resulted  in  140  collections  of
wild and cultivated plants including fruits and ornamen-
tals. In addition, 53 items we had requested were shipped
later following an approval by plant quarantine officials
in Leningrad. This is an important point because a suc-
cessful collecting trip does not end with the field activity
but creates the opportunity for continued plant exchange
in the future.”

FROM SIBERIA WITH PLANTS

Several years passed before a new round of negotiations
on the scientific exchange between the United States and
the USSR allowed for another plant-collecting expedition
to return to that country. It was agreed that Creech would
again  undertake  an  expedition  in  1971,  this  time  cen-
tered primarily on Siberia. “This is an extremely impor-
tant area from which to collect and introduce hardy plant
materials into this country,” emphasized Seibert (1970b).
The trip was planned and conducted in cooperation
with the Vavilov Institute of Plant Industry in Leningrad.
In  1969,  Creech  and  Seibert  hosted  the  director  of  the
institute, Professor D. D. Brezhnev, during his visit to the
United States. In return, Brezhnev offered his assistance in
organizing the expedition. He assigned two scientists from
the institute, Dr. G. Shmaraev and Dr. N. Korsokov, to
accompany Creech on the trip, each for about a month.
The goals for the expedition were “to collect native
plants from Siberian regions of the Soviet Union, partic-
ularly those of value as ornamentals and as shrubs for sta-
bilizing  areas  denuded  by  road  and  other  construction
activities, mining, and other factors destructive of natural
vegetation,”  wrote  Creech  (1970b).  “Also,  to  locate
germplasm  useful  in  developing  disease,  cold,  drought,
and  pollution  resistant  varieties  of  ornamental  plants.”
Seibert  saw  the  potential  for  acquisition  of  cold-  and
drought-hardy Siberian plants as an important aspect of
the  expedition:  “The  prospects  for  new  and  improved
types of ornamentals for the United States drought areas
with extremes of summer heat and winter cold look very
encouraging!” (1971).

The Siberian cities of Novosibirsk, Irkutsk, Barnaul,
and  Yakutsk  were  chosen  as  centers  from  which  local
excursions were to be made. Because of the short growing
season  in  Siberia,  the  trip  was  planned  for  the  summer
months of July and August.

Self-pruning willows
Creech  arrived  in  Leningrad  on  28  June.  He  spent  the
first  couple  of  days  finalizing  details  of  the  expedition
with  the  staff  of  the  Vavilov  Institute.  Then  he  visited
other leading botanical institutions, including the garden
of the Komarov Botanical Institute and the dendrarium
of the Academy of Forestry.

Creech’s first plant-collecting trip took him north of
Leningrad to the forests of the Karelian Isthmus, a strip

191

Russia and Its Neighbors

A self-pruning form of Salix fragilis that Creech collected in the
Karelian Isthmus, north of Leningrad (Saint Petersburg). 
Photo by John L. Creech.

Field trials of new cultivars of Phlox paniculata developed by
breeders working at the Central Siberian Botanical Garden in
Akademgorodok near Novosibirsk. Photo by John L. Creech.

of land between the western shores of Lake Ladoga and
the Gulf of Finland. “I was up north of Leningrad during
the week collecting in the forest that was once Finnish ter-
ritory and have been able to take what I desired from both
the garden of the Komarov Botanic Institute and the Insti-
tute  of  Forestry,”  Creech  recorded  (1970a).  “There  are
some quite interesting forms and species, all of which are
among the hardiest here in Leningrad.” One of the plants
he collected in the Karelian Isthmus was a curious form of
a willow: “Salix fragilis but of a subglobose kind that the
Russians call ‘self-pruning’ and it looks just like that. It has
a completely sheared look but it is the natural form.”

Back in Leningrad, in the hotel where he was assem-
bling all of his collections, Creech was pleased with the
results:  “All  in  all,  it  is  a  quite  useful  selection  of  plant
material and as it stands right now, in my bathtub, all are
in excellent condition” (1970a). A few days later all the
living  plants  collected  on  this  phase  of  the  trip  were
shipped via air pouch, and on 11 July, Creech, accompa-
nied by Shmaraev, departed Leningrad for Siberia.

Heavenly blue alliums
Creech’s first stop was Novosibirsk, a major cultural and
industrial center of western Siberia. Just south of Novosi-
birsk, Creech visited Akademgorodok, an academic city,
where he toured the Central Siberian Botanical Garden.
“By  far,  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  institutions  that
collectors  can  visit  in  the  USSR  is  Akademgorodok,”
wrote Creech (1988). “Created in 1957, Akademgorodok
includes most of the Soviet Union’s basic scientific insti-
tutes.  Among  the  other  sciences,  researchers  there  are

studying  various  aspects  of  biology,  including  genetics.
Horticulturists  and  botanists  are  assembling  a  vast
germplasm repository of Siberia’s native plants.”

Creech thought very highly of the scope of the collec-
tions  at  Akademgorodok:  “[This]  is  one  of  the  finest
botanic gardens of its type I have seen,” he wrote (1971c).
“The garden is organized into a series of separate sections,
one in which native plants have been assembled on a tax-
onomic  basis,  a  medicinal  plant  garden  of  excellent
quality,  a  garden  of  forage  and  pasture  grass  species,  a
fruit tree garden, a collection of trees and shrubs in a very
informal park-like arrangement, and a large collection of
ornamentals—particularly bulbs, ground covers, and cut-
flower species” (1972).

Creech was thrilled by this opportunity to study the
extensive  collections  and  trials  of  ornamental  plants,
including many species native to Siberia. “The grasses are
just ripening, as well as the perennials and legumes,” he
noted (1971c). “These are the major components of the
Siberian  flora  and  certainly  a  beautiful  array  of  species
they are. There are alliums of the clearest blue I have seen
and  many  ground  covering  species.”  Creech  acquired
from the collections and the trial plots numerous showy
grasses,  bulbs,  and  hardy  perennials,  including  bright
crimson-flowered  Paeonia  anomala (7264)  and  yellow-
flowered Papaver alpinum (7269).

Taiga’s ghostly birches
Three  days  later  Creech  flew  east  to  Irkutsk,  situated
some 70 km from the shores of Lake Baikal. Founded in

192

From Siberia with Plants

Creech collects seeds of Vaccinium in the Siberian taiga near
Tulun. Photo by John L. Creech.

1652 as an outpost for trading with China, Irkutsk later
became one of the chief cities on the Trans-Siberian Rail-
road.  “The  weather  is  bright  and  hot,”  noted  Creech
(1971c). “But this is the height of the season. Here the
last frost is mid-June and the first one is in mid to late
August,  so  the  growing  season  is  only  about  sixty  days.
Can’t do much with that! . . . Among the trees, poplars
and  Siberian  elm  are  the  most  common. The  streets  of
Irkutsk are lined with allées of Populus laurifolia, a very
dense upright smallish tree. Avenues of them run literally
for miles, planted so close as to form shaded walkways.
We certainly can make use of this tree in a similar manner
for our colder regions.”

After  visits  to  local  institutions  in  Irkutsk,  Creech
traveled about 350 km northwest on the Trans-Siberian
Railroad to Tulun. “At the small experiment station near
Tulun,” he recorded (1972), “in a region of dark, heavy
soils, the wooded areas in some places are largely mixtures
of  pine  and  larch. The  forest  floor  is  hummocked  with
sphagnum  mounds  and  in  this  bog-like  condition  vac-
ciniums, spireas, alders, and small birches flourish. To my
surprise  a  rhododendron  also  occurs  in  considerable
quantity. This is Rhododendron ledebourii Pojark., a close
relative of R. dauricum, from which it differs by its more
evergreen habit in winter.”

Creech marveled at the seemingly endless taiga with
prominent  birches,  Betula  verrucosa, and  pines,  Pinus
sibirica, describing  “a  mixture  of  white  ghostly  birch
trunks  in  fog  bound  green  forests.  There  are  taiga
meadows everywhere in full bloom, a vast array of blue
and pink Trollius, gentians, Dianthus superbus, Veronica,

A typical association of white-barked Betula verrucosa and stately
Pinus sibirica, prominent trees of the Siberian taiga. Photo by 
John L. Creech.

Geranium, and Linaria. I also found Lilium martagon, a
frequent plant in the birch forests” (1971d).

Altai crabapples
Back in Irkutsk, Creech and Shmaraev prepared for their
next excursion, this time to Barnaul, situated in the steppe
region  some  180  km  south  of  Novosibirsk. Their  main
destination  was  the  Altai  Fruit  and  Decorative  Plant
Station,  located  in  the  foothills  of  the  Altai  mountains
near  Barnaul.  “A  fruit-breeding  station  at  Barnaul  has  a
collection of trees, shrubs, and herbaceous plants from the
Altai mountains, including 25 acres [10 hectares] of more
than 1500 species of ornamental plants” (Creech 1988).
Creech was especially impressed with an excellent col-
lection of the wild forms of crabapple, Malus pallasiana.
In addition to its extensive representation of Altai plants,
the station maintained smaller collections of plants from
China  and  the  Far  East.  “It  was  here  that  I  collected
Rhododendron  adamsii, a  dwarf  compact  species  with
white  to  pink  flowers,  several  species  of  Actinidia, the
unusual large-leaved plant, Echinopanax elatus, and Micro-
biota  decussata, a  curious  juvenile-leaved  conifer,”  wrote
Creech (1972). One selection that held much promise as
a cold- and drought-resistant plant was Salix ledebouriana
‘Kuraika’,  a  selection  of  the  local  wild  willow.  “A  hand-
some species making tall arching hedges of silvery-grey,”
noted Creech (1971d). “I hope it survives.”

From  Barnaul,  Creech  and  Shmaraev  returned  to
Novosibirsk and on 23 July flew to Moscow. “I am very
pleased with the range of materials I am collecting, as it
represents  some  rather  interesting  Siberian  plants,”

193

Russia and Its Neighbors

The Altai Fruit and Decorative Plant Station near Barnaul in 
the foothills of the Altai mountains. In the background is a row 
of silver-leaved Salix ledebouriana ‘Kuraika’. Photo by 
John L. Creech.

The laboratory and administration building at the Main Botanic
Garden of the Academy of Sciences in Moscow. Photo by 
Russell J. Seibert.

Creech  reported  (1971d).  “Two  of  the  rhododendrons
will be new to us but more important is the fact that we
are dealing with plants that grow under the greatest range
of  high  and  low  temperatures  for  plants  of  this  nature.
Because of this reason, I made a first swing around south-
ern Siberia and will go back to the best area in about two
weeks when the grasses and legumes will be ripe.”

Gardens of Moscow
During a week-long stay in Moscow, Creech arranged for
another  shipment  of  plants  to  be  dispatched  to  the
United States and made visits for collecting purposes to
several gardens in the Moscow area. “In Moscow several
institutions  feature  trees,  shrubs,  and  herbaceous  plants
that  will  interest  the  horticultural  visitor,”  he  noted
(1972). “In most such places, emphasis is on the native
plants  of  the  USSR,  and  nowadays  it  is  fashionable  to
collect and display Siberian species.”

Creech’s itinerary included the Main Botanic Garden
of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  the  University  of  Moscow
Botanic  Garden,  the  Shreder  Botanical  Garden  of  the
Timirazov Agricultural Institute, and the Forestry Insti-
tute  at  Pushkino.  “The  Main  Botanic  Garden  includes
display  beds  of  horticultural  varieties  of  annuals  and
perennials, large collections of trees and shrubs arranged
on  a  systematic  basis,  and  greenhouses  with  exotic
species,”  he  noted  (1972).  “The  University  of  Moscow
Botanic  Garden  features  40  hectares  of  native  plants
arranged  on  a  geographical  basis;  and  one  can  visit  an
alpine flora, a steppe collection, plants from the Far East,

the Caucasus region, or the Crimea. Much of this garden
is  based  on  domestic  explorations  by  the  staff  of  the
Garden.”  Among  the  plants  Creech  acquired  from  this
garden were several species of peonies, including Paeonia
caucasica (7265),  P.  kavachensis (7266),  P.  tenuifolia
(7267), and P. triternata (7268).

Creech  described  the  Shreder  Botanical  Garden  as
“considerably smaller, less than 12 hectares, and perhaps
the least likely to be encountered. The small herbaceous
garden  is  devoted  to  economic  plants  mainly  used  for
teaching purposes, but nearby is the dendrarium with a
rather interesting collection of trees and shrubs” (1972).
Among Creech’s collections from the garden were a pink-
flowered hybrid of Cornus alba crossed with an unknown
parent (74238); Prunus maackii, with rich red exfoliating
bark, frequently used as a street tree; and Acer tegmento-
sum, a  striped-bark  species,  heavy  with  bright  yellow
fruits and, according to Creech, “most attractive.”

Quite a place
In Moscow, Creech said farewell to Shmaraev, who had to
return  to  Leningrad.  Korsokov  took  his  place,  joining
Creech  for  the  remainder  of  the  trip.  Together  they
departed Moscow for Yalta in the Crimea on 30 July. In
Yalta, Creech collected native Crimean plants on Ai Petri,
1233 m, which towered over the city, and on the steppe
plateau to the north. “So it has been a worthwhile excur-
sion,”  he  commented  upon  returning  from  Ai  Petri.
“Here Carpinus orientalis, Acer stevenii, Taxus baccata, and
Pinus  pallasiana are  the  main  ravine  plants.  A  prostrate

194

From Siberia with Plants

The Krymskiye Mountains, including Ai Petri, 1233 m, rise above Yalta and separate the city from the steppe plateau to the north. 
Photo by John L. Creech.

Juniperus is scattered on the edges of the steppe cliff and
the steppe itself is largely Poa pratensis. . . . Quite a place”
(1971e).

In addition to the maples, junipers, yews, grasses, and
herbaceous ornamentals he collected in the wild, Creech
obtained  a  number  of  choice  garden  plants  from  the
Nikitsky Botanical Garden, which he had visited during
his 1963 trip. “The Nikitsky Botanic Garden has a fine
collection of forms of Cedrus and other rare ornamentals.
There is an intensive breeding of cannas and several new
varieties  have  been  named.  Grafting  material  of  Cedrus
[711021–7]  and  roots  of  the  new  canna  varieties
[7249–7250] were made available to me, as well as other
ornamentals I selected in their collections and nurseries”
(Creech 1971b).

The ultimate
From  Yalta,  Creech  and  Korsokov  flew  to  Novosibirsk,
where  Creech  revisited  the  Central  Siberian  Botanical
Garden in Akademgorodok with the intention of collect-
ing some of the plants that had not gone to seed when he
had visited the garden in July. “The local botanists, as in
every  other  case,  were  most  helpful  and  generous,”  he
noted  (1971b).  “Grasses,  herbaceous  plants,  and  some
trees were seeding, and I was permitted to go through the
collections of native species to gather seed.”

From Novosibirsk, Creech and Korsakov continued
to  Yakutsk,  the  main  city  of  Yakutia  in  eastern  Siberia,
which  had  profited  from  gold  mining  and  fur  trading
since its founding in 1632. “There is no means of travel
to  Yakutsk  except  by  airplane,”  wrote  Creech  (1971b).

195

Russia and Its Neighbors

Creech in the Yakut village of Berdigestyakh, 300 km from
Yakutsk. Photo by John L. Creech.

“Here in the permafrost taiga, a small botanic garden is
devoted to plants of eastern Siberia.” Despite fiercely cold
winters  with  temperatures  dropping  below  -50ºC,  this
garden appeared to thrive. “At this time it consists of only
10–12  hectares  containing  some  120  species  in  demon-
stration plots. About thirty native species are useful deco-
rative plants. Pinus sibirica, Larix sibirica, Betula verrucosa,
and  several  spruce  species  frequent  the  permafrost  bogs.
They do not grow tall because the ground is frozen solid
from about three feet [90 cm] below the surface. But this
solid  base  helps  contain  moisture  during  the  growing
season, and it is said that without the permafrost, Siberia
would be a vast arctic desert” (Creech 1972).

With  the  help  of  the  garden  staff,  Creech  made  a
journey to a Yakut village, Berdigestyakh, some 300 km
from  Yakutsk.  He  was  the  first  foreigner  to  reach  the
remote community. “The route to Berdigestyakh is gen-
erously called a corduroy road in parts, elsewhere it is up
to  the  driver  to  find  the  route,”  Creech  explained
(1971b).  “But  the  experience  was  not  regretted  in  the
least.”  While  admiring  surprisingly  rich  vegetation  of
wild potentillas, birches, dwarf willows, and other subarc-
tic plants, Creech noted that the road, where it existed,
was  little  more  than  “a  dirt  track  with  sections  of  log
roads leading through the swamps. Forest fires were often
smoldering along the route. And, on occasion, there were
grave  markers  for  truck  drivers  who,  stranded  alone
during winter, had died” (1988).

Arriving  in  Berdigestyakh,  Creech  experienced  a
delightfully cordial welcome on the part of the villagers,
who  were  genuinely  concerned  for  his  welfare.  “The
village consisted of some 3500 Yakuts mainly occupied in

Creech found Potentilla fruticosa blooming profusely in the open
meadows in the permafrost region near Berdigestyakh. Photo by
John L. Creech.

trapping  fur-bearing  mink  and  sable,  herding  reindeer
and pursuing similar limited agricultural pursuits. In the
conifer  forests  there,  subarctic  plants  inhabit  the
meadows and other open areas. Potentillas are numerous.
I also saw dwarf Lonicera with edible fruit, Vaccinium and
wild roses. Rosa acicularis, with its many small thorns and
pendant pear-shaped fruits, was particularly handsome. I
was  particularly  delighted  to  see  the  neat,  compact
Spiraea betulifolia, which I have often encountered in the
mountains of Japan” (Creech 1988).

Creech remembered that staying late one evening in
Berdigestyakh, satisfied by bountiful collecting and con-
templating  his  experience  in  this  remote  and  desolate
outpost,  he  looked  down  at  the  timeless  village  and,
thinking  about  where  else  plant  collecting  could  take
him, said to himself, “Well, this is the ultimate” (1971a).
Upon  their  return  to Yakutsk,  Creech  and  Korsakov
boarded a plane on 19 August and flew to Moscow. Several
days later, after some last-minute collecting in the Moscow
gardens, Creech left for the United States. The 290 lots of
seeds  and  plants  that  resulted  from  this  expedition  con-
tained, in Creech’s words, “a sufficient number of surprises
for me to make the journey well worthwhile” (1972).

Of his two trips to the USSR, Creech concluded: “The
Soviet Union has an excellent chain of botanic gardens and
plant  evaluation  centers,  which  have  historically  demon-
strated an expertise in distributing the wild plants of the
USSR. Couple that with its great climatic variation and the
vast  array  of  species  suitable  to  the  coldest  regions  of
America’s  midsection,  and  this  country  should  be  high
among our priorities for future collecting sites” (1988).

196

Return of the Argonauts

Georgia occupies an area of 69,500 km2
in the central and western parts of Tran-
scaucasia. In the west it reaches the Black
Sea, in the east the Transcaucasian depres-
sion. The northern border follows the
high mountain ranges of the Greater
Caucasus, with the tallest peak, Mount
Elbrus, rising to 5633 m; the southern
border crosses the Lesser Caucasus, where
the tallest peaks reach about 3300 m. The
intermountain region of Georgia is
divided into the western part, the ancient
kingdom of Colchis, and the eastern part,
the ancient kingdom of Iberia, by the
Likhi Ridge, which connects the Greater
Caucasus to the north with the Lesser Caucasus to the south. Despite its small area, Georgia has exceptionally diverse plant communities,
from desert and semidesert in the eastern part of the country, to lush Colchic forests of moist subtropical climate in the west, to high-
mountain vegetation in the north and south. This diversity of plant communities is reflected in the forty-two hundred vascular plants 
found here.

RETURN OF THE ARGONAUTS

Thirty  years  passed  before  the  next  expedition  would
continue plant exploration in that region. In the mean-
time,  historical  changes  took  place:  the  USSR  was
replaced  by  the  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States
(CIS). In 2001 an expedition was organized to Georgia,
one of the republics in the Caucasus and a member state
of the CIS. The main purpose for the expedition was to
collect new germplasm of common boxwood, Buxus sem-
pervirens, from areas where it grows wild in Georgia and
also from locations where it was introduced centuries or
possibly millennia earlier.

The expedition was organized in collaboration with
the Georgian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Botany.
The institute’s director, Professor Giorgi Nakhutsrishvili,
agreed to host the group of plant explorers and assigned
two  scientists,  Dr.  Maia  Akhalkatsi  and  Dr.  Marina
Mosulishvili, to participate in the expedition. I compiled
a  team  of  several  boxwood  experts  from  the  United
States, including Charles T. Fooks, owner of Woodland
Nursery in Salisbury, Maryland; Todd Lasseigne, assistant
director  of  the  J.  C.  Raulston  Arboretum  in  Raleigh,
North Carolina; Tatum N. and Paul M. Saunders, owners
of  Saunders  Brothers  Nursery  in  Piney  River,  Virginia;
Frederick  R.  Spicer,  manager  of  horticulture  for  Morris
County, New Jersey; and Dr. Robert D. Wright, profes-

Standing between boxwoods at the entrance to the Institute of
Botany in Tbilisi are, left to right, the author, Otar Abdaladze,
Mosulishvili, Nakhutsrishvili, and Akhalkatsi. Photo by 
Tomasz Ani´sko.

sor of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univer-
sity in Blacksburg.

Sacred tree
Our search began on 9 June in the area 60 km northwest
of  Tbilisi,  the  capital  of  Georgia.  In  this  part  of  the
country  boxwood  is  not  considered  to  be  indigenous.
Numerous  established  populations  found  in  eastern
Georgia are believed to be remnants of intentional intro-
ductions that took place in the remote past. Boxwood has
been  considered  a  sacred  tree  since  antiquity  by  the

197

Russia and Its Neighbors

woods  (011280–1)  grew
throughout this site. “The
three  of  us 
roamed
through this small stand of
Buxus, at  Saint  George’s,
excited  as  kids  in  a  candy
store,” 
recalled  Fooks
(2002).  “We  noted  two
variations  in  the  leaves  of
what we saw. One type was
a  rather  narrow,  lighter
green 
some
having 
larger,  wider,
rounder  leaves  that  were
somewhat glaucous.”

leaf,  and 

church 

The  site  near  Cho-
porta very much resembled
the  one  near  Navdaraant
Kari, but only the ruins of
the 
remained.
Despite  this  fact,  villagers
continue  to  visit  the  site,
light candles, and leave coins between stones as small offer-
ings.  Boxwoods  growing  around  the  ruins  had  attained
almost treelike size; after centuries of self-seeding, they had
spread far beyond the original site and established a popu-
lation covering almost an entire hillside. Browsing through
an undergrowth of small seedlings gave us a taste for what
amazing  variability  can  be  found  in  such  populations
(011282–4).

Around a small church of Saint George near the village of Navdaraant Kari, many boxwoods were
planted for ceremonial purposes. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

people of this region. Many Christian churches were built
in places that had been sacred to the local people for mil-
lennia. Boxwoods growing in these sites were adopted in
Christian  religious  ceremonies.  A  tradition  of  bringing
boxwood  twigs  to  a  church  on  Palm  Sunday  continues
even today. These twigs are later taken home, where they
are  believed  to  offer  protection  to  the  house  and  good
fortune to the family.

We were able to travel back in time and immerse our-
selves in this world of ancient myths on the first day of
our  expedition,  when  we  visited  two  sacred  places  of
worship,  one  near  the  village  of  Navdaraant  Kari  and
another near the village of Choporta.

The  site  near  Navdaraant  Kari  included  a  small
church of Saint George sheltered by a grove of trees. Inside
the church, which dated back to the Middle Ages, were
signs of worship—small pictures, burnt candles, and coins
inserted into cracks in the walls. Here we met with our
first wish-tree, its branches clad with ribbonlike pieces of
cloth.  A  person  wanting  a  wish  or  prayer  to  come  true
would tear a piece of cloth from his or her dress or shirt
and tie it to the tree while making the wish. To complete
our  transcendental  experience,  we  proceeded  to  a  spot
near the church where there were tables at which villagers
feasted following the sacrifice of a lamb. Numerous box-

The 

following  day  we  visited  Shio-Mgvime
Monastery located near Mtskheta, 30 km west of Tbilisi,
founded in the sixth century. It was built into a pictur-
esque hillside, steep cliffs providing a dramatic backdrop
for  two  churches  and  the  monk’s  living  quarters.  The
grounds of the monastery were shaded by large trees, but
old boxwoods were planted near the churches. Most of
them were densely planted as a tall hedge separating the
lower  and  upper  levels  of  the  monastery  (011286–8).
Variability of plants in the hedge confirmed our earlier
observation  that  planted  boxwoods  in  Georgia  are
usually  seed-grown  and  most  likely  transplanted  from
the wild. “All of the boxwood we saw planted in eastern
Georgia appeared to be collected plants as no two were
alike,  even  in  hedges,”  commented  Fooks  (2002).  “Of
course, this was in our favor as it gave us much more to
select from.”

198

Return of the Argonauts

its eastern limits just west of Tbilisi. As we gained eleva-
tion,  the  forests  of  Pinus  kochiana gave  way  to  broad-
leaved forests and vast expanses of meadows thick with a
dazzling diversity of flowers. At one point our van came
to  a  sudden  stop  when  a  fenced-in,  ungrazed  meadow
appeared before us. Despite loud protests from a donkey
tied to a post, we climbed the fence and found ourselves
surrounded by lush grasses and flowers of all colors: blue
Vicia and  Galega, purple  Onobrychis and  Dactylorhiza,
yellow Hieracium and Pedicularis, red Papaver, and pink
Orobus—a  stunning  floral  spectacle  kept  in  constant
motion by the wind. Unafraid of deer ticks and poison
ivy, neither of which existed there, several of us dropped
to our knees, overpowered by the beauty of the place and
eager to take a few close-up photographs.

Mount Didgori was a site of the battle between Geor-
gian and Turkish troops that occurred in 1121. The bat-
tlefield,  which  extends  for  several  kilometers,  is  mostly
covered by lush subalpine meadows. The top of Mount
Didgori is marked with a monument consisting of dozens
of massive swords pushed into the ground and posing as
crosses.  Colossal  sculptures  of  dismembered  bodies  of
warriors are scattered in the meadows around the crosses.
Truly monumental in scale, the memorial, surrounded by
the serene Trialeti Range, makes a powerful impression.
In  the  afternoon,  continuing  north  from  Didgori
toward Nichbisi, we again entered a broad-leaved forest.
At  one  of  the  stops,  we  wandered  into  a  small  ravine
where a small relict population of Taxus baccata (011278)
managed  to  survive  outside  its  continuous  range  to  the
north and west. As we descended from Trialeti Range to
the valley of the Mtkvari River, the forest was gradually
replaced  by  so-called  shibliak vegetation,  consisting  of
drought-resistant  plants.  This  bleak  landscape  of  lime-
stone, bleached by scorching sun and sparsely inhabited
by xeric vegetation, did not entice prolonged botanizing.
With no tree tall enough to offer shade in sight, and with
our supply of water already exhausted, we were soon back
on the road to Tbilisi.

Having been told by a botanist working at the Insti-
tute of Botany about a large boxwood tree growing in the
Kvatakhevi Monastery, we decided to add this destination
to our plan. On 13 June we traveled west on the main
highway connecting Tbilisi with the Black Sea coast. In
Mtskheta we turned onto a local road leading to Nichbisi.
A couple of kilometers past Nichbisi we turned again, this
time  onto  a  dirt  road  heading  north  toward  a  remote

A lonely boxwood tree stands at the entrance to a church in 
Shio-Mgvime Monastery, which dates back to the sixth century.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

One  impressively  large  boxwood  tree  stood  alone,
guarding the entrance to the church. Its dark evergreen
foliage was in stark contrast to the subdued, faded, pale
colors  of  the  xeric  vegetation  covering  the  surrounding
hills. Clearly the tree was not meant to be mere ornamen-
tation but had acquired powerful spiritual significance as
an  arboreal  embodiment  of  the  promise  of  eternal  life.
Underneath the tree, cracks in the wall of the church’s bell
tower  were  filled  with  hundreds  of  boxwood  seedlings.
Trying  to  be  discreet  in  such  a  sacred  site,  we  left  the
seedlings undisturbed.

Trialeti Range
Our next destination was Mount Didgori, 1800 m, situ-
ated  some  40  km  west  of Tbilisi  in  the Trialeti  Range,
which is part of the Lesser Caucasus. The range reaches

199

Russia and Its Neighbors

The open woodland of Vashlovani in eastern Georgia combines xerophytic trees and shrubs with
drought-resistant grass cover. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

protect the unique, savan-
nalike,  open  woodland
and  steppe  vegetation  of
far  eastern  Georgia.  The
climate  of  the  reserve  is
dry, with annual precipita-
tion of only 470 mm. The
reserve is cut by a maze of
ravines  60  to  70  m  deep.
The  Tbilisi  Institute  of
Botany  has  a  field  station
there.  Merab  Khachidze,
who  is  in  charge  of  the
station, guided us through
the  reserve.  Khachidze
planted  several  boxwoods
on  the  grounds  of  the
station  forty  years  ago.
Despite  a  harsh  climate
and an exposed site, these
shrubs  appeared  to  be  in
good health and provided

forested gorge cut by a stream in the northern slopes of
the Trialeti Range. The Kvatakhevi Monastery was situ-
ated near the end of the gorge, protected on three sides by
the steep mountain slopes.

There  indeed  was  a  very  large,  multitrunked
boxwood tucked against the inside of the monastery wall.
This magnificent specimen had even its lowest branches
beyond the reach of someone standing on the ground. A
monk, who appeared to be the only person living in the
monastery and taking care of the church, shook his head
when we asked about a ladder. Fortunately the tree was
growing close enough to the wall that its branches could
be  reached  from  the  top  of  it. Thus  climbing  the  wall
allowed us to collect plenty of cuttings (011291). Fruits,
however, were very sparse, and those found were mostly
devoid  of  seeds.  After  much  picking,  only  three  seeds
were  recovered  (011290).  Inside  the  church  we  noticed
little  bundles  of  boxwood  branches  laying  around.  We
were told that these were placed there on Palm Sunday
and would remain there until the next year.

us with an abundant crop of cuttings (011292).

Upon  entering  the  reserve,  we  saw  vast  expanses  of
steppe  overflowing  the  undulating  hills  of  the  Shiraki
plateau, stretching all the way to the horizon. The steppe
was broken only by a single thin line of dirt track marked
by the vehicle we were traveling in. Having been warned
about poisonous snakes, we did not dare to step too far
into the waist-deep ocean of grass. The open woodlands
are  communities  of  xerophytic  woody  plants  combined
with drought-resistant grass cover.

Kasristskali  was  the  nearest  village,  some  10  km
north of Vashlovani Nature Reserve. It is primarily inhab-
ited  by  shepherds  and  their  families,  who  utilize  vast
expanses of steppe for grazing sheep and cattle. Driving
through the village, we noticed young boys armed with
an air-gun and shooting birds. Their hiding place turned
out to be a large group of boxwoods, planted seemingly
as a hedge but long since neglected and forgotten. In this
group we found two plants with exceptionally glaucous
foliage, each differing in leaf size (011294–5).

Eastern steppe
On the morning of 14 June we headed east to the Vashlo-
vani Nature Reserve, 200 km from Tbilisi, located in the
Dedoplis Tskaro  district. The  reserve  was  established  to

Lagodekhi
On 15 June we traveled east from Tbilisi to the Greater
Caucasus. We set up our base in Shilda, a village in the
district of Lagodekhi. Our first destination was an arbore-

200

Return of the Argonauts

The valley of the river Chelti near Shilda supports a lush decidu-
ous forest of wingnuts, oaks, hornbeams, and hawthorns. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Pontic azaleas, Rhododendron luteum, grow in the subalpine
meadows of the Lagodekhi Nature Reserve. Photo by 
Tomasz Ani´sko.

tum  of  the  Lagodekhi  Nature  Reserve.  The  arboretum
was established at the end of the nineteenth century by
Ludwik  M ⁄lokosiewicz,  a  Polish  botanist  serving  as  an
officer in the Russian Army, best remembered for his dis-
covery of a new species of peony, later named after him,
Paeonia mlokosewitschii. Despite its small area of only 2
hectares, the arboretum has an array of magnificent tree
specimens, including a large boxwood tree more than a
hundred years old (011297–8).

At the headquarters of the Lagodekhi Nature Reserve
we  were  met  by  Gogi  Mamukelashvili,  vice-director  of
scientific  affairs.  The  reserve’s  administration  buildings
are surrounded by a small park where many exotic trees
and  shrubs  were  planted  in  the  past.  Among  the  most
intriguing  specimens  was  a  weeping  form  of  Magnolia

grandiflora (011279).  Several  low-growing  boxwoods
were also noticed near the entrance to one of the guest-
houses  (011299).  After  having  lunch  on  the  side  of  a
stream  near  the  reserve’s  headquarters,  Mamukelashvili
led us through a forest of predominantly Fagus orientalis.
In  the  afternoon  we  reached  a  place  where  a  colony  of
Paeonia mlokosewitschii is known to flower every spring.
Unfortunately,  our  desperate  efforts  to  find  fruiting
plants were unsuccessful.

On 16 June we reached Bzatagora, or Boxwood Hill,
located outside Kvareli, 160 km northeast of Tbilisi. This
was once the site of an ancient temple or sacred grove. It
is  believed  that  the  boxwood  population  in  Bzatagora
resulted  from  an  introduction  from  the  western  part  of
the country. Since then the population in Bzatagora has

201

Russia and Its Neighbors

grown to cover an entire hillside. Mature boxwood trees
formed  a  very  dense  canopy  that  excluded  much  of  the
light  from  reaching  the  forest  floor.  Little  vegetation  of
any  sort  was  present  under  the  boxwoods.  However,  in
places where an opening in the canopy was caused by a
falling  tree,  hundreds  of  small  boxwood  seedlings  were
growing  and  competing  with  each  other.  It  was  among
these  seedlings  that  we  observed  the  greatest  diversity.
Within a relatively small area we found plants with pen-
dulous  (011305–6)  and  prostrate  (011307)  branching
habits, plants with very glossy, dark green leaves (011310),
and plants with strongly glaucous leaves (011309). One
seedling even had variegated foliage (011308).

In the afternoon we hiked in the valley of the river
Chelti  near  Shilda,  known  for  its  Pterocarya  pterocarpa
forest. Picturesque willows and poplars grew closer to the
river.  Higher  up,  large  wingnuts,  oaks,  hornbeams,  and
hawthorns created a patchwork of different textures and
shades of green on the hillsides. Flocks of sheep strolled
casually  along  the  edges  of  the  forest.  Our  hike  ended
when  two  big  sheepdogs  blocked  our  path,  leaving  no
doubt as to what they intended to do should we decide to
proceed.

The  following  morning  we  returned  to  the
Lagodekhi Nature Reserve to undertake, with Mamuke-
lashvili as our guide, a 14 km hike to reach the subalpine
meadows  at  about  2500  m.  Upon  emerging  from  the
forest  above  the  timberline,  we  were  immediately  sur-
rounded  by  the  overpowering  scent  of  Pontic  azalea,
Rhododendron luteum. The azaleas were in full bloom and
scattered  in  large  numbers  in  the  meadows.  Several
megaforbs,  or  tall  herbs,  still  in  their  vegetative  stage,
were  pointed  out  to  us.  Unlike  many  other  mountain
systems, the Caucasus has tall herbaceous vegetation well
represented in its subalpine zone. Megaforbs are mainly
dicots, characterized by rosetteless shoots, short tap roots,
and  rhizomes. They  develop  on  rich  soils  under  condi-
tions of high humidity, high solar radiation, and negligi-
ble daily fluctuations of temperature.

Floristic junction
On 21 June we reversed our course and headed west from
Tbilisi  to  Algeti  Nature  Reserve,  in  the Tetritskaro  dis-
trict. It was established in 1965 on the southern slopes of
the East Trialeti Range, which is a part of the Lesser Cau-
casus. The administration of the reserve is in the village of
Manglisi.  Malkhaz  Kavteladze,  director,  and  Khatuna

Tsiklauri, doctoral candidate at the Tbilisi State Univer-
sity, welcomed us and guided us in the reserve.

The main purpose for the reserve is to protect forests
of Abies nordmanniana and Picea orientalis in the eastern
part  of  the  Lesser  Caucasus. The  climate  is  transitional
between  moderate  subtropical-continental  and  humid-
marine. The reserve has a rich and diverse flora of more
than  a  thousand  vascular  plants.  Botanists  consider  the
southern  slopes  of  the  East Trialeti  a  floristic  junction,
where  elements  of  Colchic,  Hyrcanian,  Caucasian,
Middle Eastern, and Persian floras meet.

After hiking through the spruce forest, we descended
to  a  small  hamlet.  Shepherds  who  spend  summer  there
while their sheep graze in the surrounding hills treated us
to a meal. It was served under an oak tree on the site of a
ruined medieval church.

That evening, while returning to Tbilisi, we stopped
at  a  roadside  vendor  selling  plants.  “We  purchased  a
boxwood, which had been hacked on quite a bit, but got
our interest,” remembered Fooks (2002). “It was one per-
fectly straight pole with all of the branches perpendicular
to the trunk. It seemed to have great promise as a fasti-
giate plant. We purchased it for 10 lari, trimmed the cut-
tings  [011313]  and  later  planted  it  in  the  Tbilisi
Botanical Garden.”

Kazbegi
On 23 June we headed north to Kazbegi in the Greater
Caucasus,  160  km  from  Tbilisi.  The  Georgia  Military
Road, which leads to Kazbegi, is the only major road that
crosses the Caucasus and connects Georgia with Russia.
First  it  follows  the  river  Aragvi  to  the  Cross  Pass,  and
from  there  it  follows  the  river  Tergi  flowing  north  to
Russia.  It  is  an  ancient  trading  route  that  the  Russians
converted  into  a  carriage  road  during  the  nineteenth
century. The town of Kazbegi, elevation 1797 m, is situ-
ated on the banks of the river Tergi in Phansheti Valley,
overshadowed  by  the  mighty  Mount  Kazbeg,  5047  m.
The town and the mountain were named after Alexander
Kazbegi, a local noble and much-loved poet who lived in
the nineteenth century.

The  next  day  we  drove  to  the  village  of  Phansheti,
located  in  the Tergi  River  valley,  about  4  km  south  of
Kazbegi. Steep slopes there are largely covered by scree,
which provides habitat to mountain xerophytes. Numer-
ous mineral springs created small marshes in the valley,
which  at  the  time  of  our  visit,  when  several  species  of

202

Return of the Argonauts

A narrow ribbon of the Georgia Military Road. This is the only major road crossing the Greater Caucasus and connecting Georgia with
Russia. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Ranunculus were in bloom, appeared from a distance to
be  dusted  with  gold.  Villagers  in  Phansheti  channeled
one of the springs into a large outdoor swimming pool,
the last thing we expected to see in these rugged moun-
tains.  The  pool  was  constantly  filled  by  gushing  water
from a mountain spring on one end and overflowing on
the other. Set in the middle of a vast meadow, against a
backdrop  of  magnificent  Mount  Kazbeg,  it  appeared
almost surreal.

Gveleti Gorge, located near the village Gveleti, just a
few kilometers north of Kazbegi, was our destination for
the afternoon. It follows Tibaistskali, a tributary of Tergi,
fed  by  glaciers  on  Mount  Kazbeg.  Upon  entering  the
gorge, the recognizable trail soon disappeared among lush
grasses and herbs, forcing us to carefully navigate our way
among  rocks  and  follow  the  course  of  the  Tibaistskali
upstream. Along the stream many herbaceous plants were

in full bloom, including Caltha polypetala (011052), Fil-
ipendula vulgaris (011051), and Linum catharticum, but
most  enchanting  was  the  profusion  of  Campanula and
Geranium species.  Some  of  the  individual  Geranium
plants identified as G. sylvaticum (011049) and G. iber-
icum (011050) stood out from the crowd because of their
exceptionally rich bluish purple flowers. Our progress was
eventually halted by a waterfall and the unclimbable, ver-
tical rock face some 30 m high surrounding it.

On 25 June, in order to reach Truso Gorge, 40 km
south  of  Kazbegi,  we  turned  off  the  Georgia  Military
Road in the village of Almasiani. A dirt track allowed us
to  drive  as  far  as  the  tiny  settlement,  Zemo-Okrokana,
where a medieval defensive tower guarded the entrance to
the gorge. From the village we continued hiking west, fol-
lowing  a  track  along  the  river Tergi  until  we  reached  a
wide-open  valley  where  numerous  mineral  springs

203

Russia and Its Neighbors

The austere landscape of Truso Gorge is filled with scree covered by sparse vegetation. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

the 

created  striking  creamy
pink  deposits  along  the
river.  Interestingly,  at  one
point  along  the  trail  we
saw a wish-tree, this time a
juniper,  decorated  with
pieces  of  cloth.  It  was
growing  out  of  a  rock
its
above 
trail, 
branches  hanging 
low
enough 
for  people  to
reach  them.  Under  the
tree  was  a  large  pail  of
empty  bottles,  indicating
that  the  trail  might  have
been  traveled  more  fre-
quently  than  we  thought.
As  with  the  churches  we
had  visited  earlier,  small
coins  were  placed  in  the
crevices in the rock.

After lunch we headed to the Sno Gorge. A dirt track
leading to the gorge begins on the east side of the Georgia
Military  Road,  about  5  km  south  of  Kazbebi,  near  the
village  of  Arsha.  The  Sno  Gorge  starts  as  a  wide-open
valley with picturesque emerald green fields and pastures.
Past the village of Sno, some 2.5 km into the valley, the
road enters a narrow canyon and climbs gradually for 18
km to the village of Juta. Built at an elevation of 2200 m,
this is among the highest permanently settled villages in
the Caucasus. A horse track, which we took, leads north
from  the  village  toward  Russia.  Above  the  trail  a  vast
colony  of  Rhododendron  caucasicum, Daphne  glomerata,
and  Vaccinium  myrtillus smothered  the  whole  hillside,
while  the  meadows  along  the  river  were  filled  with
orchids and sporadically accented with statuesque Hera-
cleum  sosnowskyi. Glistening  in  the  afternoon  sun  were
silver-leaved  willows,  Salix  kusnetzowii, which  occupied
little nooks between rocks near the river.

On  26  June  we  made  a  daring  attempt  to  climb
Mount Kazbeg to reach the subnival vegetation at the base
of  the  Gergeti  Glacier.  Mount  Kazbeg  is  a  long-extinct

A medieval watchtower in Sno Gorge, where watchmen warned
the inhabitants of the mountains against advancing invaders.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

204

Return of the Argonauts

Holy Trinity Church rises above the clouds. It was built in the fourteenth century on a ridge near Kazbegi at 2216 m. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

volcano and the highest peak in the central Caucasus. It is
believed  to  be  the  place  where  Amirani,  the  Georgian
archetype of Prometheus, was chained to the mountain.
The morning began with a brisk hike to the Gergeti Holy
Trinity Church, built in the fourteenth century on a ridge,
2216  m,  opposite  the  town  of  Kazbegi  and  silhouetted
against the impressive, overpowering Mount Kazbeg. The
trail  started  just  above  the  village  of  Gergeti  on  the  left
bank  of  the  Tergi  River.  Led  by  two  local  guides,  we
quickly  entered  a  forest  of  predominantly  Betula
litwinowii only to emerge from it on the top of the ridge
with alpine meadows extending as far as the eye could see.
The  Holy  Trinity  Church,  barely  visible  in  the
clouds, appeared to float in the air. Heading in the direc-
tion of the church, we were quickly engulfed by thick fog.
A  herd  of  cows  leisurely  stood  on  the  hills  around  the
church.  They  were  almost  motionless,  as  if  awaiting

church bells to break the silence. Wishing to avoid dis-
turbing  the  tranquility  of  the  scene,  we  lowered  our
voices and proceeded slowly to the church. The building
was locked and appeared deserted except for a couple of
dogs and a lonely herdsman standing on top of the wall
watching his cows.

Spicer, Wright, and I took on the challenge of reach-
ing Gergeti Glacier at 3045 m and seeing subnival vege-
tation,  which  can  be  found  just  below  the  permanent
snow cover. Despite the extreme conditions, more than
three hundred species of plants occur in the subnival belt,
about  a  third  of  which  are  unique  to  this  ecosystem.
These plants developed morphological adaptations allow-
ing them to cope with high solar radiation, temperature
fluctuations,  and  desiccating  winds  during  the  growing
season,  while  allowing  for  hibernation  under  the  snow
during the winter.

205

Russia and Its Neighbors

At about 2300 m, Spicer began feeling the effects of
the thin air and decided to turn back and return to the
church. Wright chose to do the same at about 2600 m. To
make things more difficult, it started to rain. As my two
guides did not seem to be bothered in the least by the low
oxygen, the steep climb, and the rain, we continued our
hike  to  the  glacier.  Thick  clouds  reduced  visibility  to
between 10 and 20 m and made it impossible to gauge our
progress or have a sense of the distance from the glacier.
Changes in vegetation and the first patches of snow indi-
cated,  however,  that  we  were  approaching  it.  Finally,  an
opening in the clouds made it possible to see the glacier, 8
km long and 7 km wide, down below our feet.

On  the  morning  of  27  June  we  hiked  on  Mount
Kuro, 4071 m. This mountain had appeared to us in its
full glory the first evening we came to Kazbegi as we sat
in  the  dining  room  of  the  Kazbegi  Ecological  Center,
where we were staying. The windows there looked out to
the  east,  and  suddenly  someone  pointed  to  the  view
outside.  There  it  was:  Mount  Kuro,  gloriously  illumi-
nated by the sun setting on the opposite side of the valley.
Since that moment we had admired it every day—slate-
gray and gloomy at breakfast, glistening as if gold-plated
at  suppertime.  On  our  last  day  in  Kazbegi,  we  were
finally able to explore its slopes.

Meadows  on  Mount  Kuro,  immediately  above
Kazbegi,  were  grazed,  so  that  only  individual  rock  out-
crops,  beyond  the  reach  of  sheep,  were  richly  encrusted
with floral jewels, Campanula species in particular. Only
upon reaching a very steep rocky ridge at about 2000 m
did we discover the plant diversity of this mountain in its
full. There, along the edge of the forest of crooked-stem
birch,  Betula  litwinowii, and  mountain-ash,  Sorbus  cau-
casigena, we  found  a  lush  meadow  that  had  escaped
grazing and bore a lavish vegetation dazzling with color.
Golden Inula orientalis (011054) and Ranunculus caucasi-
cus, blue Myosotis alpestris and several species of Campan-
ula,
lavender  Linum  hypericifolium, pink  and  rose
Pyrethrum  roseum, purple  Stachys  macrantha, and  char-
treuse  Alchemilla  oligotricha lured  us  higher  and  higher.
The  colors  seemed  exceptionally  brilliant  and  intense,
perhaps because of the sheer rock cliffs of Mount Kuro,
which dropped like a slate-gray curtain behind them. The
air  was  perfumed  by  a  diminutive  rose,  probably  Rosa
pimpinellifolia, and by the even smaller Daphne glomerata.
If  not  for  Mosulishvili,  we  might  have  forgotten
about the whole world there, savoring the beauty of the

Caucasian flora, inhaling the oxygen-deficient mountain
air, and absorbing the UV-rich sun rays. All these things
can  lead  to  a  strange  state  of  euphoria  known  to  affect
plant collectors around the world. Mosulishvili brought
us back to reality, reminding us of the need to return to
the Kazbegi Ecological Center. We had to prepare for the
next  day’s  departure  and  the  travel  to  Bakuriani  in  the
Lesser Caucasus.

Lesser Caucasus
On the evening of 28 June, after an all-day drive from
Kazbegi, we arrived in Bakuriani, 1700 m, located in the
northern slopes of the West Trialeti Range in the Lesser
Caucasus. Bakuriani was established in the 1930s as a ski
resort, but despite its popularity it retained much of the
atmosphere  of  a  small  mountain  village,  with  its  tradi-
tional wooden cottages. The snow cover in this area lasts
from November to March, and occasionally until May.
Our home for the next couple of days was the Ecologi-
cal Center in the Bakuriani Botanical Garden, where we
were  welcomed  by  Dr.  Nukri  Sikharulidze,  director  of
the garden.

In  order  to  reach  our  destination  for  the  day,  Lake
Tabatskuri, south of Bakuriani, we had to take a dirt road
up through the Trialeti Range. Sikharulidze arranged for
two UAZ jeeps to take us on a strenuous road through
the mountains. Upon reaching the Tskhra-Tskaro Pass at
2454 m, a spectacular view opened before us of highland
pastures  and  mountain  ranges  stretching  south  into
Armenia. As the road we traveled on descended from the
pass on the south side of Trialeti Range, it became less like
a road and more like an obstacle course, sometimes dis-
appearing  altogether.  Our  admiration  for  the  rugged
UAZs and their skillful drivers grew by the minute. By
the early afternoon we reached Lake Tabatskuri, backed
by  a  couple  of  extinct  volcanoes.  The  lake  provides
enough fish to support two small villages on its shores,
which  are  settled  mostly  by  the  Armenian  minority.
“About fifty families lived here,” remembers Paul Saun-
ders.  “No  supermarket,  hospital,  or  short-order  food
stops here. Only a jeep road into this secluded village in
the  mountains  at  2000  m  connects  it  to  the  world
beyond.  Similar  to  the  early  American  Indian  practices
using  buffalo  patties  on  the  treeless  prairie  as  fuel  for
campsites, the villagers were drying cow dung into foot
square slabs for fuel for winter.”

206

Return of the Argonauts

Standing in front of a variegated boxwood (011323) in a formal
park surrounding Romanov’s palace in Borjomi are, left to right,
Paul M. Saunders, Likhovtschenko, and Fooks. Photo by 
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Romanov’s retreat
Our  next  destination  was  Borjomi-Kharagauli  National
Park,  located  northwest  of  Bakuriani,  on  the  northern
and southern slopes of the eastern Adjara-Imereti moun-
tain range. The northern end of the park merges into the
Likhi  Ridge,  which  divides  Georgia  into  eastern  and
western parts. The northern boundary coincides with the
river  Chkherimela,  while  the  southwestern  boundary
follows the river Mtkvari. The national park covers more
than 68,000 hectares, which places it among the largest
parks in Europe.

Borjomi, one of the oldest health resorts in Georgia,
was built in the gorge of the river Mtkvari, which boasts
springs of mineral water with exceptional medicinal qual-
ities. The park began in the second half of the nineteenth
century  when  Mikhail  Romanov,  brother  of  the  ruling
Russian  czar,  was  appointed  viceroy  of  the  Russian
Empire to Transcaucasia and decided to build a summer
residence  in  Borjomi. The  former  Romanov  estate  was
declared  a  nature  reserve  in  1935,  after  the  fall  of  the
Russian  Empire  and  the  accession  of  Georgia  to  the
USSR. The  formal  park  surrounding  Romanov’s  palace
was developed into a health resort.

“On entering the resort we saw a nice little variegated
boxwood,”  recalled  Fooks  (2002).  “However,  since  the
guards at the gates only a few yards away were armed with
submachine guns, we felt intimidated in spite of having
our  Georgian  guides  and  passed  it  by.”  Fortunately,  a
little while later we met Levan Likhovtschenko, who had
been  a  horticulturist  at  the  resort  for  more  than  forty

A fallen tree halted progress in Baniskhevi Gorge in the 
Borjomi-Kharagauli National Park. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

years. Likhovtschenko graciously shared with us some of
the boxwoods he had brought to Borjomi from western
Georgia forty years earlier, including the variegated one
we saw at the gate (011322–3).

Our  destination  for  the  afternoon  was  Baniskhevi
Gorge on the southern side of the Adjara-Imereti moun-
tain  range.  In  this  gorge  many  plants  typical  for  the
Colchic forest of western Georgia can be found growing
together  with  plants  characteristic  of  the  drier  eastern
Georgia. Colchic plants in the gorge are found primarily
in the understory of Fagus orientalis forest between 800
and  1300  m  and  include  many  broad-leaved  evergreen
shrubs such as Ilex colchica (011277), Prunus laurocerasus,
and Rhododendron ponticum. At the elevation of 1350 to
1400 m, beech forest is replaced by Abies nordmanniana
forest  with  undergrowth  of  Rhododendron  ponticum.
Above  1800  m,  the  forest  gradually  gives  way  to  sub-
alpine herbaceous vegetation. Thanks to UAZ jeeps and
their  amazing  drivers,  we  were  able  to  cross  the  stream
several times, and we drove deep into the gorge until a
fallen tree blocked our path. From this point on we con-
tinued on foot, hoping to find our first wild population
of boxwood. This was not to be, however. Having been
warned about Baniskhevi being a brown bear habitat, we
proceeded  cautiously.  After  seeing  fresh  bear  tracks  and
bear dung on the trail, the group decided to return to the
vehicles.

On  our  way  back  to  Bakuriani,  we  stopped  at  what
used  to  be  the  first  botanical  garden  in  this  mountain
resort.  We  were  told  that  Lavrenty  Beria,  the  infamous
chief of Joseph Stalin’s secret police, was so overtaken by
the beauty of this site that he decided to turn the botanical

207

Russia and Its Neighbors

traveled along the river as far as the village of Kharagauli,
which  placed  us  near  the  northern  boundary  of  the
Borjomi-Kharagauli  National  Park,  on  the  northern
slopes  of  the  Adjara-Imereti  mountains.  Upon  reaching
the vicinity of Kharagauli we found ourselves surrounded
by slopes covered with boxwood groves. Steep slopes of
loose,  crumbled  rock  made  maneuvering  difficult,  but
the  profusion  of  boxwoods  and  their  diversity  lured  us
higher  and  higher.  The  site  appeared  to  have  been
forested in the past, with boxwood growing as the under-
story. Now grazing by domestic animals prevented regen-
eration  of  the  trees,  while  boxwood,  unpalatable  to  the
animals,  flourished  in  the  site  despite  full  exposure  to
sun. The diversity of forms, colors, sizes, and shapes of
the  boxwood  growing  here  held  up  our  group  much
longer than initially planned (011326–36). “Our guides
and  driver  practically  had  to  pry  us  away  from  there,”
remembered Fooks (2002). Kharagauli is believed to be
the  easternmost  natural  population  of  boxwood  in  the
Adjara-Imereti mountains.

Loaded  with  boxwood  cuttings  and  seeds,  we
returned to the main road and continued west through
Kutaisi to the coastal city of Poti. Kutaisi was the capital
of the ancient kingdom of Colchis and the destination of
the  legendary  Argonauts’  expedition  led  by  Jason  in
pursuit of the Golden Fleece. After reaching the coast of
Colchis  near  Poti,  the  Argonauts  sailed  up  the  Rioni
River to Kutaisi. In Poti we changed directions and drove
south along the Black Sea coast toward Batumi. Planta-
tions of tea and citrus signaled that we were to enjoy a
balmy,  subtropical  climate.  Upon  reaching  Batumi  we
were  met  by  Dr.  Zurab  Manvelidze,  head  of  the  plant
conservation  department  of  the  Batumi  Botanical
Garden, who would not only be our guide in and around
Batumi but who also wholeheartedly opened his home to
us, a group of strangers from the United States.

Our first excursion out of Batumi on 2 July took us
to  Kintrishi  Nature  Reserve,  about  50  km  northeast  of
the city, a sanctuary for chestnut and beech forests in the
gorge  of  the  Kintrishi  River.  Because  of  its  location
between  the  Black  Sea  and  the  mountains  of  Adjara-
Imereti,  the  nature  reserve  receives  very  high  precipita-
tion—nearly 4000 mm annually on average. The terrain
in the park is very rugged, with high peaks, steep slopes,
and several river gorges.

Kintrishi Gorge was mostly covered by a lush decid-
uous forest with rich undergrowth, which included dense

A twelfth-century stone bridge spans the sides of the Kintrishi
Gorge, one of many such structures still standing in Adjara. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

garden into his summer residence. Indeed, the botanical
garden was relocated to its present site at the Ecological
Station, while the old one functioned as Beria’s summer
retreat.  Extensive  plantings  of  boxwood  surrounded
Beria’s  house;  one  unusually  low-growing  plant  near
steps leading to the lower level of the house caught our
attention (011324).

Colchis
On 1 July we were to cross the Adjara-Imereti mountains
and enter the historical Colchis of western Georgia. After
traveling north out of the Borjomi Gorge, we turned west
onto a main road between Tbilisi and the coast. The road
crossed the mountains through a long tunnel under the
Rikoti pass. Some 20 km further west, we turned onto a
road leading to the gorge of the river Chkherimela. We

208

From the Caspian to the Black Sea

thickets of boxwood (011337–42). “These natural thick-
ets  of  boxwood  contain  thousands,  even  millions,  of
plants growing in some of the most rugged country imag-
inable,” remembers Paul Saunders. “Gorge after gorge of
boxwood,  often  growing  along  with  rhododendron  and
holly,  on  nearly  vertical  slopes  made  green  with  the
varying  shapes  and  shades  of  these  seedlings.  Truly  a
boxwood heaven!”

Independence Day
Our last day of collecting was to be 4 July, when we paid
a visit to the Batumi Botanical Garden, located some 9
km north of the city. The garden was founded in 1912
and now belongs to the Georgian Academy of Sciences.
It covers an area of 113 hectares and features more than
five thousand species of plants from around the world,
representing temperate, Mediterranean, and subtropical
climates.

The unique climate of Batumi allows for cultivation
of frost-sensitive subtropical plants next to hardy plants
from northern temperate climates. The garden design is
based on geographical regions representing floristic zones
of  North  America,  Japan,  the  Far  East,  South  America,
Australia, and New Zealand. A formal garden called Pri-
morsky  Park  offers  a  spectacular  vista  opening  to  the
Black Sea and is lined with boxwood hedges (011350),
clipped Laurus nobilis and Prunus laurocerasus, as well as
stately Cryptomeria  japonica, Phoenix  canariensis, and
Pinus taeda.

Before we departed Batumi to return to the United
States with more than eighty collections of boxwoods and
more than 180 collections of other plants, an unexpected
grand finale to this expedition awaited us in Manvelidze’s
house.  “Zura  and  his  family  were  the  most  gracious
hosts,”  remembered  Fooks  (2002).  “His  daughter  and
some  neighbor  girls  assisted  his  wife  in  preparing  and
serving the meals. They played the piano and sang for us
after the evening meal. They surprised us with a fantastic
Fourth of July celebration. When we came back from our
day  trip  we  found  balloons  tied  to  the  stair  railings.
Inside, the table was set with red, white, and blue napkins
in each glass and a large cake at the head of the table with
an American flag. We were very touched. Many of their
friends  and  relatives  had  gathered.  The  ladies  outdid
themselves.  The  dinner  was  superb.  After  dinner  there
was the usual singing with a little different twist tonight.
We sang the Star Spangled Banner and some other patri-

otic songs for them. It was hilarious. I must say I spent
my most memorable Fourth of July in a foreign country.”

FROM THE CASPIAN TO THE BLACK SEA

The results of the 2001 expedition opened our eyes to the
floristic  wealth  of  Transcaucasia.  The  diversity  of
boxwood,  in  particular,  far  exceeded  our  expectations.
Participants of the 2001 trip came to the realization that
boxwood  exploration  in  that  region  should  continue.
With this goal in mind, in 2002 preparations began for
another trip that would allow for additional collections of
boxwood to be made across the region, from the Talish
Mountains on the border between Azerbaijan and Iran,
through  Georgia,  along  Russia’s  Black  Sea  coast,  and
finally to the Crimean Peninsula in Ukraine.

The  team  this  time  included  Lynn  R.  Batdorf,
curator of the National Boxwood Collection at the U.S.
National Arboretum in Washington; Dr. Henry F. Frier-
son, Jr., professor at the University of Virginia in Char-
lottesville;  David  J.  Williams,  production  manager  of
Woodland  Nursery  in  Salisbury,  Maryland;  and  me.
While we were helped by many botanists along the way,
Mosulishvili  accompanied  us  on  the  entire  trip  and
played a pivotal role in organizing it.

Hyrcanian boxwood
On  6  June  the  team  assembled  in  Baku,  the  capital  of
Azerbaijan, sited along the coast of the Caspian Sea. We
were greeted by Mosulishvili, along with Professor Vagid
D. Gadjiev, director of the Institute of Botany in Baku,
and Professor Valida Ali-zade, the institute’s deputy direc-
tor. On our first day, accompanied by Gadjiev, we traveled
south to the Talish Mountains, along the border with Iran,
and  part  of  the  ancient  Persian  province  of  Hyrcania.
“Our ride from Baku along the central Caspian coast was
largely  through  barren  semi-desert  until  we  reached  the
fertile Talish region where the climate became almost sub-
tropical,” recalls Frierson. “The Talish Mountains contain
small  stands  of  Buxus  hyrcana, also  classified  as  a  sub-
species  of  Buxus  sempervirens, which  has  a  geographic
range extending to the neighboring part of northern Iran.”
Our destination was Lenkoran, renowned for its tea
plantations.  A  few  kilometers  south  of  Lenkoran  we
stayed in a guesthouse built on the picturesque Lake Xan-
bulaq,  in  close  proximity  to  the  Hyrcanian  Nature

209

Russia and Its Neighbors

Azerbaijan’s southernmost town, Astara, is nestled at the foot of
the Talish Mountains, which are home to Buxus hyrcana. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

An Azeri boy guided us through the marshes of the river Akusha-
chay to this population of Nelumbo caspica (02614). Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Reserve. The next day, thanks to a four-wheel-drive mili-
tary truck that was arranged for our group by Hadji Saa-
farov, vice-director of the reserve, we penetrated deep into
the reserve. There we were led by Saafarov to a couple of
wild  boxwood  populations  (02594–602).  Some  of  the
boxwoods in these sites were 10 m tall and estimated to be
250 years old. We speculated that one of the sites could
actually be an ancient burial site, because it had a fairly
regular mounded shape rising above the surrounding area
and  contained  a  large  number  of  rocks  scattered  on  the
surface. Interestingly, boxwoods were confined only to the
mound and did not spread into the adjacent forest.

On 9 June we traveled on the road along the valley of
the Lenkoran River, heading west to Lerik, where, as we
ascended  into  the  Talish  Mountains,  we  came  upon
groves  of  boxwood  surrounding  a  mosque  and  nearby
cemetery. The following day we collected in the hills just
northwest of Astara, the southernmost town in Azerbai-
jan, which is nestled along the Caspian Sea at the border
with Iran (02605–13). The boxwood forest there shared
a southeast-facing slope with a cemetery and mausoleum.
“It was clear that the populations of B. hyrcana in the
Talish  region  were  centered  around  Moslem  cemeteries
and that the species was considered to be sacred,” wrote
Frierson (2003). “The finding of stands of B. hyrcana at
religious  sites  led  to  the  question  of  whether  they  had
been  planted  there  or  whether  they  arose  naturally  and
were therefore protected as holy sites. We surmised that
the populations of boxwood at some of these sites were so
extensive that it was likely that they were native to these
specific areas.”

On  11  June  we  departed  Astara  to  return  to  Baku.
Along the way we stopped in the marshes along the river
Akusha-chay, about 50 km south of Salyany, to look for
Nelumbo caspica, Caspian lotus, which had been acquired
by Creech during his 1963 visit to the Nikitsky Botanical
Garden in Yalta. Thanks to help from a local boy, who
guided us through a maze of narrow dikes, we eventually
came upon a small colony of N. caspica (02614). As there
were no seeds available, we collected shallowly rooted rhi-
zomes. In the evening we reached Baku, said farewells to
Gadjiev and Ali-zade, and boarded a night train that took
us through the broad dry steppe of central Azerbaijan and
on to Tbilisi, Georgia.

Georgia’s river gorges
Upon our arrival in Tbilisi we headed east to the town of
Signakhi. Knowing that boxwoods are not native in that
part of Georgia and that they are typically found growing
only  around  places  of  worship,  we  wanted  to  visit  a
monastery near the town. “One of the most spectacular
boxwoods we found on this trip,” recalls Frierson, “was
planted  at  the  Monastery  of  Saint  Nino,  Convent  of
Bodbe near the town of Signakhi, where we discovered a
unique  single  small  dense  plant  whose  new  foliage  was
sky blue, beautifully contrasting with the dark green of
the mature leaves (02615). Fortunately, we were granted
permission to take cuttings, but we received no informa-
tion about the origin of this plant.” We were fascinated
by an old allée of boxwood (02616–7) in the monastery’s
vegetable garden; maintained through coppicing, it pro-

210

From the Caspian to the Black Sea

Resting at a stop along the road through the Lesser Caucasus to
Batumi are, left to right, Mosulishvili, Williams, Manvelidze,
Frierson, and Batdorf. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

The valley of the river Adjaris Tskali in Adjara was a fruitful
ground for boxwood hunting. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

vided the monks with material from which to carve little
crosses.

“It quickly became apparent to us that boxwood pos-
sesses important religious significance,” explains Batdorf.
“The Georgian Bible states that Jesus entered Jerusalem
on  branches  of  boxwood  meant  to  rid  the  way  of  evil
spirits. It was believed that evil spirits could not penetrate
the  hard,  dense  wood  of  the  boxwood,  thus  areas  near
boxwood  were  considered  purified. Today  the  wood  of
boxwood is carved into small crosses and other religious
symbols to wear as necklaces.”

Returning  to  Tbilisi,  we  visited  the  Institute  of
Botany and the Botanical Garden. On 16 June we headed
west  over  the  mountains  of  the  Lesser  Caucasus  to
Batumi on the Black Sea coast. In the evening we reached
Akhaltsikhe, a small town in southern Georgia near the
border with Turkey, where we were met by Manvelidze,
who arrived from Batumi with two UAZ jeeps to take our
group over the most strenuous part of the road through
the mountains. As he had done a year earlier, he also gra-
ciously  offered  us  room  and  board  in  his  home  during
our several days in Batumi.

The  following  day  we  continued  driving  west  while
the road gradually climbed the increasingly rugged moun-
tains. Once we surmounted the crest of the Lesser Cauca-
sus and began to descend to the valley of Adjaris Tskali on
the west side, boxwoods became quite prevalent, and we
made several stops to collect seeds and cuttings.

“In the evening we stopped near the small village of
Dologani where we found masses of boxwoods growing
along  both  banks  of  a  small  river,  Dologanis  Tskali,”

Williams, left, and Frierson collect boxwood cuttings at a church
in Skhalta, west of Tsabliana in Adjara. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

remembers Frierson. “As we would observe at many other
locations, the plants grew directly along the water. Here,
we saw perhaps the greatest diversity of boxwoods, whose
leaves varied greatly in size and shape. We gathered seeds
and cuttings from many specimens until darkness inhib-
ited further collecting (02620).”

Batumi  welcomed  us  with  persistent  rain.  “Despite
the downpour, we drove to the mountains east of Chakvi,
a small coastal town north of Batumi,” recalls Frierson.
“There we explored in a torrential rain a protected area of
boxwood forest in a gorge traversed by rivers and streams
and  laden  with  waterfalls.  Here  boxwoods  draped  the
steep slopes, forming a canopy.”

Still harassed by rain, on 19 June we left Batumi for
Kutaisi. There  we  were  met  by  Dr.  Shamil  Shetekauri,
plant  taxonomist  at  the  Institute  of  Botany  in  Tbilisi,

211

Russia and Its Neighbors

Steep banks of Dologanis Tskali in Adjara revealed perhaps the
greatest diversity of boxwoods seen during the expedition. Photo
by Tomasz Ani´sko.

who helped guide us through the provinces of Samegrelo
and Racha. “Near the village Inchkhuri, we found Buxus
(02621–2) growing along the small river Abasha and on
steep  limestone  slopes  adjacent  to  an  abandoned  lime-
stone quarry and kiln,” wrote Frierson (2003). “We next
traveled  a  short  distance  to  a  site  along  the  river
Tsachkhura, which was an extremely scenic environment,
as the fantastic river gorge was filled with limestone and
Buxus. The loud rushing of water was assisted by days of
heavy  rain.  Disappointingly,  our  trekking  here  was  cut
short due to downpour and the perception that the area
might be unsafe.” The only shelter we could find was a
tiny  roadside  cabin  checkpoint.  “Men  were  stationed
there to prevent illegal logging,” recalls Frierson. “We met
at the cabin several very hospitable Georgians who shared
their potent homemade spirit chacha with us over lunch.
Unfortunately, with no end to the rain in sight, we had to
turn back to Kutaisi.”

On 21 June we headed northeast from Kutaisi to the
Racha  region  in  the  Greater  Caucasus.  Upon  reaching
Nakerala  Pass,  1217  m,  separating  Imereti  from  Racha,
we discovered a population of boxwoods growing at the
highest elevation seen during the trip (02623–4, 02627).
At  the  same  site  potentially  more  cold-hardy  forms  of
Prunus laurocerasus (02625) and Ilex colchica (02626) were
collected.

From  the  Nakerala  Pass,  we  continued  to  Nikorts-
minda  in  Racha.  “Our  most  remarkable  discovery  of
boxwood was near the village of Nikortsminda,” explains
Batdorf. “In the nearby gorge of the Sharaula River, adja-

Lush forests along the turbulent river Tsachkhura sheltered a
plethora of boxwoods. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

cent to an old hydroelectric plant, we found thousands of
boxwood growing in a very wet and shaded environment.
They exhibited a wide variety of unique characteristics.”
As Frierson remembers, “The plants grew along the river
and even on limestone rocks within the river. Some box-
woods in this damp and dark environment had branches
that  were  covered  with  moss.  Remarkably,  some  plants,
varying in height up to about 3 m tall, were distinguished
by having flaking bark, a striking and unique appearance,
which had never been seen by any of us before. We won-
dered  if  this  exfoliation  was  due  to  the  moist  environ-
mental  conditions  or  whether 
it  was  a  natural
characteristic of the plants. Cuttings from these and other
unusual  specimens  were  taken  with  the  hope  that  they
might result in new cultivars of boxwood in future years

212

From the Caspian to the Black Sea

The dark interior of a boxwood forest in the Sataplia Ecological
Reserve near Kutaisi. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

harvest of timber, we satisfied our appetite for boxwoods
with  a  limited  collection  of  cuttings  (02636–7).  The
boxwood  forest  in  Sataplia,  with  its  eerie  atmosphere,
dinosaur  footprints,  and  proximity  to  Kutaisi,  seemed
just  the  place  at  which  the  legendary  Jason  of  the  Arg-
onauts might have found the Golden Fleece, guarded by
a sleepless dragon.

Two days later we drove back to Batumi. The follow-
ing  day  Batdorf  returned  to  the  United  States,  and  the
rest  of  us  boarded  a  hydrofoil  that  took  us  to  Sochi  in
Russia. This allowed us to avoid Abkhazya, the breakaway
region  of  Georgia  in  the  northwestern  part  of  the
country, bordering Russia.

Russia’s boxwood reserves
In Sochi we were met by Professor Mikhail V. Pridnya,
researcher at the Research Institute of Mountain Forestry
and  Forest  Ecology,  based  at  the  Sochi  Dendrarium.
“Our  first  excursion  was  south  of  Sochi  in  the  Greater
Caucasus,  where  we  observed  Buxus  sempervirens
(02642–3)  growing  on  limestone  along  and  above  the
river  Mzymta,  16  km  north  of  Adler  district,”  recalls
Frierson. “Upon returning to Sochi, we toured the spec-
tacular Yew and Boxwood Reserve, a protected environ-
ment of about 300 hectares, located some 3 km from the
coast on the southeastern slope of Ahun’s range. Here we
saw the tallest boxwood specimens, with some over 15 m
in height. The boxwood canopy in the reserve was dense,
and there was little growth of other plants below in the
warm  and  moist  environment.  The  trees  grew  straight

Exfoliating bark of Buxus sempervirens (02629) found in the 
gorge of the Sharaula River near Nikortsminda in Racha. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

(02628–34).”  Batdorf  was  equally  intrigued  by  speci-
mens with exfoliating bark, a previously unknown attrib-
ute for any boxwood: “It is discoveries such as this that
make plant exploration so important.”

On  23  June  we  traveled  to  the  Sataplia  Ecological
Reserve located several kilometers west of Kutaisi. “It had
been  created  about  1935,  and  contained  a  70  hectare
boxwood forest, a stone outcropping with dinosaur foot-
prints  from  120  million  years  ago,  and  caves,”  explains
Frierson. “Formerly, the forest here had been damaged by
limestone  mining,  and  boxwood  timber  had  been  har-
vested  in  the  nineteenth  century  to  be  used  as  wooden
parts in the textile industry. Tons of Caucasian boxwood
had been cut during this time period for use in European,
especially British, industry.” In contrast to the historical

213

Russia and Its Neighbors

Old growth of boxwoods in the Yew and Boxwood Reserve near
Sochi. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

with relatively few branches. It was readily conceived how
simple the harvest of such plants would have been in the
nineteenth  century.  There  had  been  great  harvests  of
boxwood until the time of the Russian revolution, after
which  its  cutting  had  been  severely  limited  by  the  new
government.  Today,  the  harvest  of  boxwood  timber  is
prohibited, but it is likely that there is still some illegal
harvesting  in  the  national  parks.  In  one  forest  that  we
visited,  we  found  a  group  of  boxwood  logs  along  the
road, which we surmised might be evidence of poaching.
We  collected  seeds  from  trees  along  a  steep  cliff  at  a
remarkable  lookout  above  a  gorge  containing  the  river
Khosta (02641–2).”

The  next  day  we  toured  the  Sochi  Dendrarium,  a
110-year-old park and arboretum showcasing plants that
thrive in the warm climate of the Black Sea coast. “We
took  cuttings  from  two  interesting  boxwood  plants
(02644–5),” wrote Frierson (2002), “one of which was a
variegated form that I had never seen before, having occa-
sional,  slightly  irregular  leaf  margins  and  distinct  lime
green leaf variegation of the new shoots.”

The  following  day  was  spent  at  another  reserve,
north of Sochi, where we collected seeds (02646) along
the Dagomys River, 4 km above the village Baranovka. As
Frierson recalls, “Pridnya speculated that there might be
boxwood trees as old as 1000 years but admitted that he
had not seen them and that a dendrochronological study
of purported ancient trees would be of interest. He gave
us  a  map  detailing  the  specific  locations  of  boxwood
forests within the Russian portion of the Greater Cauca-
sus, including those on the northern side of the mountain

The Livadia Palace, site of the 1945 Yalta Conference, features
clipped Buxus balearica (02648) along its main façade. 
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

range, which we did not know existed. Indeed, seeing this
precise map stimulated the thought for the need of future
exploration  in  that  region  along  the  northern  limit  of
boxwood distribution.”

Yalta’s palaces
After an entire day of bus and ferry riding, on 29 June we
arrived  in  Yalta.  Our  botanist  guide  was  Professor
Vladislav V. Korzhenewskiy, head of the flora and vegeta-
tion department of the Nikitsky Botanical Garden. Yalta
has long been a Russian vacation spot, ever since its devel-
opment  following  the  annexation  of  the  Crimea  by
Catherine the Great in the eighteenth century. Because of
the  city’s  balmy  Mediterranean  climate  and  spectacular
scenery,  likened  to  that  of  the  French  Riviera,  Russian
aristocracy  built  their  elaborate  residences  and  estates
there,  many  of  which  survive  today  as  museums  and
public parks. As boxwood was not to be found in the wild
in Crimea, our search was centered on plants growing in
historic parks, botanical gardens, and old cemeteries.

We first toured the Italian Renaissance–style palace at
Livadia,  constructed  as  a  summer  residence  for  Czar
Nicholas II and Queen Alexandra, and the 1945 site of
the  Yalta  Conference  attended  by  Franklin  Roosevelt,
Winston  Churchill,  and  Joseph  Stalin.  The  present
Livadia  Palace  was  built  in  1911,  but  the  surrounding
park was laid down in the 1830s. In the park we saw tall
clipped  hedges  of  Buxus  balearica, with  neatly  trimmed
specimen  plants  along  the  front  of  the  palace  (02648).
Later we headed to the nearby Vorontsov Park surround-
ing Alupka Palace, which dates back to 1846. There we

214

From the Caspian to the Black Sea

Yalta, situated near the southern end of the Crimean Peninsula, enjoys a balmy Mediterranean climate and spectacular scenery.

casian  boxwood,  which  has  the  potential  to  greatly
augment  the  expanding  list  of  cultivars  that  adorn  the
gardens.”  Batdorf  adds:  “To  specialize  in  boxwood  as  I
have done for nearly three decades, leads one to believe to
have seen it all. Thus, imagine the excitement and thrill
when  one  discovers  an  important,  previously  unknown
plant. This is the reward that keeps us searching for the
plant material that just might be the next popular culti-
vated boxwood.”

observed  large  specimens  of  B.  balearica and  collected
seeds  and  cuttings  of  B.  sempervirens  (02647,  02649).
“The  most  notable  boxwood  plantings  in  Crimea  were
those  seen  in  the  Nikitsky  Botanical  Garden,”  stresses
Frierson. “We made there many collections of seeds and
cuttings of Buxus sempervirens that included several varie-
gated and pendulous forms (02650–60).”

Upon completion of our work in Crimea, we drove
to Odessa, and there we concluded our journey from the
Caspian  Sea  to  the  Black  Sea.  On  5  July,  after  a  long
month of plant hunting, we said farewells to Mosulishvili
and departed for the United States.

A  total  of  seventy  collections  made  on  this  trip,
including  sixty-two  boxwoods,  were  successfully  intro-
duced into the United States and later distributed among
the  participating  parties.  As  Frierson  concludes,  “This
expedition assembled a comprehensive collection of Cau-

215

EUROPE

FROM THE MEDITERRANEAN 
TO THE NORTH SEA

In  1956,  while  contemplating  strategic  goals  for  Long-
wood’s  plant  exploration,  Dr.  Russell  J.  Seibert,  Long-
wood’s director, recognized that the collections of plants
maintained in European gardens were unmatched by any
others. He saw a need for “an exploratory survey of plant
materials  in  southern  European  nurseries  and  botanical
gardens, to look for and send back plants of potential use
to  American  ornamental  horticulture  which  are  not  in
this  country  and  which  are  not  normally  available
through other channels” (Seibert 1956b).

Soon after, Seibert and Dr. Walter H. Hodge, head of
education and research at Longwood, as well as various
colleagues  from  the  USDA,  began  planning  a  trip  that
would  concentrate  on  the  southern  areas  of  Europe,  in
particular  southern  France,  Italy,  Portugal,  and  Spain,
with a short detour through Great Britain. They expected
“that much of the material brought in may be of interest
to  Longwood”  (Hodge  1956d).  Yet  the  whole  basis  of
backing the exploration was “to help out ornamental hor-
ticulture in the United States in general.”

Dr. Frederick G. Meyer, at that time dendrologist at
the  Missouri  Botanical  Garden  in  Saint  Louis,  later  a
botanist for the USDA, was asked to lead this expedition
in the spring of 1957. In Meyer’s view the time was right
for  such  an  undertaking:  “In  the  United  States,  we  are
now  in  the  midst  of  a  great  Renaissance  of  interest  in

At 10.6 million km2, Europe (right) is the second smallest conti-
nent after Australia. More than half of Europe’s territory consists of
lowlands, beginning with the most extensive Great Russian Plain
westward to the North European Lowland. The central uplands
and plateaus form distinctive landscapes of regions such as
Bohemia, Massif Central, or Iberian Meseta. The northwest high-
lands dominate much of Iceland, Ireland, Britain, and Scandinavia.
High mountains are found in the south of Europe; the Alps include
Mont Blanc, Europe’s highest peak, rising to 4807 m. The western
part of the continent, from Norway to northern Spain, is exposed
to Atlantic air masses and subject to maritime climate, with mild
winters, cool summers, and abundant precipitation (more than
1000 mm) year-round. In contrast, eastern Europe is influenced by
continental climate, with cold winters, hot summers, and only
moderate rainfall (600 mm or less). Central Europe has transitional
climate resulting from the interaction of maritime and continental
air masses. The Mediterranean climate of southern Europe is char-
acterized by mild, wet winters and hot, dry summers. Vegetation
zones transition from tundra in the extreme north of Russia and
Scandinavia, through the boreal forest of predominantly conifers
and mixed forest of evergreen and deciduous trees, to Mediter-
ranean vegetation in the south, steppe in the southeast, and semi-
desert around the northern shores of the Caspian Sea.

ornamentals,  in  fact,  the  greatest  in  the  history  of  our
country” (1959e).

Expecting  to  find  an  immense  wealth  of  plants
growing in various European collections, Meyer was con-
cerned about establishing a priority basis for the selection
of  plants  and  cuttings  to  keep  reintroductions  to  a

216

Europe

Ginkgo biloba, with strongly divaricate branches that give
it a skeletal appearance, originated here and is named ‘St.
Cloud’. The next day Meyer headed to Grand Trianon à
Chateau  Neuf,  an  extensive  arboretum  adjacent  to  the
Palace of Versailles, which contained “a notable collection
of  trees  maintained  in  the  great  tradition  of  French
arboriculture”  (Meyer  1959e).  Later  that  day  he  visited
the  Arboretum  Vilmorin-Andrieux  at  Verrières-le-
Buisson near Paris, established by Philippe-André de Vil-
morin in 1815, an important repository of woody plants
introduced into France.

On 11 and 12 March, the Meyers stayed in Orléans,
south of Paris, in the valley of the Loire River, counted
among the largest nursery production areas of northern
France.  One  of  the  places  he  visited  was  the  Chenault
nursery, founded by Léon Chenault in 1895 and perpet-
uated by his son Raymond. “A short stop at Orléans and
a  visit  with  Monsieur  Raymond  Chenault  was  produc-
tive,”  wrote  Meyer  (1957c).  “He  is  a  well-known  and
ardent plantsman, and is one of the most knowledgeable
plantsmen  for  cultivated  plants  in  France. The  original
specimen of Berberis ×chenaultii is now very large in his
garden.”  Meyer  acquired  from  Chenault  a  number  of
shrubs of outstanding merit, including a dwarf form of
the Austrian pine, Pinus nigra (591632).

Narcissi of northern Spain
From Orléans the Meyers continued southwest to Biar-
ritz, which brought them near France’s southern border
with  Spain.  Driving  through  the  northwestern  part  of
Spain,  Meyer  observed  that  “the  native  flora  is  full  of
interesting  plants  with  horticultural  merit.  At  San
Sebastián,  Narcissus  bulbocodium var.  citrinus [581608]
was common on the grassy, steep, north slopes above the
sea. This form of the species has lemon yellow flowers and
occurs only in this part of Spain” (1957c).

After spending a night near Santander, the couple left
the coast and took the road along Río Esla. “The mountain
scenery became quite wild further on as we approached the
mountain  range  of  the  Picos  de  Europa  which  is  the
highest mountain range in the north of Spain,” recorded
Meyer  (1957c).  “An  interesting  rock  plant,  Globularia
willkommii brought  our  little  French  Renault  car  to  a
sudden  halt.  It  was  making  large  patches  of  blue  on  the
rock cliffs above the river. Near the summit of the Picos de
Europa  the  road  rises  to  1670  m  and  the  snow-capped
peaks rise still higher. The crowning triumph at this point

Meyer, dendrologist at the Missouri Botanical Garden in Saint
Louis, was selected to conduct the 1957 plant-collecting expedi-
tion to Europe. Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

minimum. To ease Meyer’s apprehension, Hodge offered
these comments: “It is always better to bring in a thing
that is questionable and then throw it out after it has been
brought  in  rather  than  assume  that  we  have  it  in  this
country and then later find that it is not true in the sense
that it is not available. In other words, lots of things have
to  be  re-introduced  several  times  before  they  take  on”
(Hodge 1957a). Meyer agreed: “If a plant is not generally
known or occurs in one botanical garden or some other
out-of-the-way corner, the plant might as well be back in
its  native  habitat  or  in  Madrid,  Lisbon,  or  some  other
place. Even though here, it is not doing what an intro-
duced plant might be expected to do” (Meyer 1957a).

An American in Paris
Accompanied by his wife, Jean, Meyer traveled to Europe
on  a  steamer  bound  for  the  French  port  of  Le  Havre.
Upon  their  arrival  in  France  on  4  March,  the  couple
headed to Paris and rented a car, a little Renault, which,
as Meyer pointed out, was “going to work out splendidly
for  getting  around!”  (1957b).  Having  Jean  at  his  side
during  the  entire  trip  allowed  Meyer  to  devote  all  his
attention to plants: “She is always full of encouragement
and is a true Spartan in all matters that count. She is an
excellent wrapper-upper and has taken over the packing
of  all  the  material  I  send.  .  .  .  I  could  hardly  operate
without Jean” (1957c).

Meyer’s first stop in Paris on 6 March was the Jardin
Kahn, located on the banks of the Seine at Saint Cloud.
The  garden  was  founded  by  Albert  Kahn,  a  prosperous
Paris banker of the late 1890s. A most unusual form of

218

From the Mediterranean to the North Sea

A 6 m tall camellia hedge surrounds a formal garden of clipped boxwood and tulip beds in Porto’s Jardim Botânico. 
Photo by Frederick G. Meyer.

was Narcissus asturiensis [581630] which dotted the moist
slopes near the melting snow by the thousands. This beau-
tiful  miniature  daffodil  looks  exactly  like  the  larger
trumpet daffodil everyone knows, except that N. asturien-
sis is only 3–4 inches [7.5–10 cm] tall. . . . Along the river
in the adjoining meadows at Riaño, Narcissus bulbocodium
var. monophyllus actually caused the meadows to be com-
pletely  yellow.  This  Hoop-Petticoat  daffodil  was  at  its
height. We were awed to see it growing in an absolutely
soppy wet meadow. Also at Riaño, the giant form of the
trumpet daffodil Narcissus pseudonarcissus var. nobilis also
occurred in some abundance.”

From  Riaño,  the  road  led  the  Meyers  out  of  the
mountains and onto the flat plains of New Castile toward
León. “Beyond León, the country is less flat and becomes
mountainous  again  westward  towards  the  Portuguese
frontier,”  wrote  Meyer  (1957c).  “In  the  Province  of

Orense,  Spain,  we  saw  Narcissus  triandrus for  the  first
time in great profusion on the decomposed granitic rocks
which is the common native rock throughout the north
of Portugal and this part of Spain. . . . Wherever this sort
of rock occurs, it is safe to judge that daffodils are in the
vicinity and only a tour reconnaissance is needed to find
them. Such was our luck wherever we went. This is the
wettest portion of Spain, and certainly the vegetation was
the most verdant we have seen anywhere in that country.”

Renaissance camellias
The  Meyers  entered  Portugal  from  Spain  after  crossing
the  river  Minho  between Tuy  and  Valença.  After  a  few
hours  they  reached  Porto  on  the  Atlantic  coast  at  the
mouth of the river Douro. “In spring,” Meyer reported
(1959e), “few areas of western Europe can compare with
northern Portugal. The mild, relatively moist belt around

219

Europe

Jardim Botânico Coimbra is the oldest botanical garden in 
Portugal. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Formal plantings in the Jardim Botânico of the University of
Lisbon. Photo by Frederick G. Meyer.

Campo  Bello,  present  owner  of  the  villa,  indicate  that
three living plants of C. japonica from Japan were planted
in the garden about the middle of the sixteenth century,”
wrote Meyer (1959e). “This is not impossible, since early
Portuguese traders in the Orient first made contact with
Japan in 1542. . . . The oldest trees in question are now
about 18 to 24 inches [45–60 cm] in diameter at the base
and nearly 30 feet [9 m] tall at a reputed four hundred
years of age. The flowers are single rose-pink.”

On  21  March,  Meyer  toured  Porto’s  Jardim
Botânico, established in the 1930s on a 12-hectare site of
an old private estate. From Jardim Botânico’s collections,
Meyer procured many plants, including Camellia japon-
ica ‘Mathotiana’ (65132), the most outstanding cultivar
grown  there  as  a  hedge;  Narcissus  rupicola (581634),  a
dwarf  native  Portuguese  species;  and  Romulea  bul-
bocodium (591633), a native species of southern Portugal,
with grasslike leaves and blue flowers.

The next stop on Meyer’s route, Coimbra, is home to
the oldest and largest botanical garden in Portugal. “It is
really  full  of  most  interesting  plants,”  wrote  Meyer
(1957c) to Seibert, “and its site is, I would say, unique for
a  botanical  garden.  It  is  terraced  in  the  Italian  fashion
because it lies on a side hill overlooking the Rio Mondego
which flows past the town.” In Coimbra, Meyer teamed
up with Professor Francisco J. Fernandes Casas, director
of the botanical garden and the leading authority on Nar-
cissus—“most  charming  and  most  helpful”—to  do
botanizing and plant collecting around the city.

In early April the Meyers arrived in Lisbon. “Climat-
ically, Lisbon and the area to the west around Sintra are

Cyathea and Dicksonia tree ferns in Parque de Montserrate flourish
in the mild climate of Sintra. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Oporto [Porto] receives a rainfall of approximately 35 to
40 inches [900–1000 mm] per year. As a result, northern
coastal Portugal remains perpetually green. In March and
April native species of heather and numerous species of
Leguminosae  carpet  the  northern  Portuguese  hills  in  a
kaleidoscopic riot of color.”

Porto is the major center of the nursery industry in
Portugal. The city, recognized as the home of the oldest
camellias cultivated in Europe, made a lasting impression
on  Meyer:  “A  glorious,  unforgettable  two  weeks  where
every single dewy morning we walked through thousands
of fallen camellia blossoms and kicked them up with our
feet as we kick up dried leaves in October in the Missouri
woods” (1957c).

The oldest specimens of camellia grow at Villa Nova
de  Gaya.  “The  old  family  archives  of  the  Conde  de

220

From the Mediterranean to the North Sea

unlike other areas of south-
ern  Europe.  Extremes  of
temperature and aridity are
less severe than in compa-
rable areas of the Mediter-
ranean. In summer, cloudy
and  foggy  days  are  not
uncommon in Lisbon, and
extreme heat is rare. Frost
occurs infrequently. Palms
flourish  and  subtropical
plants 
commonly
and
grown 
gardens 
this  area”
(Meyer 1959e).

are 
in  parks 
in 

Lisbon  has  many
botanical  and  horticul-
tural  institutions.  During
his  visit,  Meyer  toured
several of them, including
the Jardim Botânico of the
University  of  Lisbon,
which dates back to 1839. Among the many plants col-
lected  at  this  garden  was  the  Brazilian  soap-bark  tree,
Quillaja brasiliensis (581704).

Meyer inspects a dragon’s blood tree, Dracaena draco, nearly 12 m wide, planted during the 
seventeenth century in the royal Ajuda Park, Lisbon. Photo by Frederick G. Meyer.

Meyer also visited the Estufa Fria in Lisbon’s Edward
VII Park, among the more unusual horticultural attrac-
tions of southern Europe. “This lath house ‘conservatory’
is  without  artificial  heat  and  covers  nearly  2  acres  [0.8
hectare].  Many  tender  tropical  plants  that  otherwise
would  not  thrive  without  protection  are  grown  in  the
Estufa Fria. A rock embankment on one side provides a
natural habitat for growing subtropical vines, ferns, bego-
nias, saintpaulias, aroids, and other species that prefer the
environment  of  a  humid  tropical  forest.  Clambering
lianas  are  planted  on  concrete  pillars  made  to  simulate
tree trunks that support the superstructure of the Estufa
Fria” (Meyer 1959e).

Holy Week in Madrid
After three weeks in Portugal, the Meyers headed back to
Spain: “From Lisbon we took the ferry boat and crossed
the River Tagus and drove beyond towards Spain to the
southeast. Southern Portugal is the cork growing center.
There are miles and acres of cork trees. The brick red of
the  freshly  peeled  ones  give  the  orchards  a  weird,  but
beautiful aspect. . . . Olives also grow here in great profu-

Lisbon’s Estufa Fria displays plants in a colossal lath house 
covering 0.8 hectare. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

sion.  Portuguese  olives  are  consumed  almost  entirely
within  Portugal.  The  Portuguese  literally  bathe  them-
selves in the olive oil. The roadsides in southern Portugal
are  lined  with  the  ice-plant,  Mesembryanthemum, that
South  African  plant  so  widely  distributed  now  in  all
regions  with  a  Mediterranean  climate.  Also,  the  large,
white-flowered  Cistus  ladanifer was  beginning  to  make
quite a splash on the hills. Towards the Spanish frontier,
the country becomes considerably more rugged in aspect

221

Europe

Côte d’Azur
Before  reaching  the  French  Riviera  or  Côte  d’Azur,  the
Meyers  stopped  in  Montpellier  to  visit  the  Jardin  des
Plantes, established by Henry V in 1594. “The Mediter-
ranean climate of Montpellier is considerably more severe
in  winter  than  the  area  farther  east  along  the  French
Riviera,”  reported  Meyer  (1959e).  “The  tenor  of  the
climate is indicated by the plantings which consist largely
of  temperate  species  tolerant  of  some  yearly  frost.  Of
palms, for example, only Chamaerops humilis and Trachy-
carpus  fortunei thrive  at  Montpellier.”  Among  the  more
unusual  species  Meyer  spotted  growing  at  Montpellier
was  Mahonia  moranensis (591324),  a  rare  holly-grape
native  to  Mexico,  reaching  2.5  m  in  height  and  laden
with clusters of blue berries in July.

The next day the Meyers arrived at Menton, the east-
ernmost coastal town of the French Riviera at the Italian
frontier.  As  a  geographical  province,  the  French  Riviera
extends  along  the  Mediterranean  coast  from  Hyères  in
the west to Menton in the east. “The mildest area of all,
‘La  Petit  Afrique,’  begins  just  east  of  Nice  and  extends
eastward to Menton and beyond to the Italian Riviera for
a few miles,” noted Meyer (1959e). “The Maritime Alps
rise for several thousand feet almost directly from the sea
and thus effectively shelter the coastal region against the
cold northerly winds. . . . In the mild arid climate cacti
are  widely  grown  and  have  naturalized  throughout  the
area in a latitude comparable to that of southern New-
foundland.”

Among the first gardens visited by Meyer (1959e) in
Menton were Villa Casa Rossa, “a modern French garden
in Provençal taste,” and Serra de la Madone Val, one of
the finest collections of subtropical plants on the Riviera,
assembled over a period of forty years by Major Lawrence
Johnston, who traveled around the world in his quest for
unusual  plants.  From  the  latter  garden  Meyer  procured
an array of choice plants, including Mahonia lomariifolia
(58450),  “a  striking  arborescent  species”  introduced  by
Johnston  from  Upper  Myanmar;  Sarcococca  ruscifolia
(58488), “perhaps the showiest species of the genus with
clusters  of  dark  red  fleshy  fruit”;  and  Nerium  oleander
‘Aurantiacum’ (5892), “the most attractive” oleander with
orange-yellow flowers.

On Cap Ferrat, east of Nice, Meyer paid a visit to Les
Cedres,  the  garden  of  Julian  Marnier-Lapostolle.  “Mr.
Marnier  is,  of  course,  present  head  of  the  firm  which
makes  ‘Grand  Marnier’  [a  prestigious  French  liqueur],”

Kalanchoe rosei var. seyringii (572879), displayed in Longwood’s
indoor Silver Garden, was among more than fifty Kalanchoe
obtained by Meyer at Les Cedres. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

and here lies one of the areas important for the cultiva-
tion  of  the  Spanish  chestnut. The  wild  peony,  Paeonia
officinalis, was beginning to flower in the chestnut groves”
(Meyer 1957c).

Several days later the couple reached Madrid. “Good
Friday imposed an enforced holiday for us at the end of
Holy  Week  in  this  sunny,  dry  land  of  festivals,”  wrote
Meyer (1957c). “We were without money, package mate-
rial,  or  gasoline;  and  all  banks,  embassies,  American
Express,  gas  stations,  even  the  museums  were  closed  in
commemoration.  .  .  .  Easter-time  in  Spain  is  the  most
colorful  time  of  the  year  and  everyone  makes  quite  the
most  of  it.  Spanish  ladies  with  flowing  mantillas  were
quite the fashion in Madrid. We had to leave Spain before
the fetes and festivals that followed Holy Week in order
to get to the French Riviera before the season became any
further advanced.”

222

From the Mediterranean to the North Sea

though,  has 

explained  Meyer  (1957e)
in a letter to Hodge. “The
man, 
a
passion for plants, and has
brought together certainly
the  largest  collection  of
ornamental  plants  on  the
Mediterranean.  Although
he  specializes  in  succu-
lents,  his  collections  of
woody  plants  and  also
herbaceous  material 
is
really  quite  fabulous.  He
has  tried  to  bring  the
tropics to his garden, and
he  has  created  the  most
realistic jungle I have seen
down  this  way.  .  .  .  The
nice thing about Marnier’s
garden is that he has given
me  complete  freedom  to
have  anything  he  has,  so
long as there is a piece large enough for us to have.”

Gardens at Villa Taranto near Pallanza benefit from the dramatic backdrop of the snow-capped peaks
of the Alps. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Les  Cedres  offered  Meyer  a  unique  opportunity  to
acquire  an  extensive  collection  of  plants  not  seen  else-
where,  especially  succulents.  “The  collections  comprise
about  ten  thousand  kinds  of  plants—wild  species  and
horticultural  forms  combined.  .  .  .  The  collection  of
Kalanchoe is  one  of  the  most  comprehensive  at  Les
Cedres.  This  genus  offers  promise  for  hybridization
because  of  the  wide  diversity  in  shape  and  color  of  the
flowers. Some species are not showy even though others
are  very  much  so.  K.  pumila (572873)  with  orchid-
colored  flowers,  and  K.  manginii (572860)  with  scarlet
tubular  flowers  are  two  species  of  unusual  merit  in  the
collection” (Meyer 1959e). Along with these two plants,
Meyer  sent  Longwood  Gardens  more  than  fifty  other
species and forms of Kalanchoe as well as several hundred
other succulents obtained at Les Cedres.

World’s oldest botanical gardens
At  the  end  of  April,  the  Meyers  left  the  French  Riviera
and traveled to Italy. “The gardens of Italy bring to mind
formal  gardens  of  clipped  hedges,  topiaries,  fountains,
and  statuary,”  recorded  Meyer  (1959e).  “Foliage  plants
rather than flowers overshadow the basic requirements of
plantings in the traditional Italian gardens. . . . Modern

Meyer was impressed with the extensive collections of unusual
plants at Palermo’s Orto Botanico, describing it as “a veritable
gold-mine.” Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Italian gardens are strongly influenced by the style of the
classical period but they are becoming modernized to the
extent of using colored foliage plants, such as Teucrium,
Santolina, Echeveria, Coleus, and Alternanthera to supple-
ment the traditional woody species.”

Meyer’s first stop in Italy was La Mortola, near Ven-
timiglia  on  the  Italian  Riviera.  Founded  in  1867,  La
Mortola  occupies  a  picturesque  site  overlooking  the

223

Europe

but more as a horticultural
collection with the best to
be  obtained  in  flowers,
shrubs,  and  trees”  (Meyer
1959e).

From  the  Riviera,  the
Meyers  headed  north  to
Lake  Maggiore,  where
they  spent  several  days
near  Pallanza.  On  4  May,
Meyer  paid  a  visit  to  the
gardens  of  Villa  Taranto.
“The  site  of  the  garden
relies upon fine scenery as
an  outstanding  natural
asset  along  the  shores  of
Lake Maggiore at Pallanza
within  sight  of  the  snow-
capped  peaks  of 
the
Simplon  Pass  of  Switzer-
land.  Climatically, 
the
garden is favored by a high
rainfall of about 90 inches
[2300 mm] a year. Relatively little frost occurs, but some
freezing  is  to  be  expected  each  winter.  Camellias,  tree
ferns,  palms,  rhododendrons,  magnolias,  hollies,  and
conifers are abundantly represented” (Meyer 1959e).

The world’s second oldest botanical garden, located in Padua. Inside the glass house is Chamaerops
humilis, which was planted in 1585 and two centuries later was studied by Wolfgang von Goethe
while preparing Die Metamorphose der Pflanzen. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

In Pallanza the couple reversed their course and trav-
eled  south  to  Sicily.  Tempered  by  the  Mediterranean,
Sicily enjoys one of the most southerly geographical posi-
tions  of  Europe,  with  a  mild,  arid,  nearly  frost-free
climate along coastal areas. Palermo’s Orto Botanico sur-
prised  Meyer  with  a  rich  assortment  of  unusual  plants:
“That  was  a  veritable  gold-mine.  I  believe  I  collected
more things at that one spot than I have anyplace on the
trip  thus  far—over  eighty  collections.  The  climate  of
Sicily permits growing quite a lot of tropical plants that
one does not see elsewhere out of doors in Europe. . . . I
still can not imagine why such a good collection of plants
should  exist  at  Palermo  midst  such  a  poverty  stricken
population,  but  it  does  nevertheless”  (Meyer  1957d).
Among the eighty collections procured from Orto Botan-
ico was Brexia madagascariensis (5851), a small evergreen
tree from Madagascar.

On 20 May the Meyers were back on Italy’s mainland
and two days later the couple reached Rome. There they
toured two sites of horticultural interest: Orto Botanico of

An eighteenth-century orangery in Florence’s Orto Botanico.
Photo by Frederick G. Meyer.

Mediterranean on La Punta della Mortola, named for the
many  native  myrtles,  Myrtus  communis, growing  there.
“Horticulturists know La Mortola not only for the large
and  varied  plant  collections  but  also  as  an  architectural
gem of the gardener’s art. Few private gardens in Europe
have  attained  the  breadth  and  scope  of  La  Mortola.
Architecturally,  the  garden  is  designed  in  Anglo-Italian
taste partly as a botanical garden in the traditional sense

224

From the Mediterranean to the North Sea

A broad avenue in Florence’s Orto Botanico is lined with evergreen azaleas. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

the University of Rome and Roseto di Roma. “The botan-
ical  garden  of  the  University  of  Rome  was  formed  on  a
portion of the eighteenth century garden adjacent to the
Villa  Corsini,”  noted  Meyer  (1959e).  “Located  on  the
slopes  of  one  of  Rome’s  famous  seven  hills,  the  garden
enjoys a choice site in one of the most historical parts of
the Eternal City.” The Roseto di Roma, designated as one
of Europe’s official rose test gardens, was built after World
War II on a site facing the Palatine Hill and the Temple of
Constantine.  Designed  in  the  form  of  an  amphitheater,
“the  collection  of  roses,  apart  from  the  comprehensive
array of modern hybrid teas and climbers, includes a good
assortment  of  shrub  roses  and  early  hybrids  to  illustrate
the evolution of the garden rose over the past 150 years.”
Continuing  their  drive  northward,  the  Meyers
arrived  in  Florence  on  26  May.  They  spent  the  next

couple of days studying the collections of this city’s Orto
Botanico, the world’s third oldest garden, dating back to
1545. This allowed Meyer to select forty plants for intro-
duction  to  the  United  States.  “The  garden  of  about  5
acres [2 hectares] occupies the original site near the heart
of the city,” noted Meyer (1959e). “Designed originally
as a ‘garden of simples’ (a garden for growing medicinal
plants), an arboretum now covers about four-fifths of the
total  area.  Several  broad  tree-lined  avenues  bisect  the
garden at right angles. A pool in the center is the focal
point for the outlying features of the garden. A large cork
oak,  Quercus  suber, over  100  feet  [30  m]  tall,  and  a
twisted olive tree, Olea europaea, 40 feet [12 m] tall, date
from plantings in the sixteenth century.”

Driving  west  following  the  river  Arno,  the  Meyers
reached Pisa on 1 June. “Luca Ghini, father of botanical

225

Europe

gardens and one of the first great Renaissance teachers of
plant science, is said to have brought plants from the hills
near  Pisa  to  grow  ‘for  the  utility  of  students,’”  noted
Meyer (1959e).  “Thus the first of the world’s botanical
gardens was born at Pisa in 1543.” Some fifty years later
the garden was transferred to its present location, where
it  occupies  about  3  hectares.  Among  Meyer’s  introduc-
tions  from  Pisa  were  Eryngium  pandanifolium (58434),
“perhaps the largest species in the genus,” and many vari-
ants  of  Narcissus  tazetta, including  ‘Aureus’  (581643),
‘Italicus’ (581648), and ‘Papyraceus’ (581646).

After visiting the world’s oldest botanical garden, the
Meyers traveled to Padua to see the second oldest garden,
younger  than  the  garden  in  Pisa  by  only  two  years.  “A
well preserved sixteenth century stone wall, 15 feet [4.5
m]  high,  completely  encircles  the  original  garden  of
about 4 acres [1.6 hectares],” recorded Meyer (1959e). “A
balustrade atop the wall is studded with marble busts of
former  directors  and  garden  curators.  Inflorescences  of
Yucca sculptured in wrought iron atop the garden gates
complete the ornamentation of the ancient garden wall.”
Many plants now widespread in cultivation in Europe—
such as lilacs, sunflowers, or potatoes—first were grown
in Padua. The oldest plant in the collection was a chaste-
tree, Vitex agnus-castus, planted in 1550. Among the old
plantings in the garden, of special interest to Meyer was a
group of Mediterranean fan palms, Chamaerops humilis,
planted  in  1585  and  studied  by  Johann  Wolfgang  von
Goethe on his visit to Padua in 1787 in preparation for
his classical treatise on plant morphogenesis, Die Meta-
morphose der Pflanzen.

Hanging gardens of Monaco
By 10 June the Meyers were back on the Italian Riviera
and  driving  west  along  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean.
They  arrived  in  Monaco.  “If  ever  there  was  a  modern
hanging  garden,  it  exists  in  Monaco  at  the  Jardin  Exo-
tique,”  recorded  Meyer  (1957f).  “The  garden  lies  on  a
cliff  100  m  above  the  sea  overlooking  the  palace  of
Monaco and the Mediterranean. The garden is traversed
by switch-back pathways, rustic and very artistically done
bridges, valleys of kleinias, archways of pachycereus, with
grotesque euphorbias, crassulas and other cacti on a scale
unapproachable by any succulent garden I know.”

Monaco’s  Jardin  Exotique  was  founded  on  approxi-
mately 1 hectare on the edge of a jagged precipice in 1913.
“The inventory of species cultivated of succulent genera is

indeed  extensive,”  commented  Meyer  (1959e),  “but  the
grouping of the species in the spectacular location mani-
festly is of greater interest to most visitors. Construction
problems and maintenance of the collection bring forth a
host of problems unique to this garden. All soil for growing
the plants, for example, must be carried by hand.”

Jardin Exotique—which, according to Meyer, “must
be  seen  to  be  appreciated  fully”—was  a  source  of  more
than three hundred introductions, mostly succulents, sent
to  Longwood.  The  explorer  must  have  been  greatly
inspired and enthused by these “hanging gardens,” as he
humbly admitted in a letter, “I have never seen succulents
so beautifully displayed as they are at the Jardin Exotique”
(1957e).

The  Meyers  complemented  their  stay  in  Monaco
with  visits  to  two  gardens,  beginning  with  the  Casino
Gardens  at  Monte  Carlo.  In  the  Casino  Gardens,  the
largest public garden in Monaco, dating from the latter
part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  “palms,  cacti,  water
gardens, flowering trees, and large well-kept flower beds
in the sunken garden form the principal features” (Meyer
1959e). Among the plants Meyer acquired there was Ore-
opanax capitatus (591598), a small evergreen tree of “out-
standing  merit”  with  handsome  lustrous  foliage.  The
couple also got a firsthand look at Princess Grace’s palace
garden.  “We  were  obliged  to  have  a  special  invitation
from the Prince himself, which seemed to make the visit
all  the  more  special,”  wrote  Meyer  (1957f)  to  Hodge.
“The garden is small with orange trees, palms, a few nice
statues  and  a  brazier  for  the  prince  and  princess  to  do
their own steaks on in the garden. I have never seen roses
being grown in such curious fashion—grass between all
the bushes in a rather shaded spot.”

Iberian summer
After  leaving  Monaco,  the  Meyers  stayed  in  the  French
Riviera  for  another  three  weeks  to  revisit  some  of  the
gardens they had seen in April. Continuing west along the
Mediterranean coast, they returned to Spain in late July
and headed for Madrid. “The botanical garden in Madrid
long has stood among the well-known botanical institu-
tions of Europe,” recorded Meyer (1959e). “Founded in
1781, this garden developed rapidly at the end of the eigh-
teenth  century  and  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  as  new
plants  were  brought  to  Spain  from  the  colonies  in  the
New  World.  The  Dahlia,
for  example,  first  entered
Europe in 1789 via the botanical garden in Madrid.”

226

From the Mediterranean to the North Sea

Meyer found that despite its luminous past, Madrid’s
botanical  garden  has  a  relatively  small  collection  of
plants: “At an altitude of 2000 feet [600 m], the climate
of Madrid is not the most propitious for growing plants.
Extremes of temperature are commonplace. Strong winds
that  sweep  across  the  arid  plains  of  New  Castile  bring
biting  cold  in  winter  and  torrid  blasts  in  midsummer”
(1959e). He did, however, spot a few greenhouse plants
worthy  of  introduction.  Among  them  were  Achimenes
lanata (581322),  with  “small  light  blue  flowers  and
white-woolly leaves”; Piper ornatum (58497), a climbing
pepper  with  “lustrous  green  leaves  mottled  pink  with
pink  veins”;  and  Vellozia  elegans (58124),  with  “white
flowers that turn green with age.”

It was early August when the Meyers reached south-
ern Spain. “I am enjoying very much the short stay here
at Granada,” wrote Meyer (1957g) to Hodge. “There are
some interesting plants, especially rock garden subjects in
the Sierra Nevada Mountains which rise to 10,000 feet
[3050  m]  above  the  city.”  From  Granada  the  Meyers
drove west toward Portugal, making stops in Málaga and
Seville.  Spending  a  little  over  a  week  in  Portugal,  they
retraced  their  route  from  Lisbon  through  Coimbra  to
Porto, visiting many of the sites seen in spring: “I am now
speeding  my  little  Renault  towards  England  as  fast  as  I
can. The re-do through Spain and Portugal has, I think,
been most worthwhile, as it has made it possible to see
plants during the height of summer under quite different
conditions from the early spring months. I do think this
is a wise procedure in collecting, especially for seeing the
wide  range  of  plant  materials  which  exist  here  on  the
Mediterranean” (Meyer 1957h).

By late August the Meyers arrived back in Paris, thus
closing  the  main  loop  of  their  European  exploration.
“This  tour  of  the  Mediterranean  has  been  a  big  order,”
wrote Meyer (1957g) to Hodge. “I believe that I shall have
sampled the best collections of plants in the areas visited,
but I lament the fact, somewhat having to cut short seed
collecting  which  could  be  profitably  pursued  from  this
time on. . . . However, I am anxious to get on to England
and sample the hollies at Edinburgh, the Java rhododen-
drons at Kew, as well as other plants and places.”

Britain’s vast archives
After  stopping  briefly  in  London,  the  Meyers  headed
north to Edinburgh, on the shore of the Firth of Forth,
on the Scottish coast of the North Sea, to “sample” col-

lections of the Royal Botanic Garden there. Founded in
1670, the Edinburgh garden is the second oldest in Great
Britain. “The garden is widely known for the collections
of  Chinese  plants,”  noted  Meyer  (1959e).  “Beginning
about 1900, introductions from south central and south-
western China continued to pour into the botanic garden
for  the  next  quarter  century.  .  .  .  As  a  source  of  new
germplasm, the Chinese collections at Edinburgh are of
inestimable value to ornamental horticulture.”

The  three  weeks  spent  at  Edinburgh  were  “most
productive,”  as  Meyer  wrote  in  a  letter  to  Hodge
(1957i). “I wish I could say I had time to finish looking
and  collecting  all  they  have  of  interest. Time  just  will
not  permit  it.”  Despite  time  constraints,  Meyer
managed to collect and send back to the United States
three  hundred  new  introductions.  One  of  the  more
notable plants acquired was Agapetes serpens (591599), a
tender  ericaceous  shrub  from  the  Himalaya,  with
lanternlike red and green flowers.

A day-trip to nearby Glasgow allowed Meyer to visit
that  city’s  botanic  garden,  which  dates  from  1817.  He
returned with a number of interesting plants, including
Cochliostema  jacobianum (58415),  with  bright  blue
flowers on long peduncles, native to Ecuador; Marcgravia
umbellata (591595),  a  climber  from  tropical  America,
with  flowers  pollinated  by  hummingbirds;  and  Phylla-
gathis rotundifolia (591328), from Sumatra, with leaves a
unique iridescent blue.

Upon their return to England the Meyers spent the
last days of September in Norfolk and Cambridge. “The
subtropical  and  tropical  collections  at Talbot  Manor  in
Norfolk probably cannot be duplicated elsewhere among
the private exhibitions of these plants in Great Britain,”
noted  Meyer  (1959e).  “With  insatiable  energy,  Mr.  L.
Maurice  Mason,  owner  of  the  garden,  has  traveled  in
recent  years  to  Borneo,  Malaya,  New  Guinea,  South
Africa,  Tanganyika,  Madagascar,  British  Guiana,  and
Costa Rica in search of new ornamental plants for his col-
lections.”  Among  some  225  plants  procured  from
Mason’s  collection  were  Episcia  lilacina (58432)  from
Costa Rica, Hoya imperialis (58440) from New Guinea,
and  Impatiens  repens (58444)  from  Sri  Lanka.  Meyer’s
next  destination  was  Cambridge  University  Botanic
Garden, one of the leading centers of botanical and hor-
ticultural  research  in  Great  Britain.  “To  the  Cambridge
Botanic  Garden  goes  the  credit  for  having  produced,
nearly sixty years ago, some of the first Gerbera hybrids

227

Europe

Massive tree ferns, Dicksonia antarctica, grow in the Kibble Palace
of the Glasgow Botanic Gardens. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

known  to  horticulture,”  wrote  Meyer.  “Original  plants
still exist in the Cambridge collections.”

Meyer spent early October studying plant collections
of  the  renowned  Royal  Botanic  Gardens,  Kew,  in  the
suburbs  of  London.  “It  stands  today  among  the  most
comprehensive  botanical  institutions  in  existence,”  he
commented  (1959e).  “The  plant  collections  are  truly
remarkable in scope. Basically, Kew Gardens is a research
institution  and  for  this  reason  the  living  collections  are
devoted especially to species of botanical interest. Orna-
mental plants, though, are abundantly represented in the
extensive  collections.”  Meyer’s  introductions  from  Kew
were limited to special groups, chiefly broad-leaved ever-
greens. Among others, he procured more than sixty culti-
vars  of  hollies,  including  Ilex ×altaclarensis ‘Smithiana’
(611477) and I. aquifolium ‘Flavescens’ (611472).

Golden-rain tree, Laburnum ×watereri ‘Vossii’, trained onto a
pergola in the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, near London. 
Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

On 13 October, Meyer paid a visit to Chelsea Physic
Garden, the second oldest garden in England, founded in
1683.  “The  garden  stands  on  the  original  4  acres  [1.6
hectares] adjacent to the River Thames. In the center, a
statue  of  Sir  Hans  Sloane  reminds  the  visitor  that  this
eighteenth  century  physician-naturalist  was  the  great
benefactor  of  the  Chelsea  garden.  .  .  .  The  collections
consist  mostly  of  herbaceous  species  grown  in  narrow
beds divided by verdant grass pathways in the style of an
eighteenth century herb garden” (Meyer 1959e). The fol-
lowing  morning  he  visited  the  Royal  Horticultural
Society’s  Garden  at Wisley  on  the  outskirts  of  London.
He  was  especially  impressed  with  what  were  then  new
hybrid  gazanias,  ranking  them  “among  the  outstanding
herbaceous ornamentals of recent origin.”

228

Learning from Europe

The Meyers spent the last week of October in Corn-
wall,  visiting  gardens  at  Penjerrick  near  Falmouth, Tre-
withen  at Truro,  and  Caerhays  Castle.  “Geographically,
few British gardens are more favorably situated than the
Cornish garden of Caerhays Castle, located at the head of
a protected cove near Saint Austell on the eastern shore of
the Cornish peninsula,” noted Meyer (1959e). “The col-
lections are particularly rich in Chinese species of Camel-
lia, Magnolia, Rhododendron, Ilex, Acer, and  Quercus.
Thickets  of  the  wild  form  of  Camellia  reticulata
(581685), C. saluenensis, and small forests of rhododen-
drons  form  the  understory  beneath  towering  evergreen
Chinese oaks.”

Back in England in early November, Meyer revisited
some  of  the  gardens  in  and  around  London,  including
Wisley, Chelsea, and Kew. As a result of his ventures in
Scotland and England, he was able to ship more than a
thousand introductions to the United States. “As a source
of  ornamental  plants,  British  gardens  are  unrivaled
among  the  gardens  of  Europe,”  Meyer  commented
(1959e). “British plant explorers, perhaps more than any
other, have pioneered in the field of plant introduction
intensively for two centuries. Horticulture and gardening
have become a part of a great British tradition.” Writing
to Hodge, Meyer described Britain as “a vast archive of
ornamental plants” (1957i).

Meyer’s nine-month, 24,000 km journey concluded
on  14  November  when  he  and  Jean  sailed  out  from
Southampton. After visiting more than eighty public and
private gardens, arboreta, experiment stations, and nurs-
eries, he was returning home having collected a stagger-
ing number of plants, about twenty-eight hundred in all.
As Meyer himself noted, “Never before has any American
had the opportunity of doing this sort of project on this
scale for the Mediterranean region” (1957e).

LEARNING FROM EUROPE

Meyer’s  immensely  productive  1957  trip  to  southern
Europe and Great Britain reinforced the idea that there
was a need to continue exploring the collections of orna-
mental  plants  in  Europe.  Three  countries  with  strong
horticultural  traditions,  the  Netherlands,  Belgium,  and
Germany,  were  chosen  as  destinations  for  Meyer’s  next
expedition, scheduled for 1959.

Considering  the  flourishing  nursery  industry  in  all
three countries, Meyer planned to devote more time to
visiting  nurseries,  in  addition  to  touring  botanical
gardens and private collections: “This trip is going to be
rather different from the last. I shall be purchasing much
more material this time and I hope our losses will be nil”
(Meyer 1959a).

One Boskoop in the world
Arriving  in  the  Netherlands  in  early  July  1959,  Meyer
made Boskoop his headquarters for seven weeks. This was
the  most  practical  location  from  which  to  undertake
exploration work in the western part of the country. “The
Boskoop  nursery  area  near  Leiden  and  Rotterdam,”
Meyer  commented  (1963),  “is  a  classic  example  of  the
efficient  management  of  land  by  the  Dutch.  Indeed,
Boskoop is unique among areas devoted to nursery crops.
Most impressive are the neatly tended nursery plots, the
innumerable  canals,  and  the  colorful  houses  of  the
nursery owners.”

“The indefatigable industry of the Dutch people to
recover land from the sea is a source of constant inspira-
tion to all visitors of the Netherlands,” Meyer remarked
(1963). “The best agricultural soils lie on reclaimed land
below  sea  level.  In  fact,  more  than  one-third  of  the
country lies below the level of the sea. It is in these areas
that the finest horticultural crops are produced. . . . Hor-
ticulture and gardening at the local level in the Nether-
lands is not so well developed as one might expect in a
country  with  a  rich  heritage  in  these  pursuits  covering
nearly four centuries. In Great Britain, France, Italy, and
other European countries, commercial horticulture tradi-
tionally is the servant of gardening. In the Netherlands,
where  the  opposite  situation  prevails,  the  tradition  of
commercial  horticulture  takes  precedence  over  develop-
ments in home gardening.”

After barely two weeks of going through the Boskoop
nurseries  “with  a  fine  tooth  comb,”  Meyer  reported
enthusiastically  to  Hodge:  “I  am  making  slow  progress
through these little Dutch nurseries at Boskoop. What a
place!  Six  hundred  nurseries  on  2000  acres  [800
hectares]. The water table is only 12–14 inches [30–35
cm] below the surface. You have never seen such plants.
It  looks  as  though  I  will  find  quite  a  lot  of  conifers  of
interest to us—dwarf types. Only a few of the nurseries
have  collections,  the  bulk  are  only  plant  factories  for

229

Europe

Fargesia murielae was first
brought to the Arnold 
Arboretum of Harvard Univer-
sity by Ernest H. Wilson, who
collected it in 1907 in China.
Only a single plant survived
the long journey, and it was
sent in 1913 to Kew Gardens
in England, where it was 
propagated and distributed
throughout Europe. It was not
until 1959 that this bamboo
was reintroduced successfully
into United States, when
Meyer acquired it from the
Royal Moerheim Nurseries in
Dedemsvaart. Photo by 
Frederick G. Meyer.

export purposes. Certainly there is only one Boskoop in
the world!” (Meyer 1959b).

Lost bamboo found
After  an  exceptionally  productive  time  in  the  Boskoop
area,  Meyer  relocated  to  the  northeastern  part  of  the
Netherlands. One of the nurseries he visited there was the
Royal  Moerheim  Nurseries  near  Dedemsvaart,  regarded
as a leading producer of perennials and deciduous shrubs.
“For more than sixty years, Messrs. Ruys, owners of the
firm,  have  produced  a  host  of  new  ornamental  plants,
both  herbaceous  and  woody,  many  of  which  are  now
widely grown in gardens of Europe and America. Among
the plants that originated in this nursery, the Moerheim
blue  spruce,  Picea  pungens Engelm.  ‘Moerheimii’,  is
perhaps  the  most  widely  known.  This  selection,  intro-
duced in 1912, long has been a favorite in Europe and in
the United States” (Meyer 1963).

Among  the  plants  Meyer  procured  from  the  Royal
Moerheim  Nurseries  were  Buddleja  crispa var.  farreri
(60428), a low-growing butterfly bush; Kolkwitzia ama-
bilis ‘Rosea’ (60454), a superior form of beauty bush; and
Fargesia  murielae (601632),  a  clump-forming  bamboo
from China. Meyer ultimately considered the bamboo to
be “one of the most important introductions of the 1959
exploration  trip.”  Although  it  was  first  brought  from
China to the Arnold Arboretum in Jamaica Plain, Mass-
achusetts,  as  early  as  1907,  it  was  then  forwarded  to

Europe  without  ever  having  been  distributed  in  the
United States.

Meyer later described the Ruys’ Fargesia murielae: “A
handsome plant, more than fifty years old, in the nursery
[it] forms a solid clump about 10 feet [3 m] in diameter
with hundreds of culms 10 feet [3 m] tall with a graceful
arching habit. If this bamboo proves to be fully hardy in
the latitude of Washington, D.C., we shall have for the
first  time  a  nonrunning  bamboo  for  gardens  and  for
potential economic use in middle latitudes of the United
States” (1963).

You should see Pfitzers
In early August, Meyer paid a visit to the Trompenburg
Arboretum, developed on a 4-hectare site on the outskirts
of Rotterdam by J. R. P. van Hoey Smith. “I spent a most
interesting  Saturday  afternoon  and  evening  with  Mr.
Smith and wife,” wrote Meyer (1959c). “He has the nec-
essary capital (shipping and brokerage) and has an avid
interest  in  plants.  His  garden  goes  back  150  years.  His
newer introductions are really quite interesting. The one
conifer he has we must keep an eye on is Picea omorica
‘Expansa’ (61840). As the name suggests, it is a spreading
type, something like a spreading Pfitzers but even lower
and with lovely pendulous habit of the Serbian spruce.”
In  spite  of  a  relatively  high  water  table,  averaging
from  60  to  90  cm  over  most  of  the  property,  about  a
thousand kinds of trees and shrubs thrived in the peaty

230

Learning from Europe

The conifer collection in Trompenburg Arboretum on the outskirts of Rotterdam. Photo by Frederick G. Meyer.

soils of Trompenburg. Especially well represented in the
arboretum were oaks—about eighty different kinds—“a
specialty of the present owner” (Meyer 1963). One that
caught Meyer’s attention was Quercus pontica (60761), a
handsome low-growing species from the Caucasus.

Meyer was taken by the vigor of the many conifers
grown at Trompenburg. Following his visit, he wrote to
Hodge:  “You  should  see  Pfitzers  [Juniperus ×media
‘Pfitzeriana’] growing on this peat soil! Quite something.
In  a  private  garden  in  Rotterdam,  I  saw  one  with  a  30
foot [9 m] spread. Where in the States they would grow
this well I would not know” (1959c).

Meyer  did  not  miss  out  on  the  opportunity  to  visit
several  of  the  most  respectable  botanical  gardens  in  the
Netherlands, including the oldest, the Hortus Botanicus at
Leiden,  founded  in  1587.  “When  Carolus  Clusius
assumed  the  first  professorship  in  1594,  this  was  a  tiny
garden  of  only  45  by  35  yards  [41  by  32  m],”  Meyer

remarked (1963). “With an apothecary assistant, Clusius
planted more than 1000 species and varieties of plants, pre-
dominantly medicinal. From the original garden only one
plant remains, a golden-chain tree (Laburnum anagyroides
Med.) which flowers profusely every May in the place it has
stood since it was planted in the Hortus in 1601.”

Over time the garden increased in size to 6 hectares,
with  boundaries  defined  by  canals  on  two  sides.  “The
Leiden  garden  is  so  very  nice,”  wrote  Meyer  (1959d),
“small,  but  very  well  kept  and  old  trees  are  wonderful.
Some  plants  in  the  greenhouses  are  of  interest  to  us,
including  the  true  variegated  umbrella  plant,  Cyperus
alternifolius
‘Variegatus’  [592563].”  Besides  Cyperus,
nearly fifty other plants in Leiden’s collections stimulated
enough interest to be acquired by Meyer.

Leaving the Netherlands after nearly two months of
browsing  through  its  best  collections  of  ornamental
plants,  Meyer  secured  a  sizeable  bounty  of  several

231

Europe

A 30 m tall windbreak of noble fir, Abies procera, in the nursery of G. D. Böhlje near Westerstede. Photo by Frederick G. Meyer.

hundred species and cultivars to be shipped to the United
States. In a letter to Hodge, he remarked, “Holland is a
wonderful  place  for  plants,  and  Dutchmen  who  know
how to grow them” (1959c).

Grown to perfection
Crossing  the  border  from  the  Netherlands  to  Germany,
Meyer  found  himself  in  East  Friesland.  The  Oldenburg
area  of  East  Friesland  ranks  second,  after  the  Pinneberg
area  north  of  Hamburg,  among  the  most  important
nursery centers in the country. “Many first-rate nurseries
are located in this intensely farmed area of deep fertile soil
and moist cool-temperate climate,” noted Meyer (1963).
“The sandy acidic soils with relatively high organic content
are suited for growing nursery crops, especially ericaceous
plants and conifers. The climate is strongly influenced by
the proximity of the North Sea which lies only a few miles
to the north.”

Meyer  visited  many  top  nurseries  around  Oldenburg.
One was the nursery of Herman A. Hesse in Weener on the
river  Ems.  Founded  at  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth
century, this nursery has long maintained a plant-breeding
program,  resulting  in  numerous  selections  and  hybrids.

Meyer  acquired  from  Hesse  nearly  three  hundred  plants,
including many of Hesse’s introductions, such as Fraxinus
excelsior ‘Hessei’ (61805).

Several  other  nurseries  in  the  region  were  noted  by
Meyer  (1963)  as  outstanding.  The  nursery  of  G.  D.
Böhlje near Westerstede, where “hardy shrubs are grown
to perfection,” supplied about a dozen introductions. H.
Bruns’s nursery, also near Westerstede, impressed Meyer
as  “a  first-rate  collection  of  unusual  hardy  trees  and
shrubs.” The rhododendron nursery of Dietrich Hobbie
at  Linswege  represented  “an  unbroken  effort  of  more
than twenty years to produce a new race of hardy plants
for the often inclement climate of Germany.”

Hamburg’s oasis
From East Friesland, Meyer traveled south to Dortmund,
the  site  of  the  1959  Bundesgartenschau,  or  the  Federal
Horticultural  Exhibition.  “The  Germans  have  the  best
idea,” wrote Meyer (1959b) to Hodge. “Every two years
they  put  on  a  horticultural  fair  lasting  from  May  to
October. Instead of sheep, goats and horses, it’s all plants,
growing in permanent positions and put on by nursery-
men. Following these shows, the plant material becomes

232

Learning from Europe

A Baroque garden, enclosed by a hedge of Carpinus betulus, in the
Royal Garden of Herrenhausen in Hannover. Photo by Frederick
G. Meyer.

Pleached lindens, Tilia, and African lilies, Agapanthus, at the Royal
Garden of Herrenhausen. Photo by Frederick G. Meyer.

the property of the local botanic garden in the town—the
material  includes  new  stuff  and  is,  of  course,  worth  a
great  deal  of  money.  It  is  not  a  bad  idea  that  does  not
seem to have been thought of in America.”

After Dortmund, Meyer turned his attention to the
Pinneberg-Elmshorn-Rellingen area of Holstein, located
just  north  of  Hamburg  on  the  main  route  north  to
Denmark, which, he said, “comprises the largest nursery
region of Europe, larger and with more nurseries than the
Boskoop area in the Netherlands. The fertile soils, a mild
climate, and a well-distributed rainfall favor the growing
of superior nursery stock relatively quickly and cheaply”
(1963).  There  Meyer  toured  a  number  of  nurseries,
including  those  of  Rudolf  Schmidt  in  Rellingen,  W.
Kordes and Son in Elmshorn, and Timm and Company,
also in Elmshorn, prime examples of Germany’s “thriving
nursery industry.”

Near  Ahrensburg,  northeast  of  Hamburg,  Meyer
visited Tannenhoft Arboretum in the village of Schmalen-
beck. Developed in the early 1900s as a private country
estate,  Tannenhoft  Arboretum  later  became  associated
with the Institut für Forstgenetik und Forstpflanzenzüch-
tung,  a  government  organization  devoted  to  studies  in
the breeding of forest trees. Among the plants Meyer pro-
cured  there  were  several  oaks,  such  as  Quercus  petraea
‘Giesleri’  (61383),  with  long,  narrow,  yellowish  green
leaves;  Q.  petraea ‘Muscaviensis’  (61384),  with  mostly
entire, unlobed leaves; and Q. robur ‘Cucullata’ (61387),
with smaller, hood-shaped leaves.

Hamburg’s  Botanic  Garden  impressed  Meyer  as  “a
welcome oasis for thousands of busy city people who use

the  garden  daily  for  relaxation  and  inspiration  about
plants” (1963). Founded in 1810, the garden features a
lake,  a  rock  garden,  and  conservatories  full  of  tropical
plants, all amidst a “verdant green canopy of large trees
and  pleasant  walks.”  One  of  the  more  unusual  plants
spotted  in  Hamburg  was  Fagus  sylvatica ‘Ansorgei’
(602379), considered the rarest of the named selections
of European beech. This slow-growing selection—found
in 1891 in the nursery of C. Ansorge near Hamburg—
has deep bronze-green, linear to lanceolate leaves.

A sizable segment of the earth’s flora
Traveling south from Hamburg, Meyer stopped in Han-
nover,  where  he  toured  the  Royal  Garden  of  Herren-
hausen  and  the  Berggarten,  both  dating  back  to  the
seventeenth century, when Hannover was an independ-
ent German state and a center of cultural life. While the
spacious and elaborately ornamented Herrenhausen was
designed for court functions, the nearby Berggarten was
developed as a botanic garden for scientific purposes.

Continuing south from Hannover, Meyer arrived in
Frankfurt am Main in early October. He spent some time
there exploring collections growing in the Palmengarten
and at the Botanical Garden of the University of Frank-
furt. The Palmengarten, which began as a small planting
undertaken  by  the  citizens  of  Frankfurt  in  1869,  has
grown  into  a  major  botanic  garden  of  international
repute. Meyer took special note of a series of large conser-
vatories,  where,  he  said,  “Fritz  Encke,  director,  has
brought together a first-rate collection of tropical plants
admirably grown and splendidly displayed” (1963).

233

Europe

After  touring  several
of  Germany’s  botanical
gardens,  Meyer 
com-
mented  that  in  Germany,
like  in  other  parts  of
Europe, 
“the  botanic
garden  carries  with  it  a
time-honored  tradition  in
university life dating from
the Italian gardens, first at
. 
Padua  in  1545. 
.
Germany 
long 
has
remained  in  the  forefront
in  matters  horticultural
with a heritage in this field
quite as old as that of the
Netherlands.  Elaborate
gardens  were  traditional
among the wealthy before
World War II, when it was
possible  to  maintain  a
large estate. Since the last
war the small home garden has come into prominence. A
horticultural elite long has existed in Germany at a level
unknown in the United States” (1963).

. 

One glasshouse of the Palmengarten in Frankfurt am Main features Victoria amazonica and other
aquatic plants. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Leaving  Germany  for  Belgium,  Meyer  had  this  to
offer  in  retrospect:  “To  a  botanist,  horticulturist,  or
serious  amateur,  a  visit  to  a  German  botanic  garden,
either  municipally  or  university  operated,  can  be  a
rewarding experience, if for no other reason than expo-
sure to a sizable segment of the earth’s flora in so small a
space” (1963).

Traditional pursuit
Belgium was Meyer’s next and last stop. “In Belgium,” he
remarked, “horticulture is a traditional pursuit” (1963).
The country “long has maintained an enviable position
in the production of ornamental plant crops, dating back
to the early years of the nineteenth century when Louis
van Houtte, Ambroise Verschaffelt, and J. J. Linden were
leading  names  in  the  horticulture  of  this  country  with
headquarters  in  Ghent.  Belgium  still  ranks  among  the
most  important  centers  on  the  Continent  for  the  com-
mercial production of ornamental plants.”

Meyer’s  tour  of  Belgian  nurseries  concentrated
around Brugge, northwest of Brussels, a city known for
its  canals  and  bridges.  There  he  visited  a  number  of

The large palm house of the Palmengarten in Frankfurt am Main
dates back to 1869. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Adjacent  to  the  Palmengarten  was  the  Botanical
Garden  of  the  University  of  Frankfurt,  a  relatively  new
garden spread on 8 hectares and constructed primarily for
academic  use.  Among  the  plants  Meyer  acquired  from
these  two  collections  were  Erica ‘Evening  Glow’
(611387),  with  flowers  that  open  white  and  change  to
rose as they age; Nepenthes ×dormanniana (611388), with
pitchers heavily spotted with red blotches; and Selaginella
patula (601417), a club-moss native to Jamaica.

234

Europe’s Garden Flora

growers,  including  Sander  and  Fils,  long  dedicated  to
growing  orchids,  bromeliads,  and  other  greenhouse
plants, and Horticulture Flandria, also devoted to green-
house plants, particularly bromeliads, ferns, and aroids.

North  of  Antwerp,  Meyer  toured  the  Kalmthout
Arboretum,  which  in  his  view  “stands  among  the  most
important  private  establishments  of  its  kind  in  Europe.
The older part of the collection dates from 1857, when
Charles van Geert acquired the property for nursery pur-
poses.  For  nearly  a  half  century  thereafter,  this  nursery
was  renowned  in  Europe  as  a  source  of  exotic  trees,
shrubs,  and  selections  of  Indian  azaleas  (Rhododendron
indicum Sweet), known as van Geert azaleas. . . . The de
Belder family acquired the property in 1951 and quickly
restored  the  derelict  nursery  of  about  20  acres  [8
hectares]. Many old specimen trees exist throughout the
property; around these, new introductions are constantly
being added. . . . Some of the woody collections reputably
originated from introductions brought from Japan, about
1860, by the German-Dutch botanist and plant explorer,
Philipp  Franz  von  Siebold”  (Meyer  1963).  Two  witch-
hazels acquired by Meyer, Hamamelis ×intermedia ‘Jelena’
(60451) and H. ×intermedia ‘Ruby Glow’ (60714), were
originally raised at Kalmthout.

Next,  Meyer  visited  the  Royal  Botanic  Garden  of
Belgium in Meise, about 8 km north of Brussels. “The
spacious  grounds  at  Meise  covering  225  acres  [90
hectares] were given by the royal family of Belgium for a
national botanic garden. It is an imposing site where large
specimen trees abound and verdant lawns provide sweep-
ing  vistas  for  some  distance.  .  .  .  An  extensive  range  of
tropical  conservatories  called  the  Palais  des  Plantes  will
include  separate  departments  for  plants  of  Africa,  Asia,
America, and Australia” (Meyer 1963). Among the plants
Meyer  procured  were  Chlorophytum  alismifolium
(611625), with densely tufted leaves and lax racemes of
white flowers; Eugenia guilleminiana (611661), an ever-
green  shrub  with  gracefully  arching,  fernlike  branches;
and Eulophia horsfallii (611662), a terrestrial orchid with
giant leaves 2 m long. His bounty complemented twenty-
three  cultivars  of  croton,  Codiaeum  variegatum var.
pictum. Many  of  these,  including  ‘Baronne  James  de
Rothschild’  (611630),  ‘Benoît  Comte’  (611629),  and
‘British Empire’ (611631), were later displayed in Long-
wood’s conservatories, where they can still be seen.

Meyer’s trip ended on 14 November. His collections
in  Belgium,  added  to  those  from  the  Netherlands  and

Laurus nobilis specially trained at the Sander and Fils nursery in
Brugge. Photo by Frederick G. Meyer.

Germany, exceeded twelve hundred plants. Looking back
at his two European trips, he concluded, “Europe still is a
potent source of ornamentals and probably will continue
to  be,  especially  if  one  is  willing  to  make  a  systematic
survey . . . of places where collections of these plants exist.
Much may be learned from Europe where the importance
of gardening and horticulture long have been recognized
in the development of ‘pure’ agriculture” (1963).

EUROPE’S GARDEN FLORA

Meyer’s two European trips in the 1950s led to the intro-
duction  of  a  staggering  amount  of  material,  about  four
thousand new plants in all. This collection of the best of
what Europe had to offer continued to enrich American
horticulture for many years. During the following quarter
century, the attention of Longwood explorers turned to

235

Europe

other regions of the world, but by the 1980s it became
clear  that  the  time  had  come  to  return  to  some  of
Europe’s most active horticultural centers. With its flour-
ishing  nursery  industry  and  ever-expanding  interest  in
gardening, Europe continued to be, as Meyer put it, “a
potent source of ornamentals.”

The Kingdom’s floral treasury
Rather than trying to repeat Meyer’s expeditions, which
lasted many months and covered several countries, Long-
wood envisioned a series of shorter, more focused trips.
The United Kingdom, one of the epicenters of horticul-
tural activities in Europe, was chosen as the destination
for  the  first  trip.  In  1987,  Dr.  Darrel  A.  Apps,  head  of
Longwood’s education division, teamed up with Sylvester
G.  March,  chief  horticulturist  at  the  U.S.  National
Arboretum,  for  a  five-week  trip  that  would  take  them
through Scotland, England, and Wales.

Apps  and  March  headed  first  to  Scotland.  On  20
September they arrived in Edinburgh, where they began
the exploration of Britain’s cultivated flora by touring the
renowned  Royal  Botanic  Garden,  home  to  one  of  the
largest  living  plant  collections  in  the  world.  Two  days
later  they  traveled  north  to  Glendoick  Gardens  near
Perth, some 60 km away, a nursery owned by Peter Cox,
a  veteran  plant  explorer  and  leading  rhododendron
expert. Having procured from Cox a selection of rhodo-
dendrons and other ericaceous plants, Apps and March
continued north to the Highlands, where they stopped at
the Inshriach Alpine Nursery in Aviemore, a small town
surrounded  by  the  picturesque  Cairngorm  Mountains
and claimed to be the coldest place in the British Isles. At
the Inshriach they picked up an assortment of more than
thirty  of  the  most  interesting  perennials,  including
Codonopsis  ovata (88809),  Podophyllum  hexandrum
(88862), and Astilbe ‘Inshriach Pink’ (88777), a hybrid
selected at that nursery.

Apps and March concluded their stay in Scotland on
25 September with a visit to Threave Gardens near Castle
Douglas, about 130 km south of Edinburgh. From there
they  headed  west  to  Morpeth  in  Northumberland,
England’s  northernmost  county.  Their  destination  was
Herterton House Garden Nursery, where they stocked up
on  a  number  of  perennials,  among  them  Achillea
‘Taygetea’  (88760)  and  Campanula  trachelium ‘Bernice’
(88795). From Northumberland they traveled south and
two  days  later  arrived  in  Colchester  in  Essex  County,

some  80  km  northeast  of  London.  There  they  toured
Beth  Chatto’s  garden,  famed  for  its  stunning  composi-
tions of drought-tolerant plants growing in an impover-
ished gravelly soil. Among thirty plants Apps and March
procured  there  were  Alchemilla  erythropoda (88763),
Crambe  koktebelica (88814),  and  Strobilanthes  atropur-
pureus (88870).

A  few  days  later,  after  visiting  nurseries  in  Norfolk
and Suffolk County, the explorers relocated to Cornwall,
on  the  island’s  southwestern  tip.  In  Madron  near  Pen-
zance, Apps and March toured Trengwainton Garden, set
up  in  a  valley  overlooking  Mount’s  Bay.  In  the  nearby
Redruth, they stopped at the Burncoose and South Down
Nurseries, where they obtained Aesculus wilsonii (92680)
raised  from  seeds  collected  from  trees  growing  at  Caer-
hays  Castle  and  introduced  from  China  by  Ernest  H.
Wilson in 1908.

From  Burncoose  the  team  continued  traveling  east
and,  on  7  October,  arrived  in Yelverton  in  Devon,  just
north  of  Plymouth.  Their  destination  was  the  Garden
House in the nearby Buckland Monachorum, a small but
highly admired naturalistic garden situated on the edge of
the scenic Dartmoor National Park. From its diverse col-
lections, Apps and March selected a number of rarities,
such  as  Daphne ×burkwoodii ‘G.  K.  Argles’  (89501),
Edgeworthia  papyrifera (88822),  and  Helleborus  niger
‘White Magic’ (88833).

From Devon the team headed east to London, stop-
ping along the way in specialty nurseries and picking up
more plants. On 11 October they paid a visit to the RHS
Garden Wisley,  just  south  of  London.  In Wisley’s  well-
stocked garden center they found a number of interesting
plants,  including  Aster ×frikartii
‘Jungfrau’  (88776),
Bergenia ‘Pugsley’s  Pink’  (88782),  and  Hypericum
androsaemum ‘Albury  Purple’  (88835).  Then  a  visit  to
Hilliers  Nurseries,  among  England’s  most  distinguished
nurseries, located in Romsey just north of Southampton,
turned out to be even more fruitful. After spending a day
browsing,  Apps  and  March  selected  twenty-five  plants
from Hilliers’ extensive collections, among them Cotinus
‘Grace’  (88813),  Viburnum ×bodnantense
‘Deben’
(88877), and Tetracentron sinense (88871).

During the next two weeks, Apps and March contin-
ued their forays to the leading nurseries and private col-
lections of southern England and Wales, tirelessly looking
for new and interesting plants worthy of introduction to
the United States. From Bressingham Gardens in Norfolk

236

Europe’s Garden Flora

The Palm House at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, where Darrel A. Apps and Sylvester G. March made their final stop during their
1987 trip. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

they  procured  a  wide  assortment  of  well  more  than  a
hundred choice trees, shrubs, and perennials. In Notcutts
Nursery in Suffolk they found a number of unique trees,
such  as  Aesculus  indica ‘Sydney  Pearce’  (92678),  and
shrubs,  such  as  Staphylea  holocarpa ‘Rosea’  (88868).
While  at  the  Fibrex  Nurseries  near  Stratford-on-Avon,
south of Birmingham, they obtained a collection of new
cultivars of Pelargonium ×domesticum (88845–51). From
John  T.  Gallagher  of  Verwood  in  Dorset,  an  accom-
plished  breeder  and  collector,  they  acquired  an  assort-
ment of rare cultivars of Magnolia and Nerine.

The  trip  that  began  at  the  Royal  Botanic  Garden
Edinburgh  ended  on  30  October  with  a  visit  to  the
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, an unquestionable horti-
cultural  mecca,  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  river
Thames on the outskirts of London. Here the five-week
plant-hunting  expedition  through  some  of  Britain’s

finest  gardens  and  nurseries,  which  resulted  in  more
than  five  hundred  collections,  concluded  with  a  very
modest  acquisition,  despite  Kew’s  enormous  holdings.
Apps  and  March  chose  only  two  old  but  little-known
selections  of  common  boxwood,  Buxus  sempervirens
‘Pendula’  (88785)  and  B.  sempervirens  ‘Prostrata’
(88786).  Perhaps  by  this  point  they  felt  overwhelmed
with the diversity of plants in British gardens and were
unable to absorb in such a short time Kew’s seemingly
inexhaustible collections.

Nursery escapade continues
It was at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, the end point
of  Apps  and  March’s  1987  trip,  that  the  next  team  of
explorers  began  five  years  later.  In  June  of  1991,  Dr.
James  R.  Ault,  Longwood’s  plant  physiologist,  and  R.
William  Thomas,  head  of  Longwood’s  education  divi-

237

Europe

Ault  and  Thomas’s
nursery  tour  focused  on
southern  England,  from
Somerset  County  in  the
southwest 
to  Hertford
County north of London.
In Somerset in the town of
Castle  Cary,  they  visited
Hadspen  Garden  and
Nursery,  of  Nori  and
Sandra  Pope,  widely
acclaimed for an unortho-
dox  use  of  color  in  the
garden.  Among  the  ten
plants  Ault  and  Thomas
acquired at Hadspen were
Astrantia ‘Hadspen Blood’
(92711), a hybrid between
A.  maxima and  A.  major
developed  by  the  Popes;
Rodgersia ‘Parasol’ (92780),
a  hardy  perennial  notable
for 
reddish
foliage; and Euphorbia characias ssp. wulfenii ‘Lambrook
Gold’ (92738), a selection found by Margery Fish of East
Lambrook Manor, only 25 km from Castle Cary.

its  bold, 

The Temple of Aeolus overlooks Kew’s extensive Order Beds. From the vast collections of the Royal
Botanic Gardens, Kew, Ault and Thomas selected thirty-three plants for use in Longwood’s cool 
conservatories. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

The story of ‘Lambrook Gold’ inspired the explorers
to pay a visit to the garden established by Fish, one of the
great  divas  of  the  English  cottage  garden  style.  The
gardens, which slid into neglect after Fish’s death in 1969,
have  since  been  restored.  In  the  small  specialty  nursery
there, which offers a wide selection of unusual plants, Ault
and Thomas found a few rarities such as Geranium macr-
orrhizum ‘Czakor’  (92744),  ×Halimiocistus ‘Ingwersenii’
(92746), and Argyranthemum ‘Mrs. F. Sander’ (92707).

In  Hampshire,  southwest  of  London,  Ault  and
Thomas toured two nurseries near Southampton. In the
town  of  Boldre,  20  km  south  of  Southampton,  they
visited  Spinners  Nursery,  specializing  in  rare,  hardy
plants. Then in Kilmeston, some 25 km northeast of the
city,  they  stopped  at  the  Blackthorn  Nursery  of  Robin
and Sue White, famed for its hellebores, several of which
Ault  and  Thomas  obtained  for  trialing  at  Longwood,
including  outstanding  selections  of  Helleborus  niger
(92750–1) and H. ×sternii (92752).

A  visit  to  Hopleys  Plants  in  Much  Hadham,  Hert-
fordshire, just north of London, turned out to be the most

Astrantia ‘Hadspen Blood’ (92711), a hybrid between A. maxima
and A. major, was among the plants Ault and Thomas acquired
from Hadspen Garden in Castle Cary. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

sion,  traveled  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  continue  the
work of their predecessors, Apps, March, and Meyer. This
time Ault and Thomas did sift through the Kew’s collec-
tions, selecting a wide range of plants suitable for Long-
wood’s cool conservatories, including Asteriscus maritimus
(92692),  Fabiana  imbricata f.  violacea (92688),  and
Helichrysum sibthorpii (92693).

238

Europe’s Garden Flora

Darke, Pagels, and Anke Mattern, left to right, in Pagels’s nursery
in Leer. Photo by Rick Darke.

Ault and Thomas acquired Cercidiphyllum japonicum ‘Rot-
fuchs’(92716), a German selection with purple foliage, from the
Spinners Nursery in Boldre. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

fruitful stop. This nursery’s claim to fame was the intro-
duction in the 1970s of the first red-flowered cultivar of
Potentilla  fruticosa, named  ‘Red  Ace’.  Among  the  nearly
fifty  plants  acquired  from  Hopleys  were  some  of  this
nursery’s  other  introductions,  such  as  Potentilla  fruticosa
‘Hopley’s Orange’ (92776), Prostanthera ‘Poorinda Balle-
rina’ (92777), and Salvia patens ‘Chilcombe’ (92782), as
well  as  an  assortment  of  Nerine cultivars  and  species
(92760–7). With this visit, Ault and Thomas concluded
their  nursery  escapade  and  in  mid-June  returned  to  the
United States with a hefty bounty of 127 choice plants.

Innovative perennials
Germany,  Europe’s  horticultural  powerhouse  and  the
birthplace  of  many  an  innovative  idea  on  plants  and
gardens, was understandably chosen as another destina-

239

Hans Simon in his garden in Marktheidenfeld, where Darke 
procured Carex morrowii ‘Gilt’ (89921). Photo by Rick Darke.

Europe

The nursery of Gräfin von Zeppelin in Sulzburg was Darke’s southernmost destination during his 1989 trip to Germany. 
Photo by Rick Darke.

tion  for  the  European  plant  exploration.  In  August  of
1989, Rick Darke, Longwood’s curator of plants, traveled
to West Germany with the primary goal of acquiring new
perennials.  Over  the  course  of  a  couple  of  weeks  he
visited  nurseries  from  Ostfriesland  in  the  north  to
Schwarzwald in the south.

In Ostfriesland, Darke stopped in the town of Leer
near the Dutch border to visit the nursery of Ernst Pagels,
one of Germany’s foremost breeders of perennial plants.
Among the plants he obtained from Pagels were Astilbe
chinensis var.  taquetii ‘Purpurlanze’  (89911),  Lamium
galeobdolon ‘Silberteppich’  (89919),  and  Symphytum
grandiflorum ‘Blaue Glocken’ (89920).

In Schwarmstedt, about 30 km north of Hannover,
Darke toured the nursery of Ruth and Wilfried Siebler.

Here he spotted Saponaria ×lempergii (89909) and ×Sol-
idaster  luteus (89923).  Further  south,  in  the  nursery  of
Heinz Klose in Lohfelden near Kassel, he found Cortade-
ria  dioica (89927).  Continuing  south  from  Kassel,  he
reached  Marktheidenfeld,  about  70  km  southeast  of
Frankfurt, where he visited the nursery of Dr. Hans and
Helga  Simon  and  procured  Carex  morrowii
‘Gilt’
(89921).

Darke’s southernmost destination was the nursery of
Gräfin  von  Zeppelin  in  Sulzburg,  Schwarzwald,  one  of
Germany’s  leading  nurseries  specializing  in  perennials.
From their extensive offerings, Darke selected a number
of plants, including Phlomis chrysophylla (89898), Orig-
anum laevigatum ‘Herrenhausen’ (89906), and Centaurea
cheiranthifolia (89901).

240

Europe’s Garden Flora

Hugin with his best-known introduction, Sedum ‘Matrona’
(93537), valued for its deep wine-colored stems, purple-tinted
leaves, and pink flowers. Photo by Rick Darke.

Gräfin von Zeppelin with Salvia officinalis ‘Berggarten’ (93543),
which Darke later procured from the nursery Haussermann
Stauden und Geholze in Stuttgart. Photo by Rick Darke.

These  two  trips  to  Germany  resulted  in  more  than
seventy new perennials being brought back to the United
States. Many of these plants can still be viewed at Long-
wood,  proof  that  German  plant  breeders  deserve  their
reputation for selecting outstanding garden plants.

Four years later, Darke returned to Germany and to
the nursery of Gräfin von Zeppelin. This time he picked
twenty-seven  of  their  new  introductions,  including
Clematis heracleifolia ‘Cassandra’ (93535), notable for its
exceptionally clear deep blue flowers. In Freiburg, 20 km
north  of  Sulzburg,  Darke  visited  the  nursery  of  Ewald
Hugin,  best  known  for  introducing  Sedum ‘Matrona’
(93537), a putative hybrid between S. maximum and S.
spectabile, which later gained widespread recognition and
acclaim  in  both  Europe  and  North  America.  Another
German selection that has since become popular in the
United States was Salvia officinalis ‘Berggarten’ (93543),
a  form  with  large,  rounded,  gray-green  leaves,  which
Darke  obtained  in  Stuttgart  from  the  nursery  Hausser-
mann Stauden und Geholze.

241

AROUND 

THE CARIBBEAN

DOMINICA ROOTS

The island chain of the West Indies extends from Cuba
and the Bahamas in the north to Trinidad and Aruba in
the  south.  It  may  be  divided  into  three  groups:  the
Bahamas, the Greater Antilles, and the Lesser Antilles. It
comprises  islands  of  greatly  contrasting  size,  geologic
origin,  and  topography. The  islands  are  surrounded  by
warm oceanic waters and swept by predominantly east-
erly trade winds. The resulting moderately high tempera-
tures  and  abundant  rainfall  support  the  luxuriant  and
rich  flora  of  the  islands,  which  includes  about  twelve
thousand  species  and  is  characterized  by  a  high  rate  of
endemism.

The need for Longwood to explore these islands for
new ornamental plants was very apparent to Dr. Walter
H. Hodge, Longwood’s head of education and research.
While  working  as  a  predoctoral  student  at  the  Gray
Herbarium  of  Harvard  University  in  the  late  1930s,  he
had  conducted  plant-collecting  and  floristic  studies  on
Dominica in the Lesser Antilles. During a discussion in
1958  with  Dr.  Russell  J.  Seibert,  Longwood’s  director,
regarding  future  plant  explorations,  Hodge  remembers
asking, “How about my going back to my roots, that is to
what started me in tropical botany of which I became a
specialist all my life and particularly of the New World
tropics? Why don’t we go and stop at all the islands that
have botanical gardens all the way down to Trinidad and
then come back?”

Seibert concurred, thus the planning for the trip to
the West Indies began. It was not until three years later,
however, that the execution of this plan became possible
and Hodge made arrangements to depart on a three-week
trip  in  late  January  of  1961.  “The  purpose  was  to  visit
public and private gardens of certain of the West Indies
and British Guiana [Guyana],” he recorded, “particularly
those gardens with which we have had established plant
exchange relations and with the idea of becoming person-
ally familiar with the materials grown at the present time
and with the officials in charge, and to make collections
of native plants of potential ornamental value observed in
the  wild,  especially  on  the  Lesser  Antillean  island  of
Dominica.  .  .  .  On  this  trip  I  was  accompanied  by  my
wife Bobbie [Barbara T. Hodge] who served in an unoffi-
cial  capacity  as  an  efficient  field  aid  helping  in  the
keeping of notes, the cleaning and packing of plant mate-
rials, etc.” (Hodge 1961b).

British possessions
“This trip in 1961 brought back very many memories of
my early work in the tropics,” recalls Hodge. “It was in
this area back in 1937, while a new botany staff member
of the Massachusetts State College, that I and my wife-to-
be, Bobbie, took the first trip to see the Lesser Antilles and
especially Dominica. My purpose was to collect material
for  a  new  course  in  economic  botany.  A  year  later,  as  a
doctoral candidate at Harvard University I began floristic
work on Dominica which was to develop into my doctoral

242

Dominica Roots

The Lesser Antilles are a chain of islands
disposed in an arc about 800 km long,
extending from Puerto Rico, the smallest
and easternmost of the Greater Antilles, to
Trinidad, off the northeastern corner of
Venezuela. Geologically the Lesser Antilles
can be divided into islands of volcanic
origin, such as Dominica, Grenada, and
Saint Lucia, and those of limestone origin,
like Barbados and Saint Croix. The climate
of these islands is tropical, although the
fairly constant northeastern trade winds
lower the prevailing temperatures. The
mountainous islands have very mild
weather year-round, especially at higher elevations and on the windward coast. The rainfall is abundant in the wet season, from June to
December, with an annual average of about 1000 mm. Higher mountain peaks receive much higher rainfall, on some islands to well more
than 6000 mm, and are frequently clad in dense clouds. Vegetation at elevations below 450 m is xerophytic, especially on the west coast.
Mountain rain forest with luxuriant, high-stemmed, broad-leaved trees is found between 450 and 750 m. Mossy forest of dwarf, wind-
twisted trees is found above 750 m; this region, known as elfin woodland or cloud forest, is subjected to almost constant mist or rain.

thesis  on  the  flora  of  this  interesting  island.  Of  all  the
Lesser  Antilles  it  was  the  most  rugged,  least  populated,
and with pristine mountains attaining nearly 1500 m in
elevation. The island was precipitous and heavily covered
with  the  finest  rain  forests  still  extant  in  the  Lesser
Antilles, if not in the whole West Indian area.”

Returning  to  the  West  Indies  in  1961,  the  Hodges
left  Philadelphia  on  20  January.  Before  reaching
Dominica they spent several days in British Guiana and
Trinidad—at  that  time,  like  Dominica,  British  posses-
sions. “Our tour was to stop at any major botanic gardens
en  route  to  Georgetown,  British  Guiana,  and  back  to
Dominica,” explains Hodge. “We hoped to find new out-
standing ornamental plants with the aid of visitations to
botanic gardens, where we could see what actual plants
were  being  grown  and  which  ones  might  be  of  use  in
Longwood conservatories or that could be grown in the
outdoor gardens during the summertime.”

The  Hodges  arrived  in  Georgetown  on  30  January.
There they visited the Botanic Garden, where Hodge was
especially interested to see the outstanding collection of
palms:  “As  the  current  president  of  the  recently  estab-
lished Palm Society at that time, I was looking not only
for palms which we could grow indoors at Longwood but
also those that might interest gardeners living in Florida,
southern California, or Hawaii.”

243

On the way to Dominica, the Hodges stopped at the Botanic
Garden in Georgetown, known for its extensive palm collection.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Around the Caribbean

Steep volcanic slopes meet the Caribbean Sea along Dominica’s west coast. Morne Anglais, 1123 m, is seen in the distance. 
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Two  days  later  the  Hodges  flew  to Trinidad. There
they toured the Botanic Garden in Port of Spain, Saint
Augustine  Nurseries,  several  private  gardens,  and  espe-
cially  the  ornamental  and  economic  plantings  at  the
Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture at Saint Augus-
tine.  “The  College,”  Hodge  explains,  “was  the  main
British  institution  for  training  botanists,  horticulturists,
and the like, for Britain’s possessions in the tropics back
before World War II. People who had received training at
Kew Gardens in England could then go and study at the
Imperial College in Trinidad. At the time of our visit it
had  become  a  unit  of  the  new  University  of  the  West
Indies, which is based in Jamaica. At Saint Augustine we
met with an old friend Dr. John Purseglove, dean of the
college, who showed us around.”

From  the  collections  maintained  at  the  Imperial
College, Hodge picked a few choice plants, including an

undetermined  species  of  Clitoria (61210),  a  herbaceous
vine with attractive, deep blue, double flowers; selections
of  Ixora (61211–3)  with  yellow,  pink,  and  dark  red
flowers; and Pachyrhizus erosus (61214), the yam-bean, an
annual  legume  with  an  edible  tuber,  grown  in  Central
America since pre-Columbian times, which he intended
to grow in Longwood’s economic plants garden.

Lofty island
“And  then  on  3  February  we  went  on  to  Dominica,”
remembers  Hodge.  “Of  course  it  was  quite  a  different
landing than in the 1930s. Back then we arrived by ship,
which anchored offshore thus requiring a launch to take
passengers to a jetty. This time we flew to the northwest
coast, where it was remarkable that they found a spot for
a new little airport.”

244

Dominica Roots

Dominica, 

located
between  Guadeloupe  and
Martinique,  is  about  45
km long and 24 km wide
with a total area of about
780  km2.  The 
island’s
rugged  mountain  ranges
run  north  to  south  and
have  numerous  precipi-
tous  peaks,  the  highest  of
them  Morne  Diablotin,
1447 m. The west-flowing
Layou,  Dominica’s  largest
river, ties in with the head-
waters  of  the  east-flowing
Pegoua  and  Castle  Bruce
rivers  to  form  the  main
east–west  valley  system
separating  the  northern
and southern peaks.

Roseau, Dominica’s capital, viewed from Morne Bruce. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

The  remarkable  fea-
ture  of  Dominica  is  its
forests: “This forest area remains intact, for, although the
companion Antillean islands, because of their compara-
tive  lowness  and  accessibility,  have  lost  much  of  their
original stands, Dominica alone has retained them. Her
loftiness  has  been  at  once  her  savior  and  the  millstone
around her neck, for, although her beauty has never aged,
she  has  had  to  sacrifice  riches  for  it  since  economically
speaking Dominica is poor. Her soil is rich, but the diffi-
culty is to cultivate soil which is situated on what are for
all intents and purposes ninety degree slopes and which
when cleared of forest become sterile and eroded away by
landslides caused by incessant rain” (Hodge 1944).

Near Roseau the Hodges found a place to stay at one
of  the  old  estates  and  rented  a  jeep,  the  best  kind  of
vehicle  to  have  on  the  narrow  roads  of  Dominica.
“Roseau,”  noted  Hodge  (1944),  “the  chief  town  of  the
island, which is little more than an overgrown village, is
tightly jammed upon the only available level ground bor-
dering the rugged Dominica coastline–a small delta hewn
from the very mountains and tumbled down to the sea
margin by the actions of Roseau’s lusty little river.”

The Hodges began the exploration of the island with
a visit to the Botanic Garden at Roseau. “Tiny Roseau has
but  one  real  attraction–her  botanic  gardens,”  wrote
Hodge (1944). “In the beauty of this well-kept English

park,  which  complements  rather  than  vies  with  the
natural  vegetation  of  the  surrounding  mountains,  one
can  find  growing  nearly  all  the  outstanding  representa-
tives  of  the  world’s  tropical  flora.  Indeed,  the  Roseau
Gardens are famed as among the best in the West Indies;
they possess particularly one of the finest palm collections
in  the  Western  Hemisphere.”  From  the  garden’s  collec-
tion, Hodge selected a number of plants, including Bar-
leria  barbata (61303),  Psychotria  ipecacuanha (61317),
and  Poitea  carinalis (61291),  the  national  flower  of
Dominica, a small endemic tree or shrub with very hand-
some, red, pealike blooms.

The leaf green of the forest
Hodge  spent  most  of  his  time  in  Dominica  collecting
wild plants from the wet mountain forests of the island’s
interior. “In such a forest almost every tree seems to be
different,”  he  wrote  (1944).  “Boles  ten  feet  [3  m]  in
diameter are common, and many of the trunks of these
giants  are  thrust  two  hundred  feet  [60  m]  into  the  air
from bases that flare like the flying buttresses of continen-
tal cathedrals. Arboreal foliage is so high above one’s head
as  to  defy  recognition,  but  from  this  canopy  drop  the
cord-like  roots  of  kaklin (Clusia),  a  common  strangling
arborescent  epiphyte.  On  the  trees  appear  numerous

245

Around the Caribbean

The Imperial Road was one of the few paved roads that provided
access to the interior of Dominica. Bobbie Hodge, pictured, is
looking towards Morne Grand Bois, 910 m. Photo by 
Walter H. Hodge.

vines,  such  as  marcgravias,  zelle  mouche (Carludovica),
which  lift  their  festooning  cables  to  the  sunlight,  while
lower  down  are  aroids  and  ferns  clutching  at  every
foothold. Beneath the trees the light is dim and ground
vegetation is never dense. A rubiaceous shrub (Cephaelis),
with tiny white flowers surrounded by waxy blue bracts,
is  most  common  living  among  colonies  of  low  ferns,
feathery selaginellas, or occasionally with various rare ter-
restrial orchids. But colorful plants are few and over all is
just the leaf green of the forest.”

At higher elevations the rain forest is replaced by elfin
or mossy forest. “One has to become an acrobat on the
uppermost  grueling  slopes  of  Dominica’s  mountains,”
warned Hodge (1944), “for here the constant trade-wind
causes the forest aspect to change. The trees are of differ-
ent  species  and  are  dwarfed,  twisted,  and  massed  in
impenetrable  and  grotesque  fashion  upon  the  steeply
pitching  slopes  in  such  a  way  that  one  can  only  make
progress  by  clambering  hand  over  hand  through  the
appressed,  dripping,  wind-blown  treetops.  Rain  here,
except  on  rare  occasions,  is  almost  incessant,  with  the
result that mosses are everywhere, covering the limbs like
cushions and spilling out water at every touch; their pres-
ence in such numbers gives to this upper region the name
mossy-forest.”

Exploring the interior
Using Roseau as his base, Hodge undertook several excur-
sions  into  the  interior  of  the  island.  Following  Roseau
River  upstream,  he  reached  the  settlement  of  Laudat,

Collecting Glomeropitcairnia penduliflora (61325), one of the
largest known epiphytic bromeliads, near the summit of Morne
Plat Pays. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

northeast of the capital. There he collected Didymopanax
attenuatum (61219),  Charianthus  purpureus var.  rugosus
(61215),  and  C.  corymbosus (61216).  Then,  east  of
Laudat, on the southern flanks of Morne Micotrin, 1221
m, he botanized near Freshwater Lake, one of only two
small  bodies  of  fresh  water  on  the  island.  Among  the
plants collected were Dryopteris consanguinea (61232), a
terrestrial  fern;  and  Guzmania  megastachya (61299),  a
bromeliad. North of Morne Micotrin, Hodge botanized
on  Morne  Trois  Pitons,  1387  m,  the  area  where  he
thought “the best pickings” on the islands could be made.
Among  the  plants  he  found  was  Renealmia  racemosa
(61220), a tall herb of the rain forest floor.

“When  I  was  collecting  plants  on  Dominica  in  the
1930s as a systematic botanist I was not concerned about

246

Dominica Roots

Bobbie Hodge holds an impressive specimen of Aechmea smithio-
rum (61297) collected near Laudat. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Heliconia caribaea (61224–6), one of the two species native to
Dominica, was collected by Hodge at Mount Joy estate. Photo by
Walter H. Hodge.

their possibilities as horticultural subjects,” recalls Hodge,
“but of course I still thought they were pretty neat so I
had remembrances of certain exceptional plants. One of
the  species  I  wanted  to  get  for  Longwood  was  a  giant
‘tank’ bromeliad, Glomeropitcairnia penduliflora (61325),
common  in  the  edge  of  elfin  forests  in  the  mountains
from about 1000 m up to the summits. I thought that,
although we may not have a greenhouse big enough to
bring this bromeliad to maturity, because its inflorescence
gets to be about 4.5 m tall, and it must be 2 m or more
in  diameter,  it  would  be  a  remarkable  plant  to  display
even in its vegetative stage with a ‘tank,’ one of which is
recorded to have held up to 20 liters of water. I knew the
easiest place to find it so went to the site on Morne Plat
Pays, 943 m, located near the southern end of the island.”

Other  bromeliads  collected  in  Dominica  included
Thecophyllum urbanianum (61296) and Aechmea smithio-
rum (61297). Hodge described the latter in his field notes:
“Leaves produced are up to 1 m long and the flower spikes
are 30–40 cm long with very attractive inflorescences with
pink  scape  bracts  and  floral  bracts  varying  from  lilac  to
orchid in color; plants readily sucker; a good species for
the  Longwood  collection  and  also  a  rare  one,  probably
never brought into cultivation before.”

“Then  we  collected  heliconias,”  remembers  Hodge.
“There  are  only  two  species  of  Heliconia native  to
Dominica, H. caribaea and H. bihai, but they are both
attractive ones. Dominica is where the first heliconia, that
is H. bihai, was described in the eighteenth century. At
Mount Joy estate I collected rhizomes of several forms of

247

Around the Caribbean

Cyathea arborea and other tree ferns are a prominent element of
Dominica’s forests and clearings. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Carib Indians of Dominica use the aerial roots of Anthurium
palmatum (61306–7) in basket weaving. Photo by 
Walter H. Hodge.

Heliconia caribaea (61224–6) reaching over 3 m high and
producing inflorescences with red or yellow bracts.”

Being  blessed  with  abundant  rainfall  and  a  gentle
climate, Dominica is home to many ferns. “Tree ferns, as
only  Dominica  can  produce  them,  predominated,”
wrote Hodge (1944), “arching over the roadway and fil-
tering  motes  of  sunlight  through  a  filigree  of  fronds.
There  are  five  kinds  of  tree  ferns  on  this  little  island
[including  a  rare  endemic  Cyathea  hodgeana discovered
by Hodge in the 1930s] plus about two hundred other
fern species, which vary from thirty-foot [9 m] arbores-
cent giants to tiny filmy epiphytes scarcely a quarter of
an inch [6 mm] high. Real variety when one considers
that  so-called  ferny  New  England  can  boast  of  a  mere
sixty odd species!” With such a wealth of ferns inhabit-

ing  the  forests,  Hodge  had  no  difficulty  assembling  an
impressive  representation,  which  included  a  tree  fern,
Trichipteris  aspera (61267);  terrestrial  species  of  Dicra-
nopteris
(61266),  Polybotrya (61261),  and  Tectaria
(61236);  and  many  epiphytes.  Of  special  note  were
many  collections  of  filmy  ferns,  such  as  Trichomanes
(61231, 61233, 61248, 61256–7) and Hymenophyllum
(61237, 61241, 61258).

In the same habitats where ferns flourished, Hodge
encountered  interesting  orchids  such  as  Jacquiniella
globosa (61270)  and  Maxillaria  coccinea (61275),  often
growing in mats of moss covering tree limbs, and anthuri-
ums such as Anthurium cordifolium (61308), A. domini-
cense (61305,  61312),  A.  lucidum (61309–10),  and  A.
palmatum (61306–7). The decorticated, dyed aerial roots

248

Not Enough Time Here

Hodge and George J. W. Ford, gardener at Longwood, inspect bromeliads brought back from Dominica. Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

of  A.  palmatum have  been  used  by  Dominica’s  Carib
Indians in basket weaving.

After ten days of exploring Dominica, Hodge’s col-
lections  exceeded  one  hundred.  With  plants,  rhizomes,
and seeds carefully cleaned and packed, the Hodges left
Dominica  on  13  February  and  returned  to  the  United
States.  They  made  a  brief  stop  in  Miami  to  visit  the
Fairchild  Tropical  Garden,  hoping  to  pick  up  a  few
palms.  One  of  them,  Chamaedorea  ernesti-augusti
(61302), is still displayed in Longwood’s conservatories.

NOT ENOUGH TIME HERE

The  islands  of  Lesser  Antilles  support  floristic  diversity
beyond  what  could  be  expected  on  such  small  land-
masses. Plants of the Lesser Antilles have affinities with

those  in  the  Greater  Antilles,  Central  America,  and
northern  South  America.  Seibert  was  well  acquainted
with flora of Hispaniola in the Greater Antilles through
his work in 1940 on the USDA’s rubber survey, intended
to  identify  areas  suitable  for  rubber  production  in  the
Caribbean  and  in  Central  and  South  America.  He  was
acutely aware of the richness of the Caribbean flora and
its  potential  usefulness  for  Longwood’s  conservatory
exhibits. Therefore, six years after Hodge’s expedition to
Dominica, Seibert planned another trip to explore several
other Antillean islands.

Bearded island
The island of Barbados was originally named Los Barba-
dos by Spanish sailors, in reference to the “bearded” aerial
roots of Ficus citrifolia commonly seen there. It is a coral
island, some 34 km long by 20 km wide, generally level

249

Around the Caribbean

but with small hills in the central part, the highest point
of which is Mount Hillaby, 336 m. Seibert, accompanied
by his wife, Isabelle, arrived in Barbados on 27 December
1967. Upon landing in Bridgetown, the two were greeted
by Anthony Hunte, president of the Barbados Horticul-
tural  Society,  with  a  huge  bouquet  of Ixora macrothyrsa.
Ixora enjoys  great  popularity  among  gardeners  in  the
southern Caribbean, and many selections have been devel-
oped there from wild plants brought from Southeast Asia.
On 28 December the Seiberts drove to Bathsheba on
the  windward  east  coast  of  Barbados.  As  they  traveled
along the coast, Russell Seibert observed the regeneration
of  the  West  Indian  mahogany,  Swietenia  mahogani, on
steep hills where it was exposed to strong winds and sub-
jected to rapid erosion. This was part of the soil conser-
vation  efforts  on  the  island.  In  Bathsheba  they  visited
Andromeda Gardens, the private garden and nursery of
Iris and John Bannochie. Andromeda contains what is, in
Barbados, by far the largest collection of tropical plants
from  around  the  world,  assembled  over  many  years
through the efforts of the Bannochies.

Seibert explained to his hosts at Andromeda that his
interest  was  primarily  in  “ornamental  plants,  but  also
such plants as have both ornamental and other usefulness
to  man,  whether  it  be  agricultural,  horticultural,  or
medicinal” (R. J. Seibert 1967b). He was convinced that
“plants with interesting stories and background of histor-
ical  interest  are  always  of  interest  to  the  public  and
worthy of display in our horticultural displays at Long-
wood  Gardens.”  Iris  Bannochie  suggested  he  explore
Welchman  Hall  Gully.  Created  by  collapsed  limestone
caverns, the gully is a cool, lush ravine receiving dense fog
due to its topographic orientation. Preserved by the Bar-
bados  National  Trust,  this  densely  wooded  area,  filled
with a tremendous variety of plants, represents what Bar-
bados looked like before settlers arrived on the island in
1627. In Welchman Hall Gully, the Seiberts were shown
breadfruit trees, Artocarpus altilis, introduced to the New
World  from  Polynesia  by  the  French  before  1790.
Although  this  tree  never  fulfilled  the  original  hopes  of
becoming a major food source, its fruits are still eaten on
Barbados  and  other  Antillean  islands.  After  an  eventful
day,  Seibert  found  time  to  scribble  back  to  Longwood
only  a  brief  note:  “Too  many  things  of  interest—not
enough time here” (1967c).

This bouquet of Ixora macrothyrsa was presented to the Seiberts
upon their landing in Bridgetown. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Iris and John Bannochie hosted the Seiberts at the Andromeda
Gardens in Barbados. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Standing under trees of Tabebuia leucoxylon in Welchman Hall
Gully in Barbados are, left to right, Peter Webster, Iris Bannochie,
Isabelle Seibert, and John Bannochie. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

250

Not Enough Time Here

Burris welcomed the Seiberts to Saint George’s Botanic Garden,
Grenada. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

west side of the island, the Seiberts took a road that, after
a curvy and steep climb, led them over a volcanic crest
and through a lush forest filled with tree ferns.

In Saint George’s the Seiberts were greeted by Neville
Burris of the local Botanic Garden, who over the next two
days showed them around the island. While botanizing in
coastal  plant  communities  they  stopped  near  Grande
Anse Beach, south of the capital, where Seibert collected
seeds of two small trees, a yellow-flowered Suriana mar-
itima (68115)  of  “excellent  landscape  value,”  as  he
recorded in the field notes, and Agati grandiflora (68111),
with  showy,  pendant,  pink  flowers.  On  31  December,
Burris  took  the  Seiberts  to  the  Botanic  Garden,  which
covered three verdant hectares in Saint George’s. The vis-
itors  were  enticed  with  what  Isabelle  Seibert  (1968)
described  as  the  garden’s  “impressive”  entrance.  Burris
also  accompanied  the  couple  to  several  fine  private
gardens laid out in the hills above the town.

Oldest in the hemisphere
Two days later the couple left Grenada for Saint Vincent,
a little more than 100 km to the north. This volcanic and
mountainous island is slightly smaller than Grenada and
Barbados, 30 km in length and 18 km in width, but it
exceeds both in altitude, with its highest point, Soufriére,
reaching  1234  m.  It  is  noted  for  its  Botanic  Garden  in
Kingstown, a well-planted 8 hectares with beautiful views
of the sea. Founded in 1765, this garden is the oldest in
the Western Hemisphere.

The  garden’s  director,  Con  de  Freitas,  characterized
by  Isabelle  Seibert  (1968)  as  a  “perpetual  conversant,”
was exceptionally helpful in assisting the Seiberts in their

Breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis, bears round, chartreuse fruits, warty
in appearance and up to 20 cm in diameter, throughout the year.
Breadfruit trees have been grown in various greenhouses in the
United States for many years, but it was not until 1970 that the
first of them, planted in Longwood’s Palm House ten years 
earlier, bore fruits. The fruit set was so heavy that one witness
compared them to “ornaments on a Christmas tree.” Photo by
Russell J. Seibert.

The Spice Island
The following morning the Seiberts had to depart Barba-
dos on a flight southeast to Grenville, Grenada. Although
similar  in  size  to  Barbados—34  km  long  by  20  km
wide—Grenada is in other ways quite different. This is a
heavily  wooded,  volcanic  island,  largely  mountainous,
with the highest point being Mount Saint Catherine, 840
m. Plantations on the island are conglomerates of banana,
cocoa, and breadfruit. Widely cultivated nutmeg, cloves,
ginger,  and  cinnamon  earned  Grenada  its  status  as  the
Spice Island. To reach Saint George’s, the capital on the

251

Around the Caribbean

Purchas and his anthurium-growing establishment at Morne
Grande in Saint Lucia. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

There are more than a hundred species of Mucuna, both in the
Old World and the New World, and many have beautiful flowers.
Mucuna bennettii from New Guinea, shown here, is reputed to be
the showiest of all tropical climbers. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

The Seiberts in Saint Thomas. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

botanizing on the island. “We certainly had a marvelous
opportunity  of  seeing  Saint  Vincent  through  Con  de
Freitas,”  reminisced  Russell  Seibert  (1968a).  A  terrific
travel  companion,  de  Freitas  generously  shared  many
plants from the Botanic Garden. Among them were Heli-
conia  bihai (68765),  a  form  with  bracts  entirely  yellow
rather  than  the  typical  scarlet;  Quamoclit  coccinea
(68112), with scarlet salverform flowers; and Petrea volu-
bilis var.  albiflora (69591),  producing  starlike  white
flowers  borne  in  erect  racemes  some  30  cm  long.  One
plant, however, the elusive Mucuna rostrata (69527), cap-
tivated  Seibert  more  than  others.  This  large  woody
climber, native to Trinidad, Panama, and northern South
America, blooms with spectacular flame-colored flowers
that resemble enormous sweet peas arranged in hanging

racemes some 20 cm long. The plant is reputed to be very
shy  about  fruiting  and  producing  seeds.  It  is  easy  to
imagine, therefore, how thrilled Seibert was when several
months later he received a packet containing six seeds and
a letter from de Freitas: “The Mucuna, much to my sur-
prise, fruited. I was told that it never did in Trinidad, but
it produced about four pods here” (1969).

On 9 January the Seiberts said their farewells to de
Freitas and flew to Saint Lucia. There they visited Guy
and  Mary  Purchas  at  Morne  Grande,  who  grew
Anthurium on  16  hectares  and  shipped  cut  flowers  to
England and Canada. They also toured George V Park,
which in 1936 replaced a former botanical garden. Two
days later the couple left Saint Lucia for Fort-de-France in
Martinique,  about  50  km  to  the  north.  The  island’s

252

Not Enough Time Here

Looking out to Buck’s Island from the eastern point of Saint Croix. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

scenery is dominated by Montagne Pelée, a volcano 1397
m above sea level. Martinique does not have a botanical
garden,  but  the  Seiberts  decided  to  pay  a  visit  to Trois
Ilets, birthplace of French Empress Josephine.

Virgin Islands
Several days later the Seiberts found themselves in Saint
Croix, an island only 32 km long and 8 km wide and yet
the  largest  of  the  Virgin  Islands.  At  the  airport  a  plant
inspector  gave  Seibert  a  hard  time  with  his  plant  press
and  luggage  filled  with  cuttings  and  seeds.  Luckily,
Seibert’s  Longwood  card  “turned  the  trick,”  as  Isabelle
Seibert  (1968)  recalled,  so  the  couple  could  continue
with their visit as planned.

Saint  Croix  is  largely  level,  with  only  small  hills
stretching along its north coast, of which the highest is
Mount Eagle at 345 m. These hills are not high enough

above  sea  level  to  cool  and  condense  the  atmospheric
moisture  brought  on  by  the  trade  wind;  therefore  they
receive a comparatively smaller amount of rain than the
volcanic islands to the south. One day the couple char-
tered a launch to go to Buck’s Island, only a few kilome-
ters off the north coast of Saint Croix, the site of a reef
national monument. On the morning of 16 January, the
Seiberts  started  with  a  brief  flight  to  Saint Thomas,  an
island some 60 km north of Saint Croix. In the afternoon
they  continued  to  San  Juan,  Puerto  Rico,  and  then  to
Mayagüez on the west end of the island, where a USDA
research station is situated, to present a seminar there.

Two  days  later  the  couple  returned  to  San  Juan  to
stop at Pennock Gardens, a well-established nursery run
by Charles F. Pennock, where Seibert acquired an unde-
termined  Tillandsia (68107)  and  Dioscorea  bulbifera
(68114), “a curiosity vine with small ‘potatoes’ develop-

253

Around the Caribbean

In the 1930s, Seibert was a young aspiring botanist
studying  at  Washington  University  in  Saint  Louis.
Bignoniaceae,  comprising  more  than  a  hundred  genera
and seven hundred species, appealed to him as a subject
of taxonomic studies. Once armed with a master’s degree
in  botany,  Seibert  accepted  a  fellowship  at  the  Arnold
Arboretum of Harvard University and chose this family
as his topic of investigation. The result was the publica-
tion in 1940 of “The Bignoniaceae of the Maya Area,” in
which  Seibert  proposed  a  new  genus,  Scobinaria, and
two  new  species,  Cydista  heterophylla and  Chodanthus
puberulus.

All squared and planted
Seibert’s  extensive  knowledge  of  Bignoniaceae  found  a
new  application  in  1955  when  he  took  on  the  role  of
director at Longwood Gardens. Over the years, Seibert,
impressed by the beauty of these plants, acquired many of
the  most  decorative  species  for  trial  and  use  in  the
garden’s conservatories. As part of this effort, in February
of 1967 he organized a brief excursion to collect Bignon-
iaceae in Yucatán, Mexico’s Maya area, the very same area
he  had  focused  on  in  the  article  he  wrote  twenty-seven
years before.

On the early morning of 8 February, Seibert, accom-
panied by Isabelle, rented a taxi in McAllen, Texas, and
crossed the Rio Grande to reach the town of Reynosa on
the Mexican side. A two-hour flight took the couple over
the Gulf of Mexico from Reynosa to Mérida in Yucatán.
From the air Yucatán seemed “all squared and planted to
corn and wheat” (I. L. Seibert 1967), but soon the Seib-
erts noticed countless yellow Tabebuia chrysantha, a tree
native to mountain forests from Mexico to Venezuela, “a
conspicuous and brilliant bloomer, flowering before the
leaves” (R. J. Seibert 1940).

Before  long  they  were  on  the  road  heading  out  of
Mérida east to Chichén Itzá, a site of Mayan ruins. The
couple was enthralled to see along the road pink Tabebuia
pentaphylla. “So  gorgeous,”  Isabelle  Seibert  said  of  the
tree in full bloom (1967). “Being one of the best known
and  useful  trees  in  Central  America,”  wrote  Russell
Seibert  in  his  1940  article,  “T.  pentaphylla presents  an
unrivaled beauty in the spring months when the trees are
covered  with  their  pale  pinkish  purple  to  almost  white
flowers.”  Before  reaching  Chichén  Itzá,  Russell  Seibert
spotted blazing orange-red flowers of Spathodea campan-
ulata, another arboreal member of Bignoniaceae, native

A Mexican species, Chodanthus puberulus (58159), named by
Seibert in 1940, was grown in Longwood’s conservatories for
nearly thirty years. Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

ing along the climbing stems,” as he recorded in his field
notes.  The  Seiberts  returned  to  Philadelphia  on  21
January  after  a  nearly  month-long  trip,  bringing  back
treasured  suitcases  full  of  herbarium  specimens,  live
plants, and seeds, but also their unforgettable memories.
“What more could we ask?” wrote Isabelle Seibert after
the trip (1968).

PLANT HUNTING ON MAYAN GROUNDS

It  is  easy  to  understand  why  one  might  have  a  lifelong
admiration  for  the  many  plants  of  the  family  Bignoni-
aceae. Writing in 1948, Seibert noted that several genera
of this family “are important in the lumber industry of
tropical regions,” while “many others hold unlimited hor-
ticultural possibilities.” In the neotropics, many species of
Tabebuia are  considered  among  the  most  important
timber trees. South American Jacaranda mimosifolia may
well be the world’s most widely planted ornamental trop-
ical tree. Spathodea campanulata, native to tropical Africa,
follows  closely  in  popularity.  Podranea  ricasoliana and
Pyrostegia venusta, both from Africa, are among the most
widely  cultivated  vines.  The  same  could  be  said  about
Campsis radicans in temperate regions. The popularity of
several species of Tabebuia led to their election in many
Latin  American  countries  as  their  national  tree  or
national  flower:  T.  rosea in  El  Salvador,  T.  billbergii in
Venezuela,  T.  serratifolia in  Brazil,  and  T.  chrysantha in
Ecuador.

254

Plant Hunting on Mayan Grounds

Yucatán belongs floristically to the
Caribbean region of the Neotropical
kingdom. It is subject to a warm, humid
climate that supports very rich plant life.
The territory of the peninsula comprises
the Mexican states of Campeche,
Yucatán, and Quintana Roo, as well as
Belize and the northern section of
Guatemala. It separates the Gulf of
Mexico from the Caribbean Sea. The
northern part of the peninsula is a
uniform, almost level plain, but further
south the terrain undulates, alternating
between depressions and low hills of less
than 300 m in elevation. In the north the
average rainfall is about 800 mm. The
wet months are June to October, fol-
lowed by a prolonged dry season. The
southern part of the peninsula receives
substantially higher rainfall. Among the
most striking features of Yucatán is the absence of surface streams. The limestone forming most of the Yucatán is so porous and the surface
so level that rainwater sinks below the surface, where it forms underground reservoirs called cenotes. In the northern plains, the land,
where not under cultivation, is covered with bush and scrubby woods, with only sporadic large trees or palms. Many plants are spiny and
deciduous during the dry season. In the central and southern parts of the peninsula, the heavier rainfall supports extensive dense forests.
By its floristic features, Yucatán is sharply differentiated from the rest of Central America and more closely related to Cuba and other
islands of the Antilles. The number of species indigenous to Yucatán, some twelve hundred, is relatively low when compared to other parts
of Central America, but it has a surprisingly large number of endemic species, estimated at about 17 percent.

to tropical Africa but extensively planted throughout the
tropics as an ornamental and a shade tree.

Climbers of the Mayan ruins
The  next  morning  the  couple  went  to  the  site  of  the
Chichén  Itzá  ruins  by  way  of  an  ancient  Mayan  road,
which  stretched  between  a  massive  pyramid,  called  El
Castillo,  and  a  large  sinkhole  used  in  sacrificial  cere-
monies,  called  Cenote-Sagrado.  Along  this  road  Seibert
found a whole wealth of botanical treasures belonging to
the Bignoniaceae and offering flowers in shades of purple,
rose,  lavender,  and  pink:  Amphilophium  paniculatum
(6781),  Arrabidaea  chica (6775),  A.  floribunda (6782),
Cydista  diversifolia (6786),  and  Neomacfadya  podopogon
(6779–80),  all  woody  vines.  Cydista  diversifolia, wide-
spread in thickets and forests from Mexico to Venezuela
and the West Indies, is closely related to C. heterophylla, a
species named by Seibert in 1940.

On 13 February the Seiberts drove from Chichén Itzá
back to Mérida and, after a brief stop to replace a flat tire,

255

Seibert spotted blazing orange-red flowers of Spathodea campanu-
lata near Chichén Itzá in Yucatán. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Around the Caribbean

Around Cenote-Sagrado, a large sinkhole used for sacrificial ceremonies in Chichén Itzá, Seibert found
a number of woody vines of the family Bignoniaceae. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

A typical Mayan homestead on the plains around Muna. Photo by
Walter H. Hodge.

Among the Mayan ruins at Uxmal, Seibert found Onohualcoa 
fissa (6784) and Amphilophium paniculatum (6774), woody
bignoniaceous vines. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

continued  north  to  Dzibilchaltún,  a  site  of  one  of  the
main  Mayan  settlements  on  the  Yucatán  Peninsula.  In
Dzibilchaltún, in dry, rocky scrub forest, Russell Seibert
found an undetermined species of Cassia (6777), a small
tree  about  8  m  tall,  covered  abundantly  with  attractive
yellow flowers. In the afternoon the couple set a course
for Uxmal, south of Mérida. The apparent monotony of
the  plains  stretching  along  the  road  was  broken  only

once, as they drove over “one low mountain range that
juts  up  from  the  flatness  around  Muna”  (I.  L.  Seibert
1967).

The  following  morning,  in  Uxmal,  the  Seiberts
explored the ruins of one of the largest Mayan cities. Along
the edge of the bush surrounding the ruins, Russell Seibert
collected  two  members  of  Bignoniaceae,  both  woody
climbers some 8 to 10 m tall. One was Onohualcoa fissa

256

Retracing Costa Rican Trails

Bordered to the north by Nicaragua and to the east by Panama,
Costa Rica has both Caribbean and Pacific coasts and is split down
the center by a volcanic mountain chain of the Continental Divide.
The highest point is Chirripó Grande, 3819 m, in the Cordillera de
Talamanca. With a little more than 50,000 km2, Costa Rica covers
only 0.03 percent of the earth’s surface, but it contains approxi-
mately 6 percent of the world’s biodiversity. Its flora is estimated to
include more than nine thousand species of flowering plants and
eight hundred ferns. Most of Costa Rica’s land area was once
covered by forest vegetation. The savannalike areas seen today
resulted from clear-cuttings for farming and cattle ranching. The
types of forest found throughout the country are determined by the
amount of rainfall and its distribution, and by changes in tempera-
ture associated with elevation. They range from the dry, deciduous,
scrubby forest in the northwest to the constantly wet, lowland rain
forest of the eastern shore and lowlands, to the oak-dominated
cloud forest of the high Cordillera de Talamanca.

(6784),  producing  lavender  flowers  marked  by  white
throats,  an  “excellent  subject  for  conservatory  display—
spectacular!”  as  Seibert  recorded  in  his  field  notes.  The
other was Amphilophium paniculatum (6774), seen previ-
ously  in  Chichén  Itzá.  He  also  found  Petrea  arborea, a
woody vine with light blue flowers, and Erythrina ameri-
cana (6778), a small tree with soft pink flowers, growing
on rocky limestone rubble. Further south from Uxmal was
yet another ancient Mayan settlement, Kabáh, which the
couple reached in the afternoon. Seibert browsed through
the scrub forest surrounding the ruins to find again two
examples  of  bignoniaceous  vines:  Cydista  diversifolia
(6787) and Arrabidaea floribunda (6785).

Back  in  Uxmal,  Seibert  decided  to  continue
botanizing  in  the  nearby  dense  scrub  woods  the  next
morning. He returned from this plant hunt with several
trophies. Among them were two bignoniaceous climbers
seen previously, Arrabidaea floribunda (6776) and Ono-
hualcoa fissa (6773). He also found Pithecoctenium echi-
natum, a  white-flowered  vine,  for  which  the  local
inhabitants  found  a  multitude  of  applications.  “The
spiny valves of the capsules are used as combs,” recorded
Seibert  (1940).  “The  slender,  long  branches  are  very
strong  and  are  used  for  tying  braces,  etc.,  in  the  con-
struction of huts. It is reported that the Maya use the
seeds  as  a  remedy  for  headache  by  moistening  and
applying  them  to  the  forehead  or  temples.”  Having
gathered  enough  seeds  and  filled  the  herbarium  press
with  specimens,  Seibert  left  Uxmal  with  Isabelle  and

headed  north  to  Mérida.  From  Mérida  the  couple
departed for Philadelphia on 18 February.

RETRACING COSTA RICAN TRAILS

“I really look forward to seeing some of the Costa Rican
country and plant life which I never had a chance to see
during our two years at Turrialba during 1948 and 1949
.  .  .  just  twenty  years  ago!”  wrote  Seibert  (1968b)  to
Robert G. Wilson of San Vito de Java, his friend of many
years,  who  established  Jardín  Botánico  Wilson  in  Las
Cruces, Costa Rica.

The  two-year  assignment  to  which  he  referred  had
begun in early December of 1947, when Seibert, at that
time  a  geneticist  for  the  USDA  Office  of  Rubber  Plant
Investigations, arrived at a rubber station called La Hulera,
situated  outside  the  small  village  of  Turrialba.  At  the
station  Seibert  evaluated  clonal  rubber  selections  from
outstanding  trees  that  had  been  collected  by  various
explorers in South America, including those he had dis-
covered a few years earlier in the Peruvian region of Madre
de Dios. The superior clones were ultimately transported
to Africa to improve the large rubber plantation there.

The tropics in the scope
The  years  Seibert  spent  working  in  Central  and  South
America  helped  him  develop  a  deep  appreciation  for
floras  of  tropical  regions. Twenty  years  after  his  assign-

257

Around the Caribbean

Chamaedorea sp. (6952), a “very dwarf” palm collected by Seibert
in Wilson’s garden. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

students  and  staff  to  undertake  a  tropical  horticultural
study tour in that country.

Seibert  arrived  in  San  José  on  22  January  and  the
same  day  met  with  Campabadal. The  Organization  for
Tropical  Studies,  which  Campabadal  represented,  is  a
consortium of universities and research institutions from
the  United  States,  Latin  America,  and  Australia  that  in
1963  forged  working  relationships  with  colleagues  in
Costa Rica for the purpose of education and research in
tropical  biology.  Among  other  functions,  it  provides
opportunity  for  graduate  and  undergraduate  education,
facilitates  research,  and  maintains  biological  stations  in
Costa Rica.

The Wilsons’ garden
Seibert’s primary destination for this trip was San Vito de
Java, some 300 km southeast of San José near the border
of Panama. A few kilometers south of this town was Las
Cruces, where Robert and Catherine Wilson had devel-
oped  their  own  private  botanic  garden.  The  Wilsons
began creating their garden in 1961 on what used to be a
cattle pasture and an abandoned coffee plantation. By the
time of Seibert’s visit, they had already managed to amass
a very large and diverse collection of tropical plants from
around  the  world,  possibly  the  richest  botanical  collec-
tion of its kind in Central America. After a twelve-hour
drive from San José, Seibert reached Las Cruces on the
evening of 26 January.

Filled with excitement and armed with a field note-
book and seed bags, Seibert rose early the next morning
to  begin  exploring  the  Wilsons’  collection.  Among  his

Robert and Catherine Wilson, founders of Jardín Botánico Wilson
in Las Cruces near San Vito de Java. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

ment at La Hulera, while drafting a curriculum for the
graduate program in public garden management initiated
by Longwood Gardens and the University of Delaware—
the first such program in the United States—he came to
the conclusion that “no comprehensive advanced degree
training  program  in  horticulture  and  botanical  garden
management  can  afford  to  overlook  the  tropics  in  its
scope” (Seibert 1968c).

With this in mind, Seibert decided to use his 1969
plant-collecting trip to Costa Rica as an opportunity to
explore  possibilities  for  providing  Longwood  students
with  experience  in  the  tropics.  He  planned  to  meet  in
Costa  Rica  with  Dr.  Armando  Samper,  director  of  the
Instituto  Inter-Americano  de  Ciencias  Agrícolas,  and
Jorge R. Campabadal, resident director of the Organiza-
tion  for  Tropical  Studies,  to  discuss  arrangements  that
would  provide  an  opportunity  for  Longwood  graduate

258

Retracing Costa Rican Trails

in  bright 

long list of “trophies” were
Costus stenophyllus (6955),
native to Costa Rica, pro-
ducing pale yellow flowers
borne 
red,
conical 
inflorescences;
Columnea  florida (6954),
with leaves marked by two
red  “eyes”  underneath,
which  Seibert  wanted  to
“grow in a basket and look
up  at”;  Piper  auritum
(6959),  known  as  anisillo
because  it  “has  odor  of
anise”; and Coriaria thymi-
folia (69726), a shrub with
ferny  foliage  and  long,
pendant  racemes  tightly
covered  with  tiny  black
berries, which, “although quite attractive, do not look in
the least edible” (Wilson 1969).

The valley of Río Reventazón near Paraíso, between Cartago and Turrialba. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

In the garden Seibert also collected two good forms
of  Calathea  crotalifera, native  to  Costa  Rica  (6950–1).
The 3 m high C. crotalifera produces flowers hidden by
large, brightly colored bracts, densely arranged and over-
lapping. The  bracts  are  typically  yellow,  but  green  and
bronze forms are known. Found from Mexico to Bolivia,
this  plant  is  commonly  referred  to  as  rattlesnake  plant
because its inflorescences resemble rattles.

Many  plants  growing  in  the  Wilsons’  garden  were
collected  by  Robert  Wilson  himself  during  his  plant-
hunting  excursions  throughout  Costa  Rica.  Some  of
them  were  of  undetermined  identity,  or  possibly  previ-
ously unknown. Those that interested Seibert particularly
were  orchids,  Calanthe sp.  (6949)  with  large,  dark  rose
flowers, and Sobralia sp. (6948), a diminutive plant with
unusually  large  flowers;  as  well  as  undetermined  native
palms, Chamaedorea sp. (6952), “very dwarf,” one of the
smallest  palms,  and  Euterpe sp.  (6956)  once  abundant
but recently “being destroyed for use as palm heart salad,”
as Seibert recorded in his field notes.

En route to Turrialba
On 28 January, Seibert said farewells to his gracious and
generous hosts in Las Cruces and departed for Golfito, a
town on the coast of Golfo Dulce. There he stopped to

259

see  banana  plantations  of  the  United  Fruit  Company.
Near  Golfito  he  found  Brownea  macrophylla (6948),  a
small leguminous tree producing large, pufflike, globose
heads of scarlet flowers on the main trunk and branches,
a phenomenon called cauliflory.

After spending a night in Golfito, Seibert set off on
an eight-hour drive to Turrialba, situated in the valley of
Río Reventazón, east of San José. While traveling on the
Pan-American  Highway  between  Buenos  Aires  and  San
Isidro  de  El  General,  in  Puntarenas  Province,  Seibert
made a stop to botanize on the surrounding hills. There
he  found  Socratea  durissima (6966),  known  as  walking
palm because of its prominent stilt roots.

In Turrialba, Seibert visited the Instituto Inter-Amer-
icano de Ciencias Agrícolas, where he consulted Samper
about the planned study tour for Longwood graduate stu-
dents.  The  institute,  founded  in  1942,  has  the  main
purpose  of  advancing  agriculture  in  the  region  through
research and modernization. Turrialba, strategically situ-
ated between South and North America, was chosen as its
headquarters. Dr. Arnold L. Erickson, assistant coordina-
tor, showed Seibert the research facilities and trial areas,
including an extensive orchid collection. At the institute,
Seibert collected an unusual small-leaved form of coffee
bush, Coffea arabica var. mirta (6953), which he thought
had possibilities as an ornamental plant for Longwood’s
conservatories.  He  also  collected  two  palms:  Aiphanes

Around the Caribbean

Clusters of ripe fruits of Bactris gasipaes are offered for sale at a
local market in Cartago. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Slender trunks of Bactris gasipaes (6957) are prominently ringed
and feature fearsome spines. Seibert collected seeds of this palm 
in Turrialba. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

caryotaefolia (6958),  a  slender,  spiny  species  producing
fragrant  flowers  followed  by  brilliant  red  fruits,  and
Bactris gasipaes (6957), widely cultivated in tropical coun-
tries for its edible fruits.

A couple of days later, upon his return to San José,
Seibert  boarded  a  train  for  a  six-hour  ride  to  Puerto
Limón on the Caribbean Sea coast of Costa Rica. In the
swamps  near  Limón,  Seibert  spotted  a  palm,  Raphia
taedigera, locally known as yolillo, but he was unable to
obtain its seeds at that time. Raphia is one of only two
genera  of  palms,  the  other  being  Elaeis, that  occurs  in
both the Americas and Africa. The leaves of Raphia are
the longest of any flowering plant, and those of R. regalis
can reach 25 m long. The Costa Rican R. taedigera has
leaves only about half this size.

260

Erickson showed Seibert a collection of orchids held at the Insti-
tuto Inter-Americano de Ciencias Agrícolas in Turrialba. Photo by
Russell J. Seibert.

Graduates in the Tropics

Back in San José on 3
February,  Seibert  met
again with Campabadal to
finalize  details  for  the
Longwood study tour. He
also  inquired  about  the
possibility  of  finding  a
source for Raphia taedigera
in  Limón.  Campabadal’s
response,  which  came  a
few  months  after  Seibert’s
return  to  Longwood,  was
more than encouraging: “I
have a good friend, Gover-
nor Solé of Limón, who is
an  ardent  amateur  horti-
culturist, and I am sure the
Governor  will  cooperate”
(Campabadal 
1969).
Indeed, thanks to the gov-
ernor, 
in  February  of
1970,  seeds  of  Raphia
arrived at Longwood.

On  his  last  day  in
Costa  Rica, 
Seibert,
accompanied  by  Cam-
pabadal and Dr. Rafael L. Rodriguez, head of the Biology
Department  at  the  Universidad  de  Costa  Rica,  visited
several  parks  in  San  José  and  the  garden  of  Charles  H.
Lankester  in  Cartago,  outside  San  José.  Don  Carlos,  as
Lankester became known in Costa Rica, then ninety years
old, showed the botanists around his garden and gener-
ously  allowed  Seibert  to  collect  many  plants,  including
Anthurium  subsignatum (70760),  Begonia  pustulata
(6947), and a couple of Rhipsalis species (6961–2).

On 5 February, Seibert departed for Philadelphia car-
rying with him twenty-eight new plants for Longwood’s
conservatories.  In  retrospect,  however,  more  important
was the fact that this trip set the stage for the launching of
tropical internships in Costa Rica as an integral part of the
Longwood Graduate Program, which over the course of
more  than  thirty  years  trained  many  future  leaders  who
shaped  the  field  of  public  horticulture  in  the  United
States.

Lankester came to Costa Rica from England in early 1900 to work on coffee plantations. A few years
later he turned his attention to collecting specimens of Costa Rican flora and fauna for some of the
leading naturalists of that period. Lankester’s contribution was recognized in 1923 when a newly 
discovered genus of orchids was named Lankesterella. In 1921, Lankester began to build a garden on
10 hectares of his Las Cóncavas property, which over the years grew to become one of the main 
destinations for all naturalists visiting Costa Rica. After Lankester’s death in 1969, the garden was 
purchased by the American Orchid Society and the Stanley Smith Horticultural Trust, and donated 
to the Universidad de Costa Rica. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

GRADUATES IN THE TROPICS

Four months after Seibert’s reconnaissance trip, the first
group  of  Longwood  Program  graduates—Ronald  C.
Bauman,  William  U.  Massey,  and  Gary  G.  Gerlach—
headed to Costa Rica, led by Dr. Donald G. Huttleston,
Longwood’s taxonomist, and Dr. Donald F. Crossan, pro-
fessor of the University of Delaware. The group flew to
San José on 11 June and the same day visited the Univer-
sidad de Costa Rica, where they met with Campabadal
and Rodriguez.

Unbelievable epiphytes
With no time to spare, Crossan, Huttleston, and the stu-
dents left the capital for San Vito de Java early the next
morning. “We drove south through the mountains on so-
called  Pan-American  Highway,”  noted  Crossan  (1969).
“The  road  was  very  poor,  mostly  unpaved  and  often
barely passable. We stopped over the course of the eleven-
hour drive at various altitudes to botanize and collect soil
and plant specimens.” Despite countless potholes, mud,

261

Around the Caribbean

Huttleston, Longwood’s taxonomist, led the 1969 trip to Costa
Rica. Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

rock slides, and fords across turbulent streams, the team
enjoyed the excellent weather and superb scenery. Some
300 km later they arrived at Las Cruces and the garden of
Robert and Catherine Wilson.

“The  next  six  days  were  spent  botanizing  in  and
around Las Cruces,” reported Huttleston (1969b). “One
walking  trip  was  made  to  a  cloud  forest  about  4  miles
[6.5 km] distant, and on 15 June, we drove about 5 miles
[8  km]  north  to  Sabalito  to  see  a  large  jungle  logging
operation owned by Vincent Lopez. We were somewhat
encumbered  during  this  period  by  heavy  rains  which
began  between  one  and  two  every  afternoon  and  not
infrequently continued into the night.”

Las Cruces was the high point of the trip for all par-
ticipants,  but  no  one  exalted  the  flora  there  more  than
Gerlach  (1969):  “Because  of  my  interest  in  epiphytic
plants,  and  more  particularly  orchids,  the  mountainous
areas with heavy rainfall and the cloud forest were unbe-
lievable.  .  .  .  The  ecosystems  that  developed  on  the
various  trees  were  beyond  my  comprehension—the
species of trees, varieties of mosses and lichens, and the
plants of higher orders that were involved. . . . And what
epiphytes! Never had I thought of an epiphyte as being
another tree but we saw clusias that must have been 20
feet [6 m] tall and growing roots 40–60 feet [12–18 m]
down to the soil.”

From  the  Wilsons’  garden,  Huttleston  procured  a
whole  array  of  plants.  Among  them  were  bromeliads,
including  Guzmania  sanguinea (69629)  and  Orthophy-
tum vagans (69632); gesneriads, such as Trichantha pur-
pureovittata (69628) and Hypocyrta sp. (69630); and an

The Wilsons’ home on the hill at Las Cruces, seen through the
fronds of tree ferns. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

epiphytic  cactus,  Rhipsalis  pachyptera (69635).  In  addi-
tion  to  plants  from  the  Wilsons’  collection,  Huttleston
himself collected a few around San Vito de Java, includ-
ing  Gynandropsis  pulcherrima (69621)  of  Capparaceae
and  ferns  such  as  Gleichenia sp.  (69620)  and  Pteris
altissima (69636).

Mystified by a parasite
On  19  June,  after  saying  farewells  to  the  Wilsons,  “we
drove  down  to  the  Pacific  coast  at  Golfito,”  recorded
Huttleston (1969b), “and were guided to Coto where we
inspected banana plantations and a processing plant. In
the afternoon we drove to Palmar Sur and were put up in
United  Fruit  Company  guest  houses.”  The  following
morning the group took off on a long drive to Turrialba.
On the way they stopped several times to collect plants

262

Graduates in the Tropics

An undetermined Bomarea (69625) found by Huttleston on Cerro
de la Muerte. Photo by Donald G. Huttleston.

Sugar cane delivered by a bullock cart to a mill near Turrialba.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

and observe plant associations in San Isidro de El General
Valley and the mountains of Cerro de la Muerte. Along
the highest stretch of the road through the mountains, at
about  3200  m,  Huttleston  collected  seeds  of  undeter-
mined species of Bomarea (69625) and Oxalis (69633).

The group reached the Instituto Inter-Americano de
Ciencias Agrícolas in Turrialba in the evening. The next
morning Erickson and Edilberto Camacho, horticultur-
ist,  showed  them  the  grounds  of  the  institute.  Crossan
(1969) recorded: “We spent the day in the plantings of
cocoa,  banana,  macademia  nuts,  palms,  coffee,  sugar
cane, mangoes, and rubber trees, among many kinds of
plants  to  be  seen.”  While  inspecting  cocoa  plantings,
Huttleston  collected  Oncidium  pusillum (69631),  a
diminutive epiphytic orchid that he spotted growing on
one of the trees.

On 22 June, Huttleston, Crossan, and the graduate
students  went  to  Linda  Vista,  Captain  Claude  Hope’s
seed-production nursery at Dolce Nombre near Cartago.
Huttleston was particularly impressed by a bright orange-
flowered  Thunbergia  gibsonii (69724),  which  he  later
requested from Hope, along with twenty-four selections
of  Solenostemon  scutellarioides (69803–18,  691004–11)
and seven selections of Browallia speciosa (69819–25).

The  next  morning  Erickson  took  the  group  to  the
top of Volcán Irazú. Crossan took an interest in observ-
ing “the cultivation of very steep hillsides without appar-
ent  erosion  .  .  .  and  the  re-colonization  of  the  volcanic
slopes  by  Ericaceae  and  Gramineae  plant  species”
(Crossan  1969).  It  was,  however,  a  very  different  plant
that  caused  quite  a  stir  among  the  team  members.

Hope, founder of Linda Vista, became a leading producer of seeds
of bedding plants. Hope came to Costa Rica during World War II
to work on establishing plantations of Cinchona trees to provide
the U.S. Army with quinine in the event that the main source of
this drug, the Philippines, fell under Japanese control. Because of
his affiliation with the Army, Hope became known in Costa Rica
as Captain Hope, or El Capitán Hope. After the Cinchona project
closed down, Hope remained in Costa Rica, established a program
for breeding ornamental plants, and founded Linda Vista. 
Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Gerlach remembered that encounter: “On Volcán Irazú it
was shocking to find Psittacanthus americanus, a parasite,
in  flower  and  completely  covering  a  number  of  oaks
giving an appearance of being a totally new type of tree”
(Gerlach  1969).  Even  Huttleston,  an  experienced
botanist, admitted, “I was astounded and quite mystified
for  awhile  by  the  spectacular  parasite  which  was  in  full
flower. I could not believe it was a mistletoe and parasitic
since it dominated huge oaks” (Huttleston 1969a).

263

Around the Caribbean

The slopes of Volcán Irazú east of San José. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

On 27 June the group
departed  San  José  for  a
short visit to Mexico City,
where  they  planned  to
tour  Jardín  Botánico  and
other  gardens. Three  days
later,  as  they  flew  back  to
Philadelphia,  they  were
still  reminiscing  about
Costa  Rica.  “Horticultur-
ally the country seemed to
be  an  oversized  green-
house,”  Gerlach 
later
wrote  (1969).  “Window-
sill 
suddenly
covered  acres  or  became
huge specimens.”

plants 

COSTA RICAN 
AFFAIR CONTINUES

In 1973 yet another group of students who were enrolled
in the Longwood Graduate Program headed south for a
three-week  study  tour  to  Costa  Rica.  Six  students—
William  Graham,  Robert  Haehle,  Gary  Koller,  Herbert
Orange,  Herbert  Plankinton,  and  Patrick  Redding—
were led by Dr. Richard W. Lighty, professor of the Uni-
versity  of  Delaware,  and  Patrick  A.  Nutt,  Longwood’s
collections foreman. The group departed Philadelphia on
28  May  and  by  way  of  Miami  flew  to  San  José. There
they were met by Robert Wilson of the Jardín Botánico
Wilson  in  Las  Cruces,  who  would  guide  and  assist  the
group for much of the trip.

Rainy afternoons in San José
“Our arrival coincided with the wet season,” remembers
Nutt. “In fact it rained nearly every day we were there,
usually in the afternoon. During the dry winter months
the clouds from the Caribbean are halted at the summits
of the highest mountains but are driven down the Pacific
slopes for a short distance. It is easy to see how the mois-
ture is distributed in the mountains. On the lower slopes
in winter, the fields are dry, but at a certain level the dust
in the road disappears and the ground becomes progres-
sively  wetter  and  wetter.  Immediately  one  notices  that
every  tree  is  laden  with  orchids,  bromeliads,  and  other

A parasitic Psittacanthus americanus was seen in full bloom on
Volcán Irazú. Photo by Donald G. Huttleston.

epiphytes.  It  is  to  this  line  that  the  clouds  and  mist
descend at night.”

On  the  early  morning  of  30  May,  Wilson  led  the
group  on  their  first  excursion  to  explore  the  slopes  of
Volcán Irazú. Later, back in San José, the group met with
Rodriguez  at  the  Universidad  de  Costa  Rica.  “He  was
famous for his beautiful water color paintings of orchids,”
recalls Nutt, “and obviously a severe critic of indiscrimi-
nate  collection,  exploitation  and  sale  of  native  orchids.

264

Costa Rican Affair Continues

Lighty examines the huge leaves of a plant of Gunnera insignis
encountered on the slopes of Volcán Irazú. Photo by 
Patrick A. Nutt.

A street vendor in San José sells Oncidium orchids. Photo by
Patrick A. Nutt.

The turbulent waters of Río Reventazón, near Turrialba. Photo by
Walter H. Hodge.

We actually saw evidence of this in San José, with street
vendors offering bundles of bare-rooted orchids.” Lighty
was  taken  by  Rodriguez’s  many  talents:  “He  spent  two
hours grounding our group in the geological, biological,
historical,  and  cultural  characteristics  of  Costa  Rica,
which  put  much  of  what  we  were  to  experience  into  a
solid context.”

Seat of learning and research
The  following  morning,  Lighty,  Nutt,  Wilson,  and  the
students  left  for  Turrialba  to  spend  several  days  at  the
Instituto Inter-Americano de Ciencias Agrícolas. “This is
an  outstanding  institution  and  seat  of  learning  and
research,”  remembers  Nutt.  “I  was  very  impressed  with
the staff and the student body representing many nation-
alities. We had a gracious host in Erickson, who was of a

great assistance in guiding us around the huge institution
and trial plots.”

Nutt  recalls  also  meeting  with  Camacho:  “In  1970
we successfully fruited the breadfruit, Artocarpus altilis, in
Longwood’s conservatories, but I had failed in propagat-
ing it from regular stem cuttings; the tissue seeming too
pithy. When  I  told  Camacho  about  our  lack  of  success
with  the  breadfruit,  he  bravely  donned  his  British
Wellington rubber boots and we went out to one of the
plots in the pouring rain where he skillfully demonstrated
how  to  propagate  it  from  root  and  then  progressively
stem  cuttings. This  acquired  method  was  used  success-
fully at Longwood later.”

In  the  institute’s  cafeteria,  which,  in  Nutt’s  words,
“resembled a boot camp but offered much better food,”
the group met with Dr. Leslie R. Holdridge, the princi-

265

Around the Caribbean

and  judiciously  collected  several  (73860).  One  plant
from  this  collection,  by  then  a  120  cm  specimen,  was
later donated to the Fairchild Tropical Garden in Miami,
Florida, and planted in their rare plant house.”

The next day the group climbed the nearby Volcán
Turrialba, 3329 m, examined the Indian village ruins at
Gyayaba, and collected a number of plants. “Only a few
meters from the burial mounds were magnificent speci-
mens  of  Aechmea  mariae-reginae,”  remembers  Nutt.
“Longwood  had  successfully  grown  this  bromeliad  but
never so showy. I remember reading accounts from trav-
elers flying over Costa Rica in the late 1920s and spotting
colonies of this plant growing in the crown shafts of forest
trees.”

On 3 June the group said farewells to their hosts in
Turrialba and headed back to San José. On the way they
stopped  in  Cartago  to  pay  a  visit  to  Las  Cóncavas,  the
garden estate of Charles H. Lankester, who had died in
1969. One of the plants received from Lankester’s garden
was Dieffenbachia oerstedtii (73809), notable for its leaves
decorated  with  attractive  lighter  green  markings.
“Lankester  was  well  loved  by  the  Costa  Ricans  and  he
generously ‘ploughed’ back profits from his coffee planta-
tion into his garden,” recalls Nutt. “He possessed a wide
knowledge of natural history. In botany, his special field
has  been  orchids,  which  he  hunted  assiduously  in  the
mountains and lowlands.”

Forest in the clouds
The  group’s  next  destination  was  the  Jardín  Botánico
Wilson, Wilson’s garden at Las Cruces. As Nutt remem-
bers, “the trip to San Vito was not without complications.
The  Pan-American  Highway,  although  a  good  route,  is
not  up  to  the  standard  of  a  North  American  turnpike!
Our bus was held up for a considerable time by a rock
slide, followed soon after by a blown tire. We took advan-
tage of the delays to do some botanizing on the surround-
ing hills.”

The group arrived in Las Cruces on 6 June. “After a
most interesting tour of the gardens and propagation facil-
ities,” says Nutt, “we climbed to a nearby cloud forest in
spite of rain. Thank goodness for light-weight rain gear!
The  head  gardener,  Bruce  McAplin,  was  our  guide.  We
collected  some  filmy  ferns,  Heliconia  tortuosa (73816),
and a superior form of Guzmania angustifolia (73813). We
also  collected  a  most  unusual  member  of  the  gesneriad
family, a remarkable Columnea florida (73861).”

An imposing inflorescence of Aechmea mariae-reginae, found by
Lighty and Nutt on Volcán Turrialba and in Las Cruces. Photo by
Russell J. Seibert.

pal investigator on campus and a recognized authority on
the  forest  vegetation  of  Central  America.  One  of
Holdridge’s  widely  acclaimed  accomplishments  was
devising a system for classifying vegetation types around
the world, which became known as Holdridge life zones.
He explained to the Longwood group how this life zone
classification had found practical use in large-scale land-
use  development  in  Latin  America,  where  more  than  a
dozen countries, at the request of their governments, had
been mapped in terms of Holdridge’s system.

On  1  June,  as  Nutt  recalls,  “A  group  of  us  trekked
down  from  the  Instituto  to  the  turbulent  Río  Reven-
tazón, famous for white water rafting but also possessing
a grim reputation for drownings. We were searching for a
cycad,  Zamia  skinneri, and  thanks  mainly  to  Lighty’s
observation  skills,  we  spotted  a  number  of  small  plants

266

Costa Rican Affair Continues

Meticulously maintained gardens around houses of staff members
of the United Fruit Company in Golfito. Photo by 
Patrick A. Nutt.

Unusual markings on the leaves of Columnea florida (73861), an
epiphytic gesneriad found by Lighty and Nutt in the cloud forest
above Las Cruces. Photo by Patrick A. Nutt.

A nursery of the United Fruit Company in Golfito, well stocked
with ornamental plants. Photo by Patrick A. Nutt.

Lighty and Nutt’s finds in the cloud forest were sup-
plemented  with  many  plants  acquired  from  fabulously
rich  collections  maintained  at  the  Jardín  Botánico
Wilson. A wide array of plants procured there included
many bromeliads, such as an imposing Aechmea mariae-
reginae (73785),  seen  previously  on  Volcán  Turrialba;
Guzmania sanguinea (73815), with red leaves surround-
ing  yellow  flowers;  and  several  neoregelias,  including
Neoregelia ‘Catherine Wilson’ (73826). Among the other
plants acquired were ferns, Diplazium atirrense (73810),
Nephrolepis  pendula (73827),  and  Odontosoria  gymno-
grammoides (73829);  orchids,  Lycaste  macrophylla ssp.
xanthocheila (74600),  Oncidium  cabagrae (76107),  and
O. globuliferum (76108); and a couple of shrubs, includ-
ing Acnistus arborescens (73783) of the family Solanaceae,

267

valued for its prolific honey-fragrant flowers and yellow-
orange berries. Lighty recalls that Acnistus was noted “for
its use seen in Las Cruces and Turrialba, where because of
its thick, ridged, and spongy bark it proved an excellent
substrate for epiphytic orchids. It was employed for this
purpose  either  as  cut  limbs  assembled  as  a  supporting
structure, or as a living small tree on which the orchids
and bromeliads were tied with a bit of sphagnum moss. It
was in the latter way that it was used at Longwood.”

From Golfito to Cerro de la Muerte
On 8 June the group left Las Cruces and drove southwest
to  the  coast  of  Golfo  Dulce,  where  they  stopped  in
Golfito at the headquarters of the United Fruit Company.
“The highlight of our trip to Golfito was a tour with the
highly skilled propagator of the nursery operated by the
United Fruit Company,” remembers Nutt. “The nursery

Around the Caribbean

Fruits of mangosteen, Garcinia mangostana (73812), collected in
Golfito. Photo by Patrick A. Nutt.

Blechnum buchtienii (73795), a dwarf tree fern resembling a cycad,
was collected by Lighty and Nutt on Cerro de la Muerte. Photo by
Patrick A. Nutt.

described by the native very accurately as pelo de gato or
cat  fur.  On  Cerro  de  la  Muerte,  temperature  may  drop
below freezing at night and thin ice may form, but snow
is apparently rare. We botanized extensively, taking care
not  to  fall  into  the  wettest  bog  areas.  Our  search  was
rewarded  finally  by  spotting  the  giant  bromeliad  Puya
dasylirioides (73837) in full flower with some plants con-
taining  seed  pods,  and  a  dwarf  tree  fern,  Blechnum
buchtienii (73795), strongly resembling a cycad. We judi-
ciously collected a little seed of Puya and pups of the fern.
Unfortunately,  neither  fared  too  successfully  at  Long-
wood. I postulate that had we enjoyed air-conditioning
plus  a  mist  system,  we  may  have  been  more  successful.
Other plants collected at this altitude often commence to
wilt and suffer at sea level and higher temperatures.”

Under Captain Hope’s wing
Upon  their  return  to  San  José  on  10  June,  the  group
visited  Linda  Vista,  Captain  Hope’s  seed-producing
nursery. Hope shared with Lighty and Nutt cuttings of
several  plants,  among  them  Jacobinia  umbrosa (73818).
One  plant  in  particular  caught  Nutt’s  attention.  “On
entering the nursery,” he remembers, “I spotted a supe-
rior red-flowered clone of Pentas lanceolata (73832), com-
monly  called  the  Egyptian  star  cluster,  probably  a
tetraploid form. Cuttings were taken and it proved to be
a  very  successful  pot  plant  subject  for  display  at  Long-
wood, both indoors and outdoors.”

Hope’s botanical interests went far beyond producing
seeds of bedding plants. He led the group on a trip to a

The misty habitat of Puya dasylirioides (73837) on Cerro de la
Muerte. Photo by Patrick A. Nutt.

was  established  to  provide  lush  plant  material  for  the
homes of staff members. Lavishly planted and very well
landscaped, it featured most incredible hedges of uniform
cycads, Cycas revoluta. We were also very impressed with
the mature sealing wax palms, Cyrtostachys lakka, luring
the  passersby  with  their  beautifully  red-colored  stems.”
From the nursery in Golfito, Lighty and Nutt obtained
seeds of Garcinia mangostana (73812), mangosteen, a tree
bearing fruits filled with delicious pulp.

During their journey back from Golfito to San José,
the group stayed overnight at San Isidro de El General,
described  by  Nutt  as  “a  real  ranching  town.” The  next
morning they set out for a hike on Cerro de la Muerte,
3491  m,  in  the  mountains  north  of  the  town.  As  Nutt
recalls, it was “considered the highlight of the whole trip.
I was glad we brought suitable clothing. The fine mist is

268

Expanding the Scope

The smallest of the Central American republics, just under 21,000
km2, El Salvador is crossed from northwest to southeast by moun-
tain ranges with many volcanic peaks, the highest being Monte
Cristo, 2418 m. Between the mountain ranges is a semitropical
plateau, averaging 600 m, broken by numerous fertile river valleys.
Between the coastal mountain range and the Pacific is a narrow,
low plain. With an area of more than 112,000 km2, Honduras is
the second largest country of Central America. Although it is the
most mountainous country in Central America, it is also curiously
the only one that has no volcanoes. The Central American
Cordillera runs through the country from northwest to southeast.
The tallest peaks—several exceeding 3000 m—are in the southern
region. The broad northern coastal plain extends inland from the
Caribbean Sea. Honduras has several large rivers, countless
streams, and several coastal lakes. El Salvador and Honduras have
a marked rainy season between May and October. During the dry
season that follows, many trees lose their leaves, as much of the
vegetation is deciduous. Evergreen forests are found at the higher 
elevation, where there is enough moisture year-round.

nearby nature preserve at Tapantí in the beautiful Orosi
Valley, which, in Nutt’s assessment, showed Hope’s many
virtues as “a master plantsman and ecologist.” Lighty and
Nutt  naturally  did  not  return  from  Tapantí  empty-
handed. Among the plants collected there were Guzma-
nia  monostachya (73814),  a  bromeliad  with  bright  red
bracts;  Ludwigia  octovalvis (73820),  a  yellow-flowered
member  of  Onagraceae;  and  Stachytarpheta  frantzii
(73846) of Verbenaceae, producing spikes of dark purple
flowers.

The following couple of days were dedicated to visits
to a number of private gardens and nurseries in the vicin-
ity of San José. The trip’s final day was spent “thoroughly
cleaning all the media from plants collected, in fact, any-
thing questionable, and also cleaning the seed collected,”
recalls Nutt. “This was well worthwhile, as on 18 June,
when we passed through the USDA inspection station in
Miami,  we  were  commended  for  cleanliness,  and  only
two  plants  had  to  undergo  quarantine.”  In  addition  to
assuring  that  all  the  plant  material  was  spotless,  Lighty
and Nutt employed various strategies to preserve the via-
bility of cuttings and seeds. “Just before we got into the
vehicle to take us to the airport,” explains Lighty, “we ate
the  delicious  pulp  of  the  fruits  of  Garcinia  mangostana
collected at Golfito, and packaged the seeds in moist tow-
eling. The care taken proved worthwhile because the seed
germinated quickly when sown at Longwood.”

EXPANDING THE SCOPE

Following  the  successful  organization  of  tropical  study
tours  in  Costa  Rica,  Seibert  envisioned  expanding  the
scope of these tours by including other Central American
countries. In 1971 he targeted El Salvador and Honduras,
and  planned  a  three-week  trip  that  would  allow  him  to
combine plant collecting in these countries with arranging
another tropical study tour for Longwood students.

Small marvel of El Salvador
Seibert and his wife, Isabelle, landed in San Salvador on 7
January. Dr. Ernest P. Imle, agricultural administrator at
the American Embassy, welcomed them and assisted the
Seiberts during their travels in El Salvador. The following
morning, after paying a visit to the embassy, the Seiberts
and Imle drove to Santa Tecla, some 13 km east of the city,
to meet with the staff of the U.S. Agency for International
Development and to tour the nurseries there.

On 9 January the Seiberts took a rocky road to the
top of the volcano San Salvador, 1893 m. Coffee planta-
tions covered the lower slopes of the volcano, while the
roadsides were lined with “little shacks . . . made of card-
board  boxes  to  house  itinerant  labor  families  picking
coffee” (I. L. Seibert 1971). Upon reaching the top, the
Seiberts  descended  the  opposite  side,  over  large,  black
lava beds, to the town of Quezaltepeque. On their return

269

Around the Caribbean

The lower slopes of San Vicente, east of San Salvador, are put into
agricultural use, while the peak of the volcano is covered by cloud
forest. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Picturesque tree ferns surround the pools of Los Chorros near San
Salvador. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Loading mangrove firewood on oxcarts for transport to Los 
Jiotes, near La Unión on the coast of El Salvador. Photo by 
Russell J. Seibert.

to San Salvador, they stopped at Los Chorros to admire a
series of spectacular, natural pools and waterfalls, fed by
spring water from overhanging volcanic cliffs.

On 12 January, Seibert set off on an excursion to San
Vicente, 2181 m, a volcano located about 60 km east of
San  Salvador,  with  a  summit  covered  by  dense  cloud
forest; and then south to the coastal town of La Libertad.
He and Imle left on a trip to mangrove swamps along the
coast. They first drove to La Unión, at the eastern tip of
El  Salvador,  where  they  arranged  for  a  boat  that  would
take  them  on  an  all-day  ride  through  the  mangrove
forests. The  mangroves  in  El  Salvador  are  so  large  that
they  even  incited  some  interest  as  a  source  of  valuable
timber.  Despite  this  use,  these  forests  are  still  relatively
well  represented,  as  about  40  percent  of  their  cover
remains untouched.

270

Imle, left, and Vilanova admire Platycerium grown at Vilanova’s
nursery in Santa Tecla. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Expanding the Scope

Upon his return to San Salvador, Seibert went back
to Santa Tecla and dedicated the next morning to exam-
ining plants grown in a nursery of Tomás Vilanova. He
collected there an undetermined species of Agave (7154),
a  short,  miniature  type  with  yellow  flowers,  and  Aris-
tolochia  littoralis (7155),  a  slender  woody  climber  with
flowers to 10 cm across, rich purple, marked with white
veins,  producing  curious  fruits  that  look  like  an  “open
parachute,”  as  Seibert  remarked  in  his  field  notes. The
next day the Seiberts departed for Honduras.

Nature-lover’s paradise
After landing in Tegucigalpa, the capital of Honduras, the
Seiberts  headed  down  a  twisty,  dusty  gravel  road  to
Zamorano, an hour’s drive east, to the Escuela Agrícola
Panamericana. This school offers three-year, high-school-
level programs in all phases of agriculture. At Zamorano
the Seiberts were welcomed by Robert P. Armour, direc-
tor, who showed them the school’s grounds and facilities.
Russell Seibert expressed hope that a group of Longwood
graduate students would be able to visit the Escuela Agrí-
cola  Panamericana  during  their  tropical  study  tour  in
June of that year.

On 20 January, Seibert joined Antonio Molina, hor-
ticulturist at the Escuela, on an excursion to the nearby
Montaña Uyuca, 2004 m, where a biological reserve had
been set up to protect a tract of cloud forest. He spent the
following day browsing through the collection of plants
cultivated  at  the  Escuela,  while  Isabelle  set  off  for  the
hills, driving along a road that was “a narrow bed of ruts
and boulders,” as she explained (1971), to San Antonio
de Oriente. “The little town used to mine silver and gold,
and the hillsides were pitted with holes. The church dom-
inated the red tile roofs clinging to the cliff. Little chil-
dren led us around, providing a key to the church, which
has a priest only once a year.” In the cemetery next to the
church,  Isabelle  found  the  grave  of  Paul  C.  Standley
(1884–1963),  a  prominent  American  botanist  and
author of numerous Latin American floras. In 1950 Stan-
dley moved to the Escuela Agrícola Panamericana, where
he worked until his retirement in 1957.

In the meantime, Seibert’s hunt for interesting con-
servatory  plants  in  Zamorano  resulted  in  several  collec-
tions.  Among  them  were  Canarium  ovatum (7157),
known  as  pili  nut,  native  to  the  Philippines  and  the
source of elemi oil; Browallia speciosa (7156), a shrubby
member of Solanaceae with deep blue flowers; and Lager-

Molina, horticulturist at the Escuela Agrícola Panamericana in
Zamorano, guided Seibert through a cloud forest reserve on
Montaña Uyuca. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

stroemia  speciosa (7161),  a  tree  native  to  tropical  Asia,
producing large panicles of purple or white flowers.

On 22 January the Seiberts returned to Tegucigalpa to
catch  a  half-hour  flight  to  San  Pedro  Sula,  the  second
largest  city  of  Honduras,  situated  near  the  border  with
Guatemala.  Two  days  later  they  met  John  D.  Dickson,
plant pathologist at the Division of Tropical Research of
the Tela Railroad Company, a subsidiary of United Fruit
Company.  Dickson  offered  to  take  the  Seiberts  to
Lancetilla, a plant introduction garden of the United Fruit
Company,  near Tela,  on  the  coast  of  the  Gulf  of  Hon-
duras. The ride to Tela turned out to be “a real disaster,”
noted  Isabelle  (1971),  who  “could  not  believe  the  road
could  be  so  bad.”  Tightly  packed  in  Dickson’s  pickup
truck, covered by “an inch thick” of dust, and feeling like
“a milkshake,” they reached Tela in late afternoon.

271

Around the Caribbean

In order to reach Lancetilla, the Seiberts boarded a railroad car in
Tela. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

Their trip to Lancetilla continued the next morning.
Since in those days the only way to the garden was “to
walk or ride the tracks” (I. L. Seibert 1971), the Seiberts
and Dickson boarded a little automobile modified with
railroad-car-like  wheels.  Lancetilla,  one  of  the  United
Fruit Company’s experiment stations, was started in 1926
by Wilson Popenoe, an agricultural explorer specializing
in Latin American neotropical crops, credited with intro-
ducing and popularizing the use of avocados in American
kitchens.  “Truly  a  magnificent  collection  of  ornamen-
tals,”  wrote  Isabelle  Seibert  of  Lancetilla.  “But  the
Company lost interest and it is going down hill.”

Fortunately the garden, which Isabelle considered “a
nature-lover’s  paradise”  (1971),  was  saved  from  neglect
and  is  known  today  as  Jardín  Botánico  Lancetilla.
Located at the mouth of the river Lancetilla, only a few
kilometers  from  Tela,  Lancetilla  is  among  the  world’s
largest tropical botanical gardens. The word Lancetilla is
derived  from  the  local  name  of  an  indigenous  palm,
Astrocaryum  standleyanum. The  garden  is  known  espe-
cially  for  its  collection  of  tropical  and  subtropical  fruit
trees, said to be the largest in the Western Hemisphere.

Seibert was especially interested in some highly deco-
rative heliconias grown at Lancetilla. He collected Helico-
nia mariae (7158), a large plant about 6 m tall, producing
1 m long pendant inflorescences with blood-red bracts.
Among  the  other  plants  collected  in  the  garden  were
Aphelandra  hartwegiana (7164),  native  to  Panama  and
Colombia, and Clitoria fairchildiana, native to Brazil.

The  couple  returned  to  Tela  before  dark.  On  the
morning of 26 January they headed back—in the same,

An avenue of Cuban royal palm, Roystonea regia, graces Jardín
Botánico Lancetilla. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

much dreaded pickup truck—to San Pedro Sula, making
a brief stop at La Lima. While at La Lima, Russell Seibert
received  an  urgent  phone  call  and  was  told  his  mother
had suffered a stroke. He decided to cut the trip short and
immediately returned to the United States. The Seiberts
managed to catch a flight from San Pedro Sula to Belize,
and from there to Saint Louis by way of Miami. On the
early morning of 27 January, they reached Belleville, Illi-
nois, to find Seibert’s mother quite alert and fine.

CLOUDBERRIES AND THE CLOUD FOREST

Four months after Seibert’s return, a group of Longwood
Program  graduates—Gordon  E.  Buswell,  Edward
Depoto, Loretta Hodyss, and Frederick E. Roberts—led

272

Cloudberries and the Cloud Forest

by Lighty and Lois W. Paul, Longwood’s education super-
visor, traveled to Central America to retrace his steps.

The  group  left  Philadelphia  on  31  May  1971,  stop-
ping first in Miami for what Seibert called “a tropical plant
indoctrination” (1970c). As Lighty explains, “The primary
purpose  of  this  trip  was  to  expose  Longwood  graduate
fellows  to  tropical  agriculture,  horticulture  and  human
culture. To do this we began the trip with two days visiting
horticultural  facilities  in  the  Miami  area,  principally
Fairchild Tropical Garden and the USDA Plant Introduc-
tion Station. Fairchild Tropical Garden served as an intro-
duction to important woody and herbaceous ornamentals
in the pan-tropical plant palette, while the Plant Introduc-
tion Station exposed us to the wealth of tropical and sub-
tropical economic plants we might see later.”

A well thought-out institution
Unlike Seibert, who began his trip in El Salvador, Lighty’s
group  flew  first  to  Honduras.  On  3  June  their  plane
landed in Tegucigalpa. They were met by Armour, head-
master  of  the  Escuela  Agrícola  Panamericana.  “Armour
saw us through customs, then put us in cars for a trip over
dusty roads to Zamorano,” remembers Lighty. “In the dry
countryside along the way, we saw little agriculture, but
noted the native pines were being tapped in the traditional
destructive way, by periodic enlargement of notches, cut
in the trunk with machetes, to renew the flow of resin. We
noted a number of terrestrial xerophytic bromeliads and
orchids in an otherwise barren landscape. Occasionally we
passed  coffee  fincas where  the  coffee  is  grown  by  small
landholders. These used orange trees and other fruits to
provide the shade needed for the coffee plants.”

The  Escuela  was  founded  by  Wilson  Popenoe,  an
American botanist, who earlier established and developed
the introduction garden of the United Fruit Company at
Lancetilla.  “Popenoe  spent  a  life  in  plant  introduction,
first  as  a  protégé  of  the  renowned  explorer  David  G.
Fairchild, and later as a research scientist for the United
Fruit Company,” explains Lighty. “Popenoe, a legend in
his own time, died in 1975, and I have always regretted
not meeting him on this trip. With regularity, our ques-
tions  about  how  some  plant  had  reached  Central
America,  or  how  some  important  horticultural  venture
had  begun  was  answered  with  ‘Wilson  Popenoe.’  At
Zamorano we stayed in Casa Popenoe, the Spanish colo-
nial  home  Popenoe  had  occupied  during  his  tenure  as
founding director.”

Trekking through the cloud forest on Montaña Uyuca are, left 
to right, Lighty, Molina, Paul, Roberts, Buswell, Hodyss, and
Depoto. Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

The days spent at Zamorano were filled with tours of
the  facilities  and  places  of  botanical,  agricultural,  and
horticultural note. “The school is remote from any large
towns, and was tightly run,” recalls Lighty. “It is a self-
sufficient operation with its own large generator to serve
when outside power fails, a dairy, creamery, vegetable and
agronomic  crop  production,  slaughterhouse  and  other
facilities  which  provide  the  practical  experience  to
counter-balance the classroom training. Altogether a well
thought-out institution.”

The next day the group met Molina for a trip to a
virgin cloud forest atop the nearby Montaña Uyuca. “A
dark and misty trail passed through forests of enormous
avocados, Persea americana, and oaks, hung with lianas,
the  tops  of  which  were  lost  in  the  mist;  where  every
surface  was  covered  with  mosses,  lichens,  filmy  ferns,
pepperomias,  bromeliads,  begonias  and  plants  with  no
names we knew,” remembers Lighty. “At the top, a care-
taker  lived  and  had  a  small  plantation  of  cloudberry,
Rubus macrocarpus, a most sweet and delicious fruit borne
abundantly in the perpetual cool mist. Also found in this
area were Ostrya sp. and Carpinus caroliniana, which we
were  told  were  native,  and  exotics  planted  for  teaching
purposes,  such  as  apples,  peaches,  quince  and  Pinus
strobus. Here, at 1500 m, we made our first collections,
including several bromeliads and an orchid, Pleurothallis
grobyi (71895).”

On 6 June, Lighty, Paul, and the students got an early
start, going to the stables to mount ponies for the ride up
to San Antonio de Oriente, a colonial village whose red

273

Around the Caribbean

The village of San Antonio de Oriente, overlooking Zamorano
Valley, Honduras. Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

tile roofs were celebrated in the paintings of José Antonio
Velásquez.  One  such  painting  was  displayed  at  Casa
Popenoe. “It was a rugged ride, but on horseback we had
time  to  observe  the  age-old  agriculture  of  small  subsis-
tence  farms  in  what  was  an  infertile  and  over-farmed
landscape  tended  by  impoverished  people,”  remembers
Lighty.  “The  village  turned  out  to  be  as  romantically
beautiful as Velásquez’ oil painting above the fireplace at
Casa Popenoe had promised. Buswell collected an unde-
termined  species  of  Philodendron (71881)  here.  The
return  was  quicker  than  the  journey  out,  as  the  ponies
anticipated  their  feed  and  broke  into  an  exhilarating
gallop upon reaching the valley floor.”

Another  excursion  with  Molina  took  Lighty,  Paul,
and the students to the rim of the Zamorano Valley to
view the typical landscape of the Honduran hinterland.
“It  was  a  dry  countryside,  sparsely  treed  with  oaks  and
Pinus caribaea,” remembers Lighty. “The oaks had a won-
derful epiphytic flora of orchids and bromeliads, but the
pines were being mutilated in the same way as those seen
along the road from Tegucigalpa. We returned in time to
go to a mid-day dinner at the home of a Peruvian instruc-
tor,  Señor  Julio  Luga,  for  a  ‘typical  meal’  of  several
chicken dishes, peas, carrots, rice and beans, fresh toma-
toes and lettuce, with beer as a beverage and topped off
with cake for dessert. All the food was produced at the
school. In the evening we were honored at dinner in Casa
Popenoe—complete with after-dinner drinks. We recip-
rocated with gifts of good scotch whiskey we had brought
for the purpose.”

Lighty found this diminutive orchid, Oncidium pusillum (71879),
growing as an epiphyte in Jardín Botánico Lancetilla. Photo by
Walter H. Hodge.

Keeping ahead of the dust
The next morning the group said good-byes to their gen-
erous  hosts  in  Zamorano  and  headed  to  the  airport  to
catch a flight to San Pedro Sula. “The trip was short and
uneventful,”  remembers  Lighty,  “but  the  take-off  was
exciting. The runway was a narrow asphalt pad between
sheer rock cliffs. Scattered along the base of each were the
remains of many airplanes—engines, severed wings, pieces
of  fuselage,  landing  gears  and  propellers—enough  to
make several whole airplanes, we surmised. We speculated
as  to  whether  these  were  the  result  of  the  recent  war
between Honduras and El Salvador, or the poor judgment
of pilots!”

Upon landing at San Pedro Sula, the group was met
by  Dickson,  who  had  accompanied  the  Seiberts  to
Lancetilla  earlier  that  year.  Together  they  drove  to  La
Lima, where they stopped for lunch at the United Fruit
Company hotel. “It was like something out of a 1940’s
Humphrey Bogart movie,” recalls Lighty. “Slowly revolv-
ing ceiling fans, narrow, natural-finish wainscoting, dark-
ened  by  the  years,  and  the  close  smell  of  perpetual
humidity.  We  enjoyed  a  lunch  of  good  seafood  before
setting off for Tela in Dickson’s pickup. The women rode
in the cab and men in the open bed. We traveled rapidly
to keep ahead of the dust, and stopped only to buy some
pineapples from a roadside vendor.”

In Tela, Lighty, Paul, and the students checked into a
motel, and the next day headed to the nearby Lancetilla.
“The  introduction  garden  in  Lancetilla  was  the  main
research collection for the United Fruit Company in its
heyday,” explains Lighty. “Here research was carried out

274

Cloudberries and the Cloud Forest

on new sorts of tropical economic crops which could be
exploited by the Company. We traveled the short distance
from Tela to the Lancetilla Valley by open work truck on
a  railroad  spur. The  tracks  took  us  through  thickets  of
Heliconia sp. and into an enormous tunnel formed by a
grove of Dendrocalamus giganteus. As we came out of the
tunnel, the arboretum lay around and ahead of us. At that
time, the Company was pulling out of plantation agricul-
ture, at least so far as banana production was concerned,
and  the  arboretum  was  no  longer  important  to  it  eco-
nomically. It was still the largest collection of tropical eco-
nomic plants in the Americas, but was being maintained
largely by mowing. Pigs were running freely through the
mature collections, while the forest had retaken much of
the intensively cultivated experimental planting areas.”

Having procured several plants from Lancetilla’s enor-
mous collection, among them orchids Oncidium pusillum
(71879)  and  Campylocentrum  micranthum (71899),
Lighty and his group said goodbye to Dickson on 12 June.
Following  a  swerving  takeoff  down  a  potholed  runway,
they flew the short distance back to San Pedro Sula. “We
had most of the day to explore the city, its markets and
suburbs and to get a feel for the life of a small city,” recalls
Lighty. “The next day we were driven to Copán de Maya,
the  enormous  Mayan  ruin  that  was  in  an  early  stage  of
excavation  at  that  time.  The  three-hour  trip  took  us
through a mountainous agricultural region where we saw
much overuse of the land through cropping of steep slopes
and burning. Though only a small part of the center of
Copán had been excavated, we were still impressed by the
scale, the architecture, and its ornamentation.”

Cloud forest of Monte Cristo
On 14 June the group departed San Pedro Sula and flew
to San Salvador via Guatemala City. Direct flights were
still prohibited in the wake of the conflict between Hon-
duras and El Salvador. “Upon landing in San Salvador,”
remembers Lighty, “we were met by Gerald M. Garvey,
an American forester who had come to El Salvador in the
Peace Corps, married a Salvadoran and remained. He was
our  guide  throughout  our  stay  in  El  Salvador.  We
checked into a pension in a quiet and settled residential
district  of  San  Salvador,  then  went  to  hear  a  friend  of
Garvey’s  speak  on  the  fauna  of  Central  America.  He
painted a dim picture of devastation and extinction.”

“On 16 June, taking a bare minimum of baggage, we
set off at 5:30 a.m. for Metapán, a town in the north of

A restored section of Mayan ruins in Copán. Photo by 
Walter H. Hodge.

El Salvador,” recalls Lighty. “On the way we passed many
volcanoes  and  ancient  cinder  cones.  After  settling  in  at
our accommodations, we met Garvey’s wife, Chavah, and
drove  with  her  to  her  father’s  fruit  farm.  There  we  all
piled into a four-wheel-drive truck and drove part way up
the side of Monte Cristo, 2418 m, the highest mountain
in El Salvador, to an old hacienda which had fallen into
disrepair. It was a huge estate with extensive waterworks,
and with many farmers now eking out a living as squat-
ters. It had been self-sufficient to the point of having an
iron foundry and a coffee beneficio. Growing on the place
were a number of minor tropical fruits including Spon-
dias mombin and several species of Annona, but by and
large, nature had reclaimed much of the landscape. There
we  collected  an  undetermined  species  of  Euphorbia
(71872),  planted  as  a  hedge  around  the  beneficio and
which had persisted from the hacienda’s heyday.

275

Around the Caribbean

Huts of hacienda workers on Monte Cristo. Photo by 
Richard W. Lighty.

A run-down hacienda on the slopes of Monte Cristo. Photo by
Richard W. Lighty.

Mangroves of the Bay of Jiquilisco
Upon returning from the escapade on Monte Cristo, the
group changed vehicles and headed back to San Salvador.
The following morning they met M. L. Rocher, a French
forester who had spent his life working on mangroves in
French  Indochina,  and  who,  when  the  French  were
forced out, had come to El Salvador to continue his work.
“We  drove  with  Rocher  to  the  coast  of  the  Bay  of
Jiquilisco,”  remembers  Lighty,  “where  we  rented  a  boat
for a three-hour tour of black, white and red mangrove
swamps—Avicennia, Laguncularia, and  Rhizophora,
respectively.  The  swamps,  particularly  those  of  the  red
mangrove, were not only highly productive in an ecolog-
ical sense, but were most beautiful in their simplicity. At
one point several of us volunteered to wade chest-deep in
the dark water to push and guide the boat through the
massive tangles of stilt roots. On our trip back we stopped
at a Pacific Ocean beach for a swim and a taste of coconut
jelly. We noted Cocos nucifera with double trunks, a rather
rare occurrence. On the way back to San Salvador we col-
lected several species of xerophytic, terrestrial bromeliads
growing on an ancient lava flow, some of them showing
off their orange or bright red bracts.”

With  only  a  couple  of  days  remaining,  the  group
stayed  in  and  around  San  Salvador.  “On  19  June  we
called on Tomás Vilanova in Santa Tecla,” recalls Lighty.
“Don Tomás was a manager of coffee plantations and a
beneficio for TACA airline, and a wealthy patron of the
arts,  knowledgeable  gardener,  hybridizer,  and  nursery-
man. He grew an enormous variety of tropical ornamen-
tals  including  orchids,  platyceriums,  codiaeums  and
anthuriums.  We  were  given  cuttings  of  several  of

In the mangroves along the shore of Bay of Jiquilisco are, clock-
wise from top, Buswell, Roberts, Paul, Depoto, and Hodyss. 
Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

“The next day we retraced our path to the hacienda
where we transferred to a tougher vehicle suitable for the
very rough and very winding dirt road to the summit of
Monte Cristo, where Guatemala, Honduras and El Sal-
vador come together. There we saw dramatic changes in
the flora as we went up and down the mountain. At one
point we saw trees that looked like Liquidambar styraci-
flua. They were, thereby, confirming the amazing distri-
bution  of  this  temperate  tree—from  the  coast  of
Connecticut to the mountains of Central America.”

Lighty  collected  a  number  of  plants  in  the  cloud
forest around the summit of Monte Cristo. Among them
were  Cavendishia  guatemalensis var.  chiapensis (71878),
Roldana chapalensis (71902), and a couple of orchids. Just
below the summit he found several ferns, including Pity-
rogramma dealbata (71882), P. triangularis (71883), and
Polypodium pumilum (71885).

276

Cloudberries and the Cloud Forest

A rare double-trunked Cocos nucifera in a coconut plantation along
the Pacific coast of El Salvador. Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

One of the xerophytic, terrestrial bromeliads found growing on a
seventy-year-old lava flow on the volcano San Salvador. Photo by
Richard W. Lighty.

Vilanova’s Hibiscus rosa-sinensis selections (71874) which
had  been  requested  by  Seibert  on  his  earlier  visit  in
January.”

On their last day in El Salvador, the group went to a
beautifully landscaped resort on Cerro Verde where they
observed  a  nearby  active  volcano,  Izalco,  1950  m.  “On
the wooded slopes of Cerro Verde we found Lopezia race-
mosa (71876),” remembers Lighty. “We then visited a city
park in San Salvador and climbed to a place called Puerto
del Diablo where we had a grand view of the city and col-
lected several gesneriads, including Kohleria sp. (71875)
with  yellow  flowers,  Achimenes  erecta (71865)  with  red
flowers,  and  another  one  with  white  flowers  (71866).”
Early  next  morning,  while  still  reminiscing  about  the
grand  views  from  Puerto  del  Diablo  and  lush  slopes  of
Cerro Verde, Lighty and his group arose early for a flight
to Guatemala City. From there they flew to Philadelphia
by  way  of  Miami,  returning  home  presumably  feeling
fully indoctrinated with regard to tropical plants.

277

Vilanova with his collection of rare anthuriums in Santa Tecla.
Photo by Richard W. Lighty.

SOUTH AMERICA

DESIRE FOR DATURAS

From  the  very  beginning,  the  focus  for  Longwood’s
exploration  has  been  centered  on  bringing  into  the
garden plants which might prove to be outstanding orna-
mentals.  No  wonder  that  when  in  1956  Dr. Walter  H.
Hodge,  Longwood’s  head  of  education  and  research,
learned  about  taxonomical  work  on Datura, commonly
known as angel’s trumpets, being carried out in Colom-
bia  by  Arthur  S.  Barclay,  doctoral  candidate,  and  Dr.
Richard E. Schultes, professor, both from Harvard Uni-
versity, he wrote to them offering Longwood’s support to
collect seeds and cuttings of these plants.

Handsome reds wanted
Three species of Datura, D. arborea, D. suaveolens, and D.
versicolor, as  well  as  a  closely  related  Methysticodendron
amesianum, all currently classified as species of Brugman-
sia, were already successfully grown in Longwood’s green-
houses. Hodge thought that a number of other shrubby
and small tree types of Datura would make desirable con-
servatory  plants:  “Since  this  genus  does  so  well  here  at
Longwood  under  glass,  we  would  like  to  have  more
variety  if  possible,  and  I  know  that  the  red-flowered
species would be especially handsome if we could get the
right clone” (1958a).

As he explained in a letter to Schultes, Longwood was
not  “anxious  to  become  a  repository  for  a  complete
Datura collection,”  yet  it  wanted  all  showy  materials
(Schultes  1956b). This  posed  a  certain  dilemma  to  the

explorers  in  Colombia.  “All  daturas  that  I  know  in  the
Andes are showy, some extremely so,” wrote Schultes. “I
presume you will want them all.” In response Hodge clar-
ified Longwood’s priorities, this time to Barclay: “Friend
Schultes  informs  me  that  practically  all  the  daturas  are
showy, and so I presume that we may expect materials of
anything  which  you  collect.  I  would  like  to  emphasize
that  we are particularly interested in  having material of
any  red-flowered  items,  since  we  do  not  have  these  at
present in our conservatories” (Hodge 1956b).

In August of 1956, the news came from Schultes that
Barclay’s project in Colombia was going along well. After
spending the whole of July searching for daturas between
Bogotá,  Colombia,  and Tulcán,  Ecuador,  they  had  col-
lected  much  material  of  Datura ×candida (561967,
562117), D. ×dolichocarpa, D. sanguinea (562120), and
Methysticodendron  amesianum, as  well  as  several  plants
they could not assign to any known species. “One beau-
tiful red coloured one, found on the slopes of one of the
volcanoes, is, I think, a new species,” wrote Schultes from
Bogotá  (1956a).  “Different  coloured  variants  of  the
common species are also turning up.”

Anticipating  that  Barclay  may  have  potential  con-
cerns  about  sharing  collected  plants,  Hodge  wrote  to
him: “I realize, of course, that some of this material you
may wish to keep close in hand and not distribute widely
until you have completed your studies upon it. On the
other hand, I can assure you that here at Longwood none
of  this  material  would  be  in  jeopardy  if  you  saw  fit  to
supply  us  with  material  for  growing  on  for  ornamental

278

Desire for Daturas

Stretching from the Pacific Ocean to the Caribbean Sea, Colombia
covers 1.14 million km2, about 0.8 percent of the world’s land
surface, yet it is home to between forty-five thousand and fifty-one
thousand species, or some 15 percent of all plant species. This
makes Colombia one of the most biologically diverse regions in
the world. One reason for this huge wealth of biological resources
is the wide variety of landscapes across the country. The northern
end of the Andes cuts through the western and central parts of
Colombia, with the highest peak, Cristóbal Colón, reaching 5775
m. To the west of the Andes are the coastal lowlands, to the east
the eastern plains. Colombia’s climate varies primarily with eleva-
tion, the coastal lowlands and eastern plains being the warmest,
and the high Andes being the coldest, whereas the seasonal tem-
perature changes are very small. In contrast, the rainfall varies sea-
sonally in most of the country, resulting in one or two wet seasons
and one or two dry seasons during the year.

display. Also it would be another place where the species
could  be  available  to  you  for  study  or  for  obtaining
further  propagation  material  in  the  event  that  you  lost
some of your own” (Hodge 1956a).

Anything but fine red
Hodge was especially interested in receiving a red-flow-
ered  Datura  sanguinea, which  he  had  seen  previously
flowering in various parts of the Andes. In addition, he
requested from Barclay propagation material and seeds of
two hybrids, D. ×candida and D. ×dolichocarpa, as well as
the new red-flowered species Barclay and Schultes discov-
ered. He also urged Barclay not to miss on an opportu-
nity  of  collecting  “any  colored  variants  of  the  common
species  which  are  especially  attractive  because  of  flower
color”  (Hodge  1956a).  As  a  side  note,  Hodge  asked
Schultes to keep his “eyes open for any cultivated species
of the genus Anguloa” (1956c), a Colombian orchid treas-
ured  for  its  unique,  tulip-like,  fragrant  flowers,  which
Hodge had “been trying to get . . . but without any luck.”
Barclay  responded  enthusiastically  to  Hodge’s
request: “I shall do all in my power to accommodate your
request  with  cuttings  and  seeds  of  the  various  arboreal
daturas  that  Dr.  Schultes  and  I  encounter”  (Barclay
1956).  Soon  afterward,  seeds  and  cuttings  of  daturas

The red-flowered Datura sanguinea (56121, 562120) collected by
Barclay in Colombia turned out to be rather inferior forms of that
species. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

began  arriving  at  Longwood,  and  a  few  months  later
Hodge was able to write to Barclay, “You will be inter-
ested to learn that several of your collections are turning
out  to  be  attractive  additions  to  our  Datura collection,
and it is hoped that perhaps in the future someone will
do a little work on hybridization and improvement, using
these  materials”  (Hodge  1957c).  Nevertheless,  Hodge’s
desire for a good form of red-flowered D. sanguinea did

279

South America

Legacy continues
Barclay’s  research  in  Colombia  came  into  fruition  in
1959 when he published the results in Harvard Univer-
sity’s  Botanical  Museum  Leaflets. In  this  article,  Barclay
described three species of Datura new to science, among
them  the  red-flowered  beauty,  which  he  found  on  the
slopes of a volcano and named D. vulcanicola. “During
my  field  studies  of  the  tree  daturas  in  the  Colombian
Andes,” he wrote (1959), “I was surprised to find on the
side of the famous and active Volcán de Puracé [4686 m]
populations of what was at once distinguishable as a strik-
ing and beautiful new species of the genus.” He offered
an explanation for the occurrence of D. vulcanicola in this
particular location: “I am of the opinion that the abun-
dance of individuals at the type locality is probably the
result of human activity. . . . We must not overlook the
fact that for centuries this agriculturally rich volcanic area
has been populated by advanced Indian peoples who are
known  to  have  employed  daturas  as  narcotics  in  their
magic and therapeutic practices.”

It was not, however, until 1969 that Longwood was
able  to  obtain  this  new  Datura from  Colombia.  The
opportunity came about when another of Schultes’s grad-
uate students, Tom E. Lockwood, was able to re-collect D.
vulcanicola (6974) on the slopes of Volcán de Puracé, and
sent cuttings and seeds of this species along with several
others  to  Longwood. Three  years  later  visitors  at  Long-
wood saw this rare plant displayed in the Rose House.

Hodge’s  hope  for  “a  little  work  on  hybridization”
became reality in the late 1960s when Dr. Robert J. Arm-
strong, Longwood’s geneticist, crossed the best forms of
daturas  collected  by  Barclay,  D.  arborea (562146),  D.
aurea (562122), and D. ×candida (562117), with a dozen
of  the  plants  acquired  from  California,  England,  and
France.  None  of  the  progeny,  however,  surpassed  the
parent species, and the breeding ended in 1971. Barclay’s
three daturas, though, continued to be exhibited in the
Rose House during the 1970s, the last of them, D. aurea
(562122), dying in 1979. The legacy of Barclay’s expedi-
tion  remains  at  Longwood  thanks  to  Anguloa  clowesii,
which appeared first as a digression in Hodge’s letter. This
orchid, brought back from Bogotá in 1956, can still be
viewed in Longwood’s conservatories.

Anguloa clowesii (562115) collected by Barclay and Schultes in
Colombia. It flowers in spring to early summer with fragrant, 
brilliant canary-yellow flowers up to 8 cm long on a 30 cm long
scape. The flowers have strongly cupped tepals, which is why 
this plant is commonly called tulip orchid. Photo by 
Rondel G. Peirson.

not materialize at that time. “Datura sanguinea [56121,
562120],  collected  by  you  and  growing  here  at  Long-
wood,” he wrote to Barclay, “are anything but the fine red
color that I remember in plants growing at the Institute
at Bogotá.”

The  disappointment  caused  by  a  meager  perform-
ance  of  Datura  sanguinea did  not  last  long,  as  Schultes
brought  the  good  news  about  the  much  sought-after
orchid: “I was able to get you some very healthy bulbs of
Anguloa clowesii [562115] which are going to the quaran-
tine people today. It is not uncommon here in Colombia.
These I got from a friend’s greenhouse” (Schultes 1956c).

280

Traversing the Southern States of Brazil

Although the five southern states—Rio
de Janeiro, São Paulo, Paraná, Santa
Catarina, and Rio Grande do Sul—cover
only about 10 percent of Brazil’s terri-
tory, nearly half of the population lives
there, and the core of the country’s eco-
nomic activities is concentrated within
their boundaries. Most of this region is
included within the Paraná plateau in the
east and the seaward dissected edge of
the Serra do Mar range, which rises
steeply from the narrow coastal plain.
Behind the northern end of Serra do
Mar lies the valley of Paraíba, running
parallel to the coast. Flanking the valley
on the west is the highest mountain
range of Brazil, Serra da Mantiqueira.
Further west, the rolling, mountain-
studded plateau gradually slopes and
merges into the vast plain of the Paraná
plateau. The rainfall in most of the
upland region of the state of São Paulo
ranges from 1000 to 2000 mm, falling
mostly in the summer. Because of the
dry winter season, much of the plateau is
covered by a tropical, semideciduous forest. The coastal lowlands and seaward slopes of Serra do Mar receive an annual rainfall of 1500 to
3250 mm, which supports a tropical rain forest. The southernmost region, including the states of Paraná, Santa Catarina, and Rio Grande
do Sul, has a more temperate climate due to its elevation and latitude. While the coastal tropical forest reaches its southern end a little
north of Pôrto Alegre in Rio Grande do Sul, more open stands of Paraná pine, Araucaria angustifolia, with an undergrowth of broad-leaved
species, replace the tropical, semideciduous forests to the west. Savannas and tall-grass prairies predominate in the southernmost states of
Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul.

TRAVERSING THE SOUTHERN STATES 
OF BRAZIL

In  1957  a  proposal  was  put  forward  for  an  expedition
with  the  main  purpose  to  “survey  existing  plant  stocks
held by government, private or commercial nurserymen
in Argentina and Brazil and procure materials that appear
to have promise for use in the United States, particularly
species that may be adapted to the milder climates of this
country” (Williams 1958). Drafting plans for collecting
in  Brazil,  Dr.  Russell  J.  Seibert,  Longwood’s  director,
noted  that  “of  particular  interest  will  be  the  species  of
Tabebuia and many Melastomataceae which in the south-
ern part of Brazil and adjoining Argentina have sufficient
frost tolerance to stand the conditions of southern Cali-
fornia”  (1958a).  Seibert  recalled  his  experience  of
growing  these  plants  while  he  directed  the  Los  Angeles

State  and  County  Arboretum  in  the  early  1950s:  “The
few that we tried in Los Angeles bloomed in containers at
a very early age and I am convinced that they would make
excellent tub subjects for conservatory work. In general,
of very much interest, will be the whole field of brilliantly
flowering trees.”

Hardy, subtropical, flowering trees were thus chosen
as  the  chief  objects  for  this  expedition,  but  other  orna-
mental plants which could prove hardier than usual were
also  of  great  interest.  Five  southern  states  of  Brazil,
namely  Rio  de  Janeiro,  São  Paulo,  Paraná,  Santa  Cata-
rina, and Rio Grande do Sul, were chosen as the target
areas  for  collecting,  with  a  possible  reconnaissance
mission to Argentina.

Seibert  thought  the  best-suited  candidate  to  under-
take such an expedition would be Dr. Llewelyn Williams,
a botanist employed by the USDA, who had “spent many

281

South America

Williams, a botanist with extensive knowledge of the flora of
South America, was selected to conduct the 1958 expedition to
southern Brazil. Photo by Llewelyn Williams.

years  in  Latin  America  having  been  with  the  Chicago
Natural History Museum, during which time he prepared
the  Woods  of  Northeastern  Peru, did  considerable  work
with McBride’s Flora of Peru, spent a great deal of time in
Venezuela and, in addition to that, traveled pretty much
of  the  warmer  world  in  connection  with  the  American
Chicle  Institute”  (Seibert  1958b).  Williams,  an  accom-
plished botanist and seasoned explorer, took on the chal-
lenge and prepared for departure in February of 1958.

Rio de Janeiro
The starting point for Williams’s expedition was Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil’s capital until 1960. He arrived on 25 Feb-
ruary. “The following morning I proceeded to the Botan-
ical Garden,” he recalled (1958). “This famous botanical
institution, which will celebrate the 150th anniversary of
its  foundation  next  month,  was  selected  as  the  most
logical center to commence the collecting, as it possesses
the largest and most varied collections of indigenous and
exotic  plants  to  be  found  anywhere  in  Latin  America.
Consent  was  kindly  given  by  the  director,  Dr.  Paulo

Dictyosperma album (58616) that was collected by Williams in Rio
de Janeiro has been growing in Longwood’s Palm House since its
opening in 1966. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Campos  Porto,  to  gather  seed  or  fruit  materials  of
selected  ornamental  trees,  shrubs,  vines,  palms,  and
herbaceous  species.”  A  large  number  of  collections,
exceeding  230,  were  procured  from  the  Botanical
Garden,  or  Jardim  Botânico.  Dictyosperma  album
(58616),  Dypsis  lutescens (58617),  and  Etlingera  elatior
(581702) are but a few examples.

“On completing my work in Rio,” recorded Williams
(1958),  “I  then  proceeded  to  Petrópolis  and  the  sur-
rounding highlands, where I had occasion to gather some
fine  materials  in  the  private  garden  of  Sr.  Guilherme
Guinle, an industrialist, who has probably the best and
largest collection of Anthurium in Brazil or elsewhere. An
inspection  was  also  made  of  the  series  of  orchids,  and
other ornamental plants, owned by Sr. Waldemar Silva, a
short distance out of Petrópolis, and selections were made

282

Traversing the Southern States of Brazil

Dypsis lutescens (58617), known in Brazil as palmeira bambu, was
procured by Williams from Rio de Janeiro’s Jardim Botânico.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Philodendron verrucosum (581537) was among the many Amazon-
ian plants obtained by Williams at Chácara Santa Rosa, a nursery
in São Paulo. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

of certain desirable species. The surrounding hills, part of
the  classical  collecting  region  of  Serra  dos  Orgãos,  are
particularly  rich  in  bromeliads,  of  which  a  number  of
species were gathered.”

As a result of nearly three weeks of collecting in and
around  Rio,  and  in  the  uplands,  two  large  shipments
were  dispatched. The  second  contained  a  wide  array  of
anthuriums  from  Guinle,  including  such  species  as
Anthurium andraeanum (591263) and A. scherzerianum
(591277), as well as many of his hybrids (591265–75).

São Paulo and Paraná
Williams’s next destination was São Paulo, the largest city
in  Brazil.  “On  Sunday,  16  March,  I  proceeded  to  São
Paulo, and on the following day I visited several private
and public gardens and nurseries in the city and neigh-

borhood,  including  that  of  Brandli’s,  Alberto  Marques,
Pollard’s  in  Brooklyn-Paulista,  and  the  Chácara  Santa
Rosa,  owned  by  Nicolau  Pepi,  with  a  rich  collection  of
indigenous  plants,  including  some  interesting  species
from  the  Brazilian  Amazon  region”  (Williams  1958).
From  the  garden  of  Robert  L.  Pollard  in  Brooklyn-
Paulista,  a  suburb  of  São  Paulo,  Williams  acquired
Alstroemeria caryophyllaea (581468), with delightfully fra-
grant red-and-white flowers; Petrea volubilis (581528), a
blue-flowered vine; and Kohleria eriantha (591609), a low
shrub with attractive leaves marked with reddish brown
border  venation  and  large,  drooping,  cinnabar-red
flowers.

“A  large  and  interesting  series  of  ornamental  plants
was  also  selected  at  the  Horta  da  Prefeitura  at
Manequinho  Lopes,  under  the  direction  of  Sr.  Arturo

283

South America

In the garden of Robert L. Pollard in Brooklyn-Paulista, a suburb
of São Paulo, Williams acquired Alstroemeria caryophyllaea
(581468), which features delightfully fragrant red-and-white
flowers. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Etzel,”  noted  Williams  (1958).  “This  extensive  nursery,
covering about 30 acres [12 hectares], is a division of Parks
and Gardens of the City of São Paulo, and specializes in
particular in shrubs and small ornamentals.” Among the
many plants Williams acquired there were Aglaia odorata
(581466),  a  tall  shrub  producing  very  fragrant  flowers;
Cestrum nocturnum (581486), a shrub valued for its ivory
flowers  with  a  cloverlike  fragrance;  and  Homalocladium
platycladum (581472),  known  as  flatworm  plant  or
ribbon-bush because of its unique flat stems.

Williams was especially pleased with several field trips
around São Paulo. One “was made to the fine upland forest
zone  at  Alta  da  Serra,  above  Paranapiaçaba,  and  located
about halfway between São Paulo and Santos. This humid
forest  is  composed  of  a  large  variety  of  woody  species.
Bromeliads are particularly common here also” (1958).

Another plant-collecting area judged by Williams as
“outstanding”  was  in  the  highlands  of  the  Serra  da
Bocaína, part of the Serra do Mar, about halfway between
São  Paulo  and  Rio,  with  an  elevation  ranging  between
750 and 900 m. Most of the collecting there was done on
the  Fazenda  Bonita,  the  property  of  William  Roberto
Marinho  Lutz.  The  day  at  Fazenda  Bonita  permitted
Williams to collect many epiphytes, including bromeliads
such  as  Billbergia  amoena (581482);  orchids,  among
them Epidendrum nutans var. dipus (581499); and ferns,
such as Polypodium hirsutissimum (581540) and Vittaria
pendula (581571).

In  early  April,  Williams  proceeded  to  Curitiba,
capital of the state of Paraná, southwest of São Paulo. The

Petrea volubilis (581528), a blue-flowered vine that Williams
obtained from Pollard’s garden, has graced Longwood’s Rose
House for more than forty years. Photo by Rondel G. Peirson.

city is situated on a vast plateau, which embraces nearly
all  of  the  states  of  Paraná  and  Santa  Catarina,  and  the
northern section of Rio Grande do Sul. Accompanied by
Gert Hatschbach, “a capable amateur botanist,” Williams
undertook  several  excursions  from  Curitiba.  “The  first
collecting  trip,”  he  noted,  “was  to  the  Serra  São  Luiz,
with an elevation of about 3000 feet [900 m]. At the foot
of and along its slopes the vegetation is composed in the
main of thickets, where we encountered small trees and
shrubs,  such  as  Prunus  ulei, Tibouchina  mutabilis
[581557], Mimosa acerba. . . . The most distinctive plant
found at the summit of the Serra São Luiz was Quesnelia
imbricata [581541]  of  the  Bromeliaceae,  with  leaves  in
dense  tufts  and  very  attractive  light  to  deep  pinkish
flowers.  It  grows  usually  in  fairly  deep  shade  among
rocks” (Williams 1959).

284

Traversing the Southern States of Brazil

Williams collects an undetermined Hippeastrum in the foothills of
Serra do Mar near Piraquara, Paraná. Photo by Llewelyn Williams.

Philodendron renauxii (581532), collected by Williams near
Corupá in Santa Catarina, is a characteristic plant of the littoral.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Campyloneurum phyllitidis (581539), an epiphytic fern, was col-
lected by Williams near Corupá. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Santa Catarina
From  Curitiba,  Williams  continued  southward  by  road
across Serra do Mar to the small coastal town of Itajaí, in
the  state  of  Santa  Catarina,  to  visit  the  Herbarium
Barbosa  Rodrigues,  which  housed  the  most  important
representation of the flora of the state. Then he decided
to  proceed  overland  through  Blumenau  and  Jaraguá  do
Sul to the little village of Corupá, at the foot of Serra do
Mar. “At Corupá,” Williams recorded (1959), “Senhor E.
J. Eipper, a German immigrant, and his two sons operate
a  small  private  nursery  with  some  interesting  native
plants  from  the  surrounding  forests,  as  well  as  some
unusual exotic species. . . . An early German immigration
to this region, as well as to the other areas in the south,
has  given  rise  to  several  distinctly  European  sections,

where the German language and customs still prevail, and
the majority of the people are distinctly of Nordic blood.”
Accompanied by Eipper, Williams made several col-
lecting excursions to the areas around Rio Paulo, Riberao
do Rancho, and the dense, virgin cloud forest that clothes
the  seaward  slope  of  Serra  do  Mar.  An  appreciable  and
varied  collection  of  ornamental  plants  was  collected
including  Cyrtopodium  verrucosum
there:  orchids, 
(581523),  Huntleya  meleagris (581507),  and  Oncidium
flexuosum (581522); bromeliads, such as Aechmea calycu-
lata (581463),  Billbergia  speciosa (581476),  and  Vriesea
carinata (581572b); gesneriads, such as Corytholoma bul-
bosum (581489) and Hypocyrta perianthomega (581566);
and  an  epiphytic  fern,  Campyloneurum  phyllitidis
(581539).

285

South America

Williams found rare Gunnera manicata (581431) at Boca da Serra
near São Francisco de Paula, Rio Grande do Sul. Photo by 
Llewelyn Williams.

Rio Grande do Sul
From  Corupá,  Williams  continued  farther  south,  by
road, through Joinville to Florianópolis, thence by air to
Pôrto Alegre, in the state of Rio Grande do Sul. At the
time, the leading authority on the flora of that state was
Padre Balduino Rambo of the Colegio Anchieta in Pôrto
Alegre. “Accompanied by Padre Rambo we explored the
Fazenda  Oroya,  at  Osório,  about  100  miles  [160  km]
north of Pôrto Alegre, considered to be an area represen-
tative  of  the  vegetation  of  the  coastal  or  littoral  zone,”
recorded Williams (1959). His finds there included Wit-
trockia superba (581574), a bromeliad with leaves pink at
the  tip;  and Ctenanthe muelleri (581490),  a  member  of
Marantaceae inhabiting swamp forests around Osório.

“In  addition  to  the  fine  cooperation  extended  by
Padre  Rambo,”  wrote  Williams  (1959),  “appreciable
assistance was received from Senhor Henrique Hanisch,
and his wife, Dona Frida Schonwald Hanisch, who own
a  nursery  on  the  outskirts  of  Pôrto  Alegre.”  With
Hanisch’s help, Williams was able to continue his explo-
rations  northward  to  the  plateau  region  of  Serra  Geral,
reaching  an  elevation  of  about  1000  m.  “From  Pôrto
Alegre,”  noted  Williams,  “the  road  leads  through  an
extensive plain covered in great part by grassland mixed
with low scrubby vegetation, until we reached Taquara.
From there we begin a steady climb until the summit is
reached at São Francisco de Paula. . . . At Boca da Serra,
at an altitude of about 3500 feet [1050 m] and near the
upper limit of the escarpment, we found a small clump of
the  somewhat  rare  Gunnera  manicata [581431],  of  the

Cycas circinalis (581491), which Williams obtained in São Paulo,
has been featured in Longwood’s Palm House for forty years.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

family Haloragaceae. Its stems are thick and short, with
large leaves forming a dense crown which may reach up
to 25 feet [7.5 m] across. The leaf blades measure up to 5
feet [1.5 m] or more across, and the petioles are prickly,
often 5 feet or more long. In Rio Grande do Sul this plant
is limited to a few sites in the upper limit of the eastern
escarpment, and grows best in deep shade, in the vicinity
of waterfalls, bathed constantly by the spray.”

Across the border
From Pôrto Alegre, Williams continued his journey south
to  Argentina.  On  4  May  he  flew  to  Buenos  Aires  for  a
short visit there. “I had eagerly hoped to continue the col-
lecting in the highland region of eastern Patagonia, in the
Cordillera between Argentina and Chile. But it was then
realized that the deadline set for my return to Beltsville,

286

Emissary to South America

15 May, was drawing close, and the considerable number
of  plants  already  collected  in  widely  scattered  zones  in
southern Brazil still remained to be assembled and made
ready for shipment” (Williams 1958).

Running out of time, Williams decided to begin his
orderly retreat northward. Upon arrival in São Paulo on
10 May, he collected additional materials from the Insti-
tuto  de  Botânica.  “The  entire  collections,”  he  remem-
bered,  “weighing  close  to  250  pounds  [113  kg],  were
again repacked, wrapped in burlap, and delivered on 13
May to the air-cargo office of Panair in São Paulo, to be
dispatched  that  evening  or  the  following  morning,  and
reached  the  Inspection  House  in  Washington  three  or
four days later” (1958).

The  collections  resulting  from  this  expedition  were
truly  impressive,  not  only  when  measured  by  their
weight. Williams summed up the accomplishments: “In
all, five shipments were made, comprising 1100 numbers,
of which approximately one-half were seed samples and
the  remainder  vegetative  material.  .  .  .  Although  many
plants  from  low  altitudes  are  represented  in  the  collec-
tion, an effort was made to concentrate as much as possi-
ble  on  plants  resistant  to  cold,  growing  in  the  higher
altitudes, and which would be most adaptable to our own
climate”  (1958).  Through  his  collecting,  Williams
showed that “south Brazil is a rich source of ornamentals.
With a wide range of altitude and latitude there is a cor-
responding wide range of flora. Plants encountered in the
tropical  and  subtropical  regions  of  the  States  of  Rio  de
Janeiro and São Paulo should be adaptable to Florida or
the  Southwest  and  California,  while  plants  from  the
colder areas in the higher altitudes and the areas further
south should be more readily adaptable to our northern
regions” (Williams 1959).

EMISSARY TO SOUTH AMERICA

Trips to Colombia in 1956 and to Brazil and Argentina in
1958  revealed  only  a  portion  of  the  immense  botanical
wealth of South America. Seibert was acutely aware of the
continent  as  an  inexhaustible  source  of  new  ornamental
plants  worthy  of  introduction. Therefore,  when  making
plans for acquisition of plants from many parts of South
America, he realized that this could not be achieved in the
course of a single expedition, no matter how ambitious. In
1959 Seibert designed a trip that in six weeks would allow

him to circle South America, making stops in Puerto Rico,
Trinidad,  Brazil,  Argentina,  Uruguay,  Chile,  Peru,
Panama, and Costa Rica. Plant collecting was not the sole
purpose  of  this  trip,  however.  He  hoped  to  establish
lasting  relationships  with  many  botanical  institutions  in
South America, with the idea that cooperation with these
organizations  would  allow  for  future  plant  acquisition.
Seibert  filled  his  itinerary  with  visits  to  nature  reserves,
botanical gardens, research stations, universities, nurseries,
and  even  private  gardens.  Often  wearing  a  coat  and  tie
instead of the more casual attire of a plant hunter, he scru-
tinized plant collections for new botanical gems while car-
rying out his assignment as Longwood’s emissary.

Hopping the islands
The trip began with a brief stop in San Juan, Puerto Rico,
where Seibert, accompanied by his wife, Isabelle, arrived
the morning of 7 January. The Seiberts stopped in Car-
olina,  a  town  southwest  of  San  Juan,  to  pay  a  visit  to
Pennock Gardens, operated by Charles F. Pennock. There
Seibert arranged for several plants to be shipped to Long-
wood, including Coccoloba rugosa (59748), a slender tree
with  diminutive  bright  red  flowers  borne  in  terminal
racemes;  and  Jasminum  rex (59749),  an  evergreen  vine
native to Thailand. The next day the couple drove to El
Yunque, Caribbean National Forest, where they climbed
in  the  rain  through  what  Isabelle  recalled  as  “the  most
lush  growth  we  have  ever  experienced—handsome  tree
ferns, palms, lianas, so thick it was dark” (1959c). At El
Yunque, at an elevation of about 300 m, Seibert collected
spores of Cyathea arborea (59107), an imposing tree fern
to 10 m tall. Before leaving Puerto Rico, he came across
another interesting plant. This time it was a vine, Sicana
odorifera (59108), known locally as pepino angolo. It is fre-
quently cultivated in the vicinity of San Juan for its juicy
fruits,  looking  “like  a  huge  red  sausage”  (I.  L.  Seibert
1959a). Though  wine-red  on  the  outside,  the  fruits  are
orange inside with a star of black seeds in the center. The
pulp is used to make a refreshing drink, while the dried
rind is said to have medicinal value.

Two days later the Seiberts set a course for Trinidad.
Their plane flew over the islands of the Lesser Antilles. By
early  afternoon  they  saw  the  island  of Trinidad  on  the
horizon. According to Isabelle, while descending toward
Port  of  Spain,  they  “fairly  shouted  with  glee  looking
down  into  a  mossy  panorama  which  looked  splattered
with orange paint. The island fairly blooms with Eryth-

287

Tree ferns, Cyathea arborea, in their natural habitat in the Maricao Forest, Puerto Rico. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

The total number of plant species in South America (left) is
unknown, as many have yet to be discovered, but conservative esti-
mates range between seventy thousand and eighty thousand. The
continent is split between two of the world’s floristic kingdoms.
The northern and central parts belong to the Neotropical
kingdom, while the regions south of the 30º south parallel are part
of the Holantarctic kingdom. The vast Amazonian region in the
northeast includes the lowlands of the Amazon basin, French
Guiana, Surinam, Guyana, and the coast of eastern Venezuela
along with its adjacent islands, Trinidad and Tobago. This region is
distinguished by its magnificent tropical rain forest, unmatched in
the world with regard to its size and diversity of plant life. The
Amazonian region surrounds a small but floristically unique region
of the Guiana Highlands. Further south, the Brazilian region
includes the Brazilian Highlands and the Gran Chaco region of
Paraguay and Argentina. Its vegetative cover ranges from various

types of savanna, through arid tropical woodland and montane
evergreen forest, to tropical rain forest along the Atlantic coast. To
the west of the Amazonian and Brazilian regions is the Andean
region, which encompasses coastal mountain ranges and the
Pacific coast of South America from Venezuela south to northern
Chile. The Andes obstruct the rain-bearing winds, giving rise to
the Atacama Desert in northern Chile, and the arid Patagonian
steppe in Argentina. The Chile-Patagonian region includes parts of
South America that belong to the Holantarctic kingdom. Moving
southward across Argentina, the subtropical forests give way to
open grasslands, the pampas. Further south the arid Patagonian
meseta is dominated by sparse grassland cohabiting with spiny
xerophytic shrubs. In Chile the coastal areas transition from semi-
desert in the north, through xerophytic shrub communities and
forests of predominantly Nothofagus, to the sparse, tundralike vege-
tation of Tierra del Fuego in the extreme south.

South America

colored the Atlantic as far as you could see,” remembered
Isabelle  (1999).  Belém  welcomed  the  Seiberts  with
unbearable heat and, to compensate for this, two botani-
cal gardens. That same day the couple toured the botani-
cal  garden  at  the  Museu  Emílio  Goeldi.  The  next
morning they drove to the garden at the Bosque Rodrigo
Alves  and  in  the  afternoon  visited  the  Instituto
Agronômico  do  Norte,  which  occupies  some  2400
hectares along the Guama River. At the institute, Russell
Seibert collected seeds of an unknown species of Adeno-
calymna (59281), a strong-growing vine embellished with
large yellow flowers.

On  14  January  the  Seiberts  left  Belém  for  Rio  de
Janeiro, where they stayed for several days. One day the
couple  took  a  short  excursion  inland  to  Petrópolis,  a
former summer capital of Portuguese royalty, and contin-
ued on to Serra dos Orgãos National Park near Teresópo-
lis. The  park’s  montane  scenery  resembled  “tremendous
jagged fingers of black granite with green valleys softening
the outline” (I. L. Seibert 1959b). There Russell Seibert
collected seeds of Paullinia cupana (59286), with an intent
to include the species in Longwood’s display of economic
plants. Known as guarana, this vine produces seeds from
which a traditional beverage is prepared; it is considered to
be the most stimulating of all caffeine beverages.

Seibert  spent  his  last  day  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  at  the
Jardim  Botânico,  where  he  was  shown  around  by  the
director, Campos Porto. This garden is known for its col-
lection of palms, none of which is more widely recognized
than the spectacular Roystonea oleracea, planted in double
rows radiating from the entrance in three directions. It was
another tree, however, that most enthralled Seibert: Clusia
grandiflora (59282), native of Brazil but cultivated at the
Jardim  Botânico,  with  its  stunning  12  cm  wide  white
flowers, highlighted by pink blush and hovering gracefully
at  the  ends  of  the  branches.  “Must  be  the  finest  of  all
clusias,” recorded Seibert in his field notes.

Sailing across the Andes
A short flight on 20 January took the Seiberts south of
Rio, over the Tropic of Capricorn, and into São Paulo. A
few days later they continued their journey to neighbor-
ing  Uruguay.  In  Montevideo  they  toured  the  Jardín  y
Museo Botánico, guided by Dr. Atilio Lombardo, and the
Instituto  Inter-Americano  de  Ciencias  Agrícolas,  where
they were met by Dr. José Marull. While in the garden,
Russell  Seibert  spotted  Phytolacca  dioica (59317),  a

Stifftia chrysantha (59144), a shrub producing bright orange
flowers, was collected by Seibert at the Imperial College of 
Tropical Agriculture. Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

rina, a tall tree shading cocoa plantings” (1959c). At Port
of Spain the couple was met by Dr. G. A. C. Herklots,
principal of the Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture.
Herklots showed the Seiberts college grounds landscaped
with  lush  and  verdant  plantings.  Among  the  most
impressive plants was Stifftia chrysantha (59144), a beau-
tiful orange-flowered shrub native to Brazil but also cul-
tivated at the college.

From the equator to the Tropic of Capricorn
The Seiberts landed on the South American continent on
11 January, in Brazil’s Belém, a city built near the mouth
of  the  Amazon.  “What  a  stunning  sight  to  fly  over  the
huge  mouth  of  the  Amazon  River  flowing  out  around
many  islands  formed  by  the  silt,  and  brown  sediment

290

Emissary to South America

Seibert admires a massive twenty-five-hundred-year-old stump of alerce or Patagonian cypress, Fitzroya
cupressoides, standing near Puerto Montt. Alerce, once abundant in southern Chile and Argentina, is
now threatened with extinction. Photo by Isabelle Seibert.

tree 

frequently
strange 
planted  around  Montev-
ideo.  This  relative  of  the
North American pokeweed
has  a  very  large,  almost
grotesque  trunk  base  for
water 
storage.  Seibert
planned to grow it in a tub
to  display  as  a  “curiosity.”
While touring the garden’s
nursery,  another  plant
caught his attention. It was
Stevia rebaudiana (62652),
a  humble  little  shrub,  tra-
ditionally  used  as  a  sweet-
ener by Guarani Indians of
Paraguay.  Despite 
its
modest floral presentation,
the plant offered an overall
very  pleasing  delicate
texture. From the institute,
Seibert also procured Lage-
naria  siceraria (59367),  a
vine cultivated in the vicin-
ity  of  Montevideo.  Small,
bottlelike  gourds  of  this
plant, dried and decorated,
served  as  the  traditional
cups for drinking yerba maté.

A  flight  over  the  Río  de  la  Plata  on  26  January
brought the Seiberts for a brief visit to Buenos Aires. A
day spent at the Jardín Botánico Carlos Thays provided
Russell Seibert an opportunity to study an extensive col-
lection  of  Haworthia held  there.  He  requested  several
species of these rosettelike succulents indigenous to South
Africa,  including  H.  cooperi (591927),  H.  laetevirens
(591928), and H. rigida (591931).

At  La  Plata  Museum,  part  of  the  Universidad
Nacional  de  La  Plata,  Seibert  met  with  Dr.  Humberto
Fabris,  an  expert  on  the  family  Bignoniaceae.  Seibert,
who had been interested in Bignoniaceae since the days of
his graduate research, was thrilled to discuss these plants
with Fabris. He later requested from Fabris seeds of any
Bignoniaceae “that might make worthwhile additions as
ornamental plants to be grown in our large conservatory.
I am especially interested in receiving seeds of the species
Tabebuia from the southernmost geographical limits. The

291

few which we have and which we have grown both in the
west and southwestern United States in the Los Angeles
area  and  here  in  the  conservatories  at  Longwood
Gardens,  seem  to  prove  excellent  plants  for  growing  in
tubs.  They  are  really  magnificent  ornamental  plants”
(Seibert 1959a).

On  1  February  the  Seiberts  left  Buenos  Aires  on  a
cross-country  flight  west  to  San  Carlos  de  Bariloche,  a
small town at the foot of the Andes in the heart of Nahuel
Huapí National Park. First they flew over a plain squared
off  into  farmland,  dotted  by  small  patches  of  trees  sur-
rounding lonely houses, and later petering out into flat
pampas with only scrub growth. After a little more than
four hours, the Andes appeared, and finally Lake Nahuel
Huapí, “unfolding like a mural . . . whose blue fingerlike
extremities reach into virgin forest in a frame of frosted
volcanoes” (D. Seibert 1962).

While in Bariloche, Seibert explored the surrounding
forests dominated by Nothofagus, southern beech trees of

South America

escarpments. Upon docking at a lonely outpost, they dis-
embarked to pass through the Argentinean border post.
From there the couple continued on another bus across
the Chilean border and into Puella on the bank of Lake
Todos los Santos. After spending a night in a small lodge
in  Puella,  the  Seiberts  boarded  a  steamboat  that  would
take them on a half-day ride across the lake. Upon reach-
ing  Petrohué  on  the  western  tip  of  the  lake,  they
exchanged the boat for a bus one last time. Following the
shore of Lake Llanquihue to Puerto Varas, they left the
Andes behind, while the environs turned into sprawling
pasturelands dotted with stately Lombardy poplars.

Northbound
The  day  of  5  February  was  this  trip’s  turning  point.
Puerto Varas was the southernmost location reached by
the  Seiberts  in  South  America.  In  the  morning  they
boarded a train to Santiago. After passing through a pic-
turesque  countryside  of  rolling  pasturelands  lined  with
rows of Lombardy poplars and Australian eucalyptus, the
train  entered  Chile’s  Central  Valley,  enclosed  between
two  mountain  ranges—the  snowcapped  Andes  to  the
east, the gentler Cordillera de la Costa to the west. The
drier, flattened Central Valley was filled by vast expanses
of  wheat  fields  and  orchards,  and  every  now  and  then
bisected by rivers rushing toward the ocean. Santiago was
reached shortly before midnight.

In Santiago, Seibert hoped to meet with Chile’s most
prominent  botanist,  Dr.  Carlos  Muñoz  Pizarro  of  the
Ministerio de Agricultura. Unfortunately, Muñoz Pizarro
was away. He arranged, however, for his friend Carlos G.
Cariola to accompany the Seiberts during their visit. On
7 February, Cariola took the couple to the private garden
of  wealthy  landowner  Don  Emilio  Madrid.  Madrid’s
estate, located near Maipú, south of Santiago, must have
made a positive impression on Seibert, as he enthusiasti-
cally summed it up in his field notes, “It was a veritable
botanic  garden!”  Among  the  plants  Seibert  requested
from  Madrid  were  a  splendid  red-flowered  Datura  coc-
cinea (59413)  and  Dendroseris  litoralis (59412),  a  small
palmlike  tree  with  very  large  heads  of  orange-yellow
flowers, endemic to Juan Fernández Islands.

On 9 February the group drove to Valparaíso, south
of Viña del Mar, to visit Jardín Suizo, a nursery run by
Benjamín  Pumpin.  Seibert  acquired  there  a  species  of
Alsophila (59411),  a  tree  fern  native  to  Juan  Fernández
Islands,  and  an  assortment  of  various  selections  of

A white-flowered variety of Chile’s national flower, Lapageria rosea
var. alba (591670), was procured by Seibert from Jardín Suizo in
Valparaíso. Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

“quite ethereal” appearance. On one of his outings he col-
lected  several  species  of  Lupinus (59368)  flowering  in
various  colors  and  apparently  cultivated  in  that  area.  A
short  boat  ride  took  him  to  Bosque  de  Arrayanes  near
Puerto  Quetri-Hué,  a  forest  of  ghostly  Luma  apiculata,
twisted small trees of Myrtaceae with cinnamon-red bark.
Two days later the Seiberts began their journey across
the Andes. First they boarded a boat to reach Puerto Blest
on the west end of the lake, facing the border with Chile.
From  there  a  bus  took  them  on  a  poor  gravel  road
through the forest, bringing them to the point where “the
road ends unceremoniously at the edge of the new lake
where nothing but forest surrounds it” (D. Seibert 1962).
There they changed to a small barge for a short ride across
Laguna  Fría,  a  diminutive  lake  enclosed  by  vertical

292

Emissary to South America

Lapageria  rosea (59415–6,
591666–70), 
Chile’s
national flower. From Val-
paraíso the Seiberts rushed
back to Santiago to catch a
flight to Lima, Peru. They
were leaving Chile inspired
by its unique flora but also
taken by the warmth with
which they were met. “Of
all  the  Latin  American
countries  which  I  have
visited,”  wrote  Seibert
upon  his  return  to  Long-
wood, “we have found the
people  of  Chile  the  most
simpático” (1959b).

It was the lush Panamanian vegetation, such as this coastal forest fringed by coconut palms near 
Portobelo, that swayed young Seibert in the 1930s toward a career in botany and plant exploration.
Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

The  couple  returned
to Lima after a twelve-year
absence.  During  World
War  II,  Seibert  had  been
recruited by the USDA as a
botanist  to  survey  rubber
plants in Peru, and between 1943 and 1947 he and Isabelle
had lived and worked in Tingo María, Iquitos, Cuzco, and
finally Lima. The day after their arrival, Seibert paid a visit
to  Dr.  Ramón  Ferreyra,  curator  of  the  herbarium  at  the
National Museum of Natural History and a leading Peru-
vian  botanist.  Later  he  toured  Lima’s  Jardín  Botánico,
where he collected Barnadesia lanceolata (59409), a shrub
with rose-pink flowers native to northern Peru.

Homecoming to Panama
On 14 February the Seiberts departed Lima on a flight to
Panama.  For  Russell  Seibert  this  meant  returning  to  a
place where his career as a plant explorer had begun in
1935. That year, while studying botany under Dr. Robert
Woodson  at  Washington  University  in  Saint  Louis,
Seibert had been invited to go to Panama to help collect
plants for the Missouri Botanical Garden. The experience
of  working  at  the  field  station  set  up  by  the  Missouri
Botanical Garden in the Canal Zone was thrilling enough
to convince the twenty-one-year-old to change his major
from geology to botany, and eventually to pursue a doc-
toral degree in the field.

After  arriving  in  Panama,  Seibert  visited  Summit
Gardens, a 700-hectare park encompassing both botani-

Heliconia wagneriana (59419) was found by Seibert growing on
the shores of Madden Lake in Panama. Photo by 
Walter H. Hodge.

cal and zoological gardens, located north of Panama City.
In  the  gardens  he  collected  seeds  of  a  white-flowered
Lagerstroemia  hirsuta (59421),  a  small  tree  native  to
India. He then continued north to the shores of Madden
Lake,  a  man-made  reservoir  supplying  water  for  the
Panama Canal. At the lake Seibert found Heliconia wag-
neriana (59419), its bracts brightly colored in red, pink,
and  yellow. The  following  day  while  botanizing  on  the

293

South America

Norantea guianensis (59929) is a shrub producing curious, bright
red, bladderlike bracts that function as nectar pouches. It was
obtained by Seibert from a private garden in Balboa. Photo by
Richard F. Keen.

Cyrtostachys lakka (59928), or sealing-wax palm, valued for its
deep red leaf sheaths, was procured by Seibert from a private
garden in Balboa. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

Arpophyllum spicatum (61945), one of the orchids Seibert received
from Lankester of Cartago. Photo by Richard F. Keen.

shores of the Gatún Lake he collected yet another Helico-
nia sp. (59420), this one with large red bracts.

The next couple of days spent in and around Balboa,
just outside of Panama City, gave Seibert an opportunity
to visit some of the private collections. There he acquired,
among others, Brownea macrophylla (591940), a captivat-
ing  shrub  with  large  scarlet  blossoms  forming  on  the
main  trunk  and  limbs;  Cyrtostachys  lakka (59928),
sealing-wax palm, rated among the most beautiful palms
for  its  deep  red  leaf  sheaths;  and  Norantea  guianensis
(59929), valued for its spectacular erect spikes of brilliant
orange-red bracts forming nectar pouches.

On  18  February  the  Seiberts  departed  Panama  and
made a brief stop in Costa Rica to meet with Dr. Ralph

E.  Allee,  director  of  the  Instituto  Inter-Americano  de
Ciencias  Agrícolas  in  Turrialba,  and  with  Charles  H.
Lankester of Cartago, an orchid enthusiast and founder
of  the  Lankester  Botanical  Garden.  At  the  institute  in
Turrialba,  Seibert  collected  Solanum  hyporhodium
(59430), which produces beautiful orange-red fruits used
to make a preserve. From Lankester’s collection, Seibert
requested  several  orchids,  including  Arpophyllum  spica-
tum (61945)  and  Rossioglossum  schlieperianum (61947).
Two days later the couple left Costa Rica and returned to
Philadelphia,  thus  closing  their  circle  around  South
America.

294

Peruvian Attraction

Peru, with an area of nearly 1.3 million
km2, extends from the equator to latitude
17º south. Altitudes range from sea level
to the snow-covered summit of Huas-
carán, which, at 6768 m, is the tallest
mountain in the tropics. Rainfall in Peru
ranges from the extremely dry northern
fringe of the Atacama Desert to cloud
forests with more than 8000 mm of rain
per year. The country is usually divided
into three major floristic regions: the
eastern Amazonian forest, the mountain-
ous Andean region, and the narrow,
mostly desert coastal region along the
Pacific. The Amazonian forests are
among the most biologically diverse on
Earth. Many of these species of plants
can also be found on the lower slopes of
the Andean region, which is home to
about a third of Peruvian flora. At the
altitude of about 1500 m, the lower
Andean forest is replaced by montane
forest, which progressively decreases in
diversity with altitude. Orchids and other
epiphytes are an exception to this rule,
being more prevalent and diverse in mid-
elevation Andean forests than in other
areas. Most of the Andean forests occur
on the eastern slopes facing Amazonia.
Above the timberline, at about 3500 m,
this forest is replaced by high-montane
flora composed mostly of herbaceous
plants and shrubs. Flora of the coastal
region is low in diversity, and the vegeta-
tion is sparse except in the condensation
zones where winter fogs are intercepted by
steep hills adjacent to the coast.

PERUVIAN ATTRACTION

“To see a fine new ornamental plant is exciting to me,”
wrote  Seibert  (1967a)  after  his  return  from  the  1965
expedition to Peru. “However, to find such a plant in its
natural local habitat is a memorable experience and prob-
ably explains why, for the past thirty years of my gradu-
ate  student  and  professional  life,  plant  exploration  has
attracted me to other parts of the world. This attraction,
like a compatible marriage, does not wane with maturity.
It becomes even more magnetic.”

295

Return of the rubber-tree hunter
Seibert was not a novice to the Peruvian Amazonia and
the  Andes.  His  first  assignment  in  Peru  had  come  in
1943, when, after working for a couple of years for the
USDA  on  their  rubber  plant  survey  in  Costa  Rica,
Panama,  Colombia,  Venezuela,  and  Haiti,  Seibert  was
asked, as part of a wartime effort, to search for high-pro-
ducing,  disease-resistant  wild  rubber  in  the  Amazonian
rain forest. In One River (1996), Wade Davis writes that
Seibert  “spent  the  first  six  months  in  Iquitos  on  the
Ucayali  river,  nosing  around  the  bars  and  waterfront

South America

agreement.  To  know  the
greatest  of  the  trees—the
lecheros, the  real  bleeders,
as they put it—one had to
travel upriver and beyond
to the forests of Madre de
Dios.”  After 
spending
three  years  exploring  the
Madre  de  Dios  region
where  Peru,  Bolivia,  and
Brazil  meet,  Seibert  suc-
cessfully  brought  out
superior  rubber  clones  to
plant in nurseries in Tingo
María, on the east side of
the Andes.

allowed  him 

Years  spent  in  Peru
searching  for  rubber  trees
inspired Seibert with vivid
images  of  fabulously  rich
flora  and  ancient  culture,
and 
to
befriend  many  prominent
botanists  of  that  country.
When contemplating a return to Peru nearly twenty years
later,  this  time  to  search  for  ornamental  plants,  Seibert
wrote  to  one  of  those  botanists,  Ferreyra  in  Lima:  “For
many years, it has been my desire to know more about the
plants which were used as ornamentals by the ancient civ-
ilizations of Peru. Therefore, I hope to visit some of the
older  gardens  which  may  be  in  existence  in  the  ancient
centers of the Peruvian civilizations such as Nazca, Cuzco,
Ayacucho,  Huancayo,  Huánuco,  Huarás, Trujillo,  Lima,
etc.”  (Seibert  1964e).  In  addition  to  exploring  ancient
centers of Peruvian civilization, Seibert decided to revisit
the rain forest areas around Iquitos and Tingo María.

This leaf of Victoria ‘Longwood Hybrid’, measured in 1979 at Longwood’s outdoor pools, reached 220
cm in diameter. The largest ‘Longwood Hybrid’ leaf on record, measured in 1995 at the Royal Botanic
Gardens, Kew, was 259 cm in diameter. Photo by Richard F. Keen.

Victoria ‘Longwood Hybrid’ was raised at Longwood Gardens in
1961. That year Patrick A. Nutt made a cross between V. cruziana
and V. amazonica, the only two species of giant water platters.
Photo by Gottlieb A. Hampfler.

shanties, visiting the small farms where retired seringueros
scratched  a  living  from  tired  soil  and  old  rubber  trees
swollen with wounds. Each of the rubber tappers had dif-
ferent  memories  of  the  boom,  of  the  era  when  Iquitos
came  close  to  rivaling  Manaus.  .  .  .  On  one  issue,
however,  Seibert  found  the  rubber  tappers  in  complete

Meeting with giant water platters
Seibert  was  especially  interested  in  studying  Victoria
amazonica in its natural habitat. By that time Longwood
staff had mastered ways of growing both species of Vic-
toria, V. amazonica and V. cruziana, in the heated water-
lily  pools  outdoors.  A  hybrid  between  the  species
developed  at  Longwood  in  1961  and  named  V. ‘Long-
wood  Hybrid’  substantially  improved  the  display  value
of Victoria, but Seibert was hoping for further improve-
ments through breeding with new strains. He argued the

296

Peruvian Attraction

The Amazon riverfront in Iquitos, with river boats that ply rainforest waterways. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

need  for  studying  and  introducing  plants  growing  in
Peru:  “V.  amazonica exists  in  the  upper  Amazon  valley
but seed of this strain has, to our knowledge, not been
grown under cultivated conditions. It has not been ade-
quately  observed  to  see  what  differences  might  exist
between this strain and that from the lower Amazon and
Guianas from whence the cultivated species material has
been derived” (R. J. Seibert 1965c).

“In going back over my notes of 1943–46, I find that
the  only  place  I  actually  noted  it  was  on  the  Amazon
below Iquitos in a slough on the south side of the river
between Pepas and Transvaal,” wrote Seibert (1964d) to
Dr.  Michael  H.  Langford  at  the  American  Embassy  in
Lima.  He  asked  many  of  his  correspondents  in  Peru  if
they  had  seen  Victoria  amazonica. One  of  them,  Dr.
Calaway  H.  Dodson  of  the  Universidad  Nacional  de
Amazonia Peruana, replied, “I have seen a Victoria which

I take to be V. amazonica, in the sloughs and backwashes
of the Amazon just upriver from Iquitos while flying over.
I don’t know of any easy way to get to them but will have
it  arranged  for  you  by  the  time  that  you  get  here”
(Dodson 1964).

Filled with high expectations, Seibert arrived in Lima
on  7  January  and  a  couple  of  days  later  departed  on  a
flight to Iquitos on the Amazon. In Iquitos, Dodson lived
up to his promise and made arrangements for Seibert to
travel to Ushpa Cocha, an oxbow lake about 30 km from
Iquitos to observe Victoria. On 12 January, Seiberts and
Dodson, accompanied by Guillermo Cetrado, ornitholo-
gist, and José Torres, herbarium assistant, both from the
university, proceeded by launch upstream to a forest trail
that  led,  after  a  three-hour  overland  hike,  to  Ushpa
Cocha. There, on the far edge of the lake, they saw several
plants of Victoria.

297

South America

Dimerocostus tessmannii (65847) was collected by Seibert at Ushpa
Cocha, an oxbow lake near Iquitos. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

A Yagua Indian woman holds a bowl of gruel made from fruits of
Bactris gasipaes. This will be used to make chicha. Photo by 
Walter H. Hodge.

Fruits of peach palm, Bactris gasipaes, known only in cultivation in
many parts of Central and South America, are eaten boiled or
roasted. When dried and ground, the fruit pulp provides flour
used for baking bread; when fermented, it provides an alcoholic
beverage known as chicha. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

As  Seibert  recalled  (Anderson  1965b),  “The  partly
Indian inhabitant on the bank of this lake told us that the
new plants were only starting to grow as the rainy season
was getting started. The plants, he said, would continue
to come up and increase in size throughout the year until
almost the entire shallow lake, a foot and a half to 3 feet
[45–90 cm] deep at that time, would be covered with the
large  6  foot  [1.8  m]  diameter  leaves.  Then,  about
October, and in the height of the dry season as the water
level  went  down,  plants  would  die  back  and  disappear
until the next rainy season.”

As  the  plants  were  only  beginning  to  flower,  there
were  no  maturing  seed  pods  available  for  collecting.

“Since  the  plants  are  said  to  start  here  with  the  rainy
season  as  the  water  in  the  lake  or  ‘cocha’  rises,  one  can
only surmise that the platter petioles lengthen to accom-
modate  the  water  depth,”  wrote  Seibert  (Anderson
1965b). “The plants, according to conversations, appear
to be confined to some of the older shallow oxbow lakes.
These appear to be filled by the rains, with clear run-off
water  rather  than  from  the  rising  muddy  waters  of  the
Amazon spreading out into its lower flood plain in this
general area.”

Cetrado,  who  accompanied  Seibert  and  Dodson  to
Ushpa  Cocha,  later  collected  seeds  of  Victoria at  the
height of the season and sent them to Longwood Gardens

298

Peruvian Attraction

Fruits of Mauritia flexuosa (65850) are sold in the market in
Iquitos. The fruits are eaten fresh or used for extraction of cooking
oil. Dried fruit pulp is ground into flour or used to make a 
fermented drink. Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

in October of 1965. At Ushpa Cocha, Seibert collected
several other plants, including the rare Dimerocostus tess-
mannii (65847), a member of the ginger family with very
attractive  yellow  flowers;  it  was  later  planted  in  Long-
wood’s Palm House, where it can still be admired.

Two  days  later  Seibert  made  an  excursion  to
Zungaro Cocha, another oxbow lake along Río Nanay, a
tributary  of  the  Amazon,  some  25  km  west  of  Iquitos.
There he visited a 2000-hectare preserve of a virgin rain
forest set aside for the Universidad Nacional de Amazo-
nia Peruana. A 15 January excursion to Guayamba, west
of  Iquitos,  resulted  in  the  collection  of  several  edible
plants,  including  Bactris  gasipaes, among  the  most
desired  cultivated  palms  in  the  area,  which  produces
fruits that are edible after boiling in salt water; Mauritia
flexuosa (65850), with striking, edible fruits, described as
“almost an addiction to many”; and Myrciaria paraensis
(65859), a shrubby tree with purplish fruits from which
a refreshing drink is made.

Cojomaria—unexpected encounter
Upon his return to Lima on 16 January, Seibert spent a
couple of days packing and shipping plants and seeds col-
lected  in  the  Iquitos  area,  and  preparing  for  the  next
chapter of the expedition, which would take him into the
high  Andes.  On  20  January  the  Seiberts  left  Lima  for
Huarás. Traveling in a rented car posed new challenges,
since road signs, notorious for being stolen, were nowhere
to be found. Asking strangers for directions became the
only available alternative. The road north of Lima, which

The Seiberts traveled on the Pan-American Highway through the
coastal desert areas north of Lima. Photo by Walter H. Hodge.

first passed through stark, dry hills, was cut along fantas-
tic  sheer  sand  drops.  From  time  to  time  green  valleys
formed by rivers rushing to the Pacific broke the monot-
ony of the desertlike landscape.

After  Paramonga,  Seibert  turned  east  onto  a  gravel
road to Huarás. The valley lined with Lombardy poplars
and eucalyptus gradually gave way to a moonlike scene of
barren  waste.  Finally  in  this  rugged  terrain  a  few  cacti
appeared. After a long and steep climb, a mountain pass
called Conococha opened at 4080 m onto a huge plain
marked by a shallow lake of the same name which feeds a
river. The  plain  is  closed  from  the  east  by  snowcapped
mountain peaks, the tallest being Huascarán. By evening
Seibert reached Huarás, a picturesque town with narrow
cobblestone  streets  around  the  central  square  still
showing scars from the 1941 rock avalanche that wiped
out part of it.

The  next  day  Seibert  stopped  at  the  Archeological
Museum of Ancash, where he noticed an unusual form of
Cantua buxifolia (6579), the national flower of Peru. Typ-
ically  this  shrub  produces  flowers  with  pink  or  purple
floral  tubes  marked  by  yellow  stripes  and  intensely  red
lobes. The specimen growing at the museum had flowers
with  yellowish  floral  tubes  and  white  lobes.  Dr.  Mario
Augusto  Soriano  Infante  of  the  Archeological  Museum
graciously shared a number of seeds from this plant.

The Seiberts drove from Huarás to Trujillo via Sechín
and Casma. The road out of Huarás ascended to reveal a
magnificent  view  of  the  valley  of  Río  Santa,  filled  with
many  cultivated,  stone-lined  fields  of  potatoes,  beans,

299

South America

Isabelle Seibert with children who are selling flowers of 
Paramongaia weberbaueri (65522) near Pariacoto. Photo by 
Russell J. Seibert.

and corn. Scattered about were tiny huts built with round
stone bases and peaked thatched roofs. At 4225 m, the
road reached a mountain pass at Punta de Callán, from
where  the  view  opened  onto  a  tremendous  valley.  Its
slopes were lined by a patchwork quilt of color produced
by thousands of years of agricultural use and crisscrossed
by centuries-old paths, Inca roads, and irrigation canals.
“One of the great thrills of plant collecting is to find
an  outstanding  plant  about  which  one  was  completely
unaware,” Seibert later wrote (1965c). “Such was the case
on the trip to the Callejón de Huaylas and Trujillo. Peru
has a phenomenal number of bulbous plants in the drier
areas  of  desert,  semidesert,  and  western  Andean  slopes.
Most of these plants are very restrictive as to their habitat
and remain in full bloom only a relatively short period of
time. Only if one happens to be at the proper place at the
proper time is one privileged to see some of these plants.
The outstanding example of this type of occurrence took
place  as  I  was  going  from  Huarás  to  Casma.”  At  some
point Seibert saw a lone Andean Indian on horseback car-
rying  a  sizeable  bouquet  of  lovely  yellow  flowers. They
were so huge that Seibert stopped his car and asked the
man  for  their  name.  “The  flowers,  he  said,  were  called
‘cojomaria’  and  were  found  growing  further  down  the
road. A short drive and several high Andean switchbacks
down,  we  encountered  three  children  attending  several
bouquets  of  the  same  large,  yellow  amaryllidaceous
flowers. Obviously, the bouquets were for sale but since
the three children spoke no Spanish, our Quechua proved
insufficient to communicate well. We surmised that the
plants  grew  in  an  area  further  down  the  Andean  slopes

Paramongaia weberbaueri (65522), first collected by Antonio 
Raimondi in 1874, was classified later by August Weberbauer 
as a species of Ismene. It was not until 1949 that Octavio Velarde-
Núñez established genus Paramongaia, comprised of a single
species, P. weberbaueri. Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

and that for a 5-sole note, we could purchase a sizeable
bundle  of  flowers.  What  remarkable  blooms!  At  first
sight, they remind one of giant daffodils, some 6 inches
[15  cm]  in  diameter,  butter  yellow  and  very  fragrant.
Further  down  the  Andes  at  somewhat  less  than  10,000
feet  [3050  m]  and  along  the  steep  slopes  immediately
above the village of Pariacoto, Department of Ancash, we
suddenly  observed  huge  quantities  of  the  flowering
bulbous plants growing within a rather restricted area of
perhaps  less  than  1000  acres  [400  hectares].  The  soil
appeared to be a decomposing granite. The natural vege-
tation was sparse scrub, almost chaparral-like. The plants
were growing on extremely steep slopes which made their
collection both difficult and precarious. With the aid of a
car jack handle and digging to depths of 1 foot [30 cm],
entire  plants,  including  the  bulbs,  were  recovered”
(Seibert 1967a).

After  climbing  up  and  down  the  slope  and  nearly
falling over a cliff, Seibert left the site with nine precious
plants. Their incredible flowers were 15 cm in diameter,
with one specimen reaching nearly 18 cm. Exhausted but
thrilled with his rare find, Seibert reached the coastal city
of Trujillo as the sun was setting over the ocean.

The  flowers  of  cojomaria collected  near  Pariacoto
were kept for a couple of days, and a few lasted until the
Seiberts returned to Lima four days later. It was sometime
afterward, while discussing the plant with Dr. Jorge León,
a  botanist  with  the  Agency  for  International  Develop-
ment  in  Lima,  that  it  was  identified  as  Paramongaia

300

Peruvian Attraction

weberbaueri (65522). This rare member of the amaryllis
family  was  originally  described  from  plants  growing  at
the  base  of  the  Fortaleza  Paramonga  near  the  Pacific
coast, hence the generic name. As Seibert recorded in his
report, “Possibly, it can be surmised, this plant has sur-
vived as a former cultivated plant of the pre-Inca civiliza-
tion  occupying  the  Fortaleza.  Actually,  it  is  native  near
Pariacoto at about 8000 feet [2450 m] elevation where I
was fortunate enough to find it flowering” (1965c). The
relative obscurity in which this plant remained since its
discovery can be explained by the fact that it is not well
known  even  in  Peru  outside  its  natural  habitat  in  the
Department of Ancash. Seibert was determined to bring
Paramongaia back to Longwood alive. In his field notes
he described it as “a most striking flower like a giant nar-
cissus and as fragrant. Keeps excellently as a cut flower.
This is a prize collection—grow at all cost.”

Sacred flowers of the Inca
On 29 January, Seibert flew from Lima to Tingo María,
located on the eastern side of the Andes in the valley of
Huallaga.  Before  coming  to  Peru,  when  planning  this
expedition,  he  had  become  intrigued  by  a  rare  fern,
Platycerium andinum (6519, 6530, 65855). “Within the
past  few  years,  the  only  American  representative  of  the
‘staghorn  fern’  was  rediscovered  in  Peru,”  wrote  Seibert
(1965c). “Originally, in the mid 1850s, Richard Spruce
had  discovered  and  collected  the  plant  near  Tarapoto,
Peru.  Platycerium  andinum has  particularly  interesting
and attractive spore-bearing fronds which are covered on
the under surface with a silvery tomentum making them
appear  as  spun-silver.  Although  I  saw  several  plants
growing in a primitive garden in Iquitos, the owner was
out of the country and arrangements for its procural were
not  possible  at  the  time.  I  was  told  of  a  young  man  in
Tingo María who was reported to have collected plants of
this  species  from  the  Province  of  San  Martín.  Contact
was made with José Schunke in Tingo María and on my
trip there, four plants were purchased.” These plants were
later sent to Longwood, where they were exhibited within
conservatories for the next twenty-three years.

On 1 February, Seibert returned to Lima to prepare
his  collections  from  Tingo  María  for  shipment  to  the
United States. Four days later he was again on a plane, this
time  heading  southeast  to  Cuzco.  On  the  day  of  his
arrival,  Seibert  visited  the  Museo  Arqueológico.  In  the
patio garden of this museum he spotted a weakly ascend-

Dodson stands beside Platycerium andinum (6519, 6530, 65855),
a rare staghorn fern that Seibert procured in Tingo María. 
Photo by Russell J. Seibert.

ing shrub about 2.5 m tall growing into Cantua buxifolia
for support. It had gracefully drooping, very long inflores-
cences. Individual flowers had dark purple calyces and 15
cm long, brilliant scarlet corollas. Upon closer inspection
the plant turned out be Salvia dombeyi (65162, 65250),
claimed to be one of the sacred flowers of the Inca.

That this Salvia made a great impression on Seibert
is evident from his field notes: “One of the most spectac-
ular inflorescences I have ever seen, should make a spec-
tacular giant basket plant.” The same level of fascination
is reflected in the report he prepared upon his return to
Longwood:  “The  most  outstanding  of  all  plants  I  had
ever  seen  in  Peru  was  ‘the  Sacred  Flower  of  the  Incas’
Salvia dombeyi. The somewhat weakly growing shrub has
remarkable drooping inflorescences about 16 inches [40
cm] long, made up of brilliant scarlet flowers 6–7 inches

301

South America

Salvia dombeyi (65162, 65250) is a subshrubby climber up to 5 m
tall. Its flowers appear later in summer and fall in conical racemes
to 35 cm long. In Peru this plant can be found at altitudes of
3000 to 3600 m, between Cajamarca in the north and Cuzco in
the south. Photo by Earl E. Smith.

In 1968, Armstrong made a cross between Cantua cuzcoensis
(65164) with pale lavender flowers and C. buxifolia with purplish
red flowers. One seedling, which produced an exceptional profu-
sion of hot pink flowers, was selected from among the offspring
and named ‘Hot Pants’. Photo by Robert J. Armstrong.

[15–18 cm] long. The plant is used as adornment in the
high  elevations  of  southern  Peru  usually  above  11,000
feet [3350 m]. There is question as to whether the plant
exists in the wild. Presumably, it is only maintained as a
relict plant under cultivation by the Indians. The flowers
are used to decorate the altars of the Indian churches on
feast days. It is well known to the Indians of the area by
the Quechua name nucchu” (Seibert 1965c).

Seibert  spent  the  next  several  days  collecting  plants
from  locations  around  Cuzco.  In  Urubamba  he  found
Cantua cuzcoensis (65164), a 3 m tall shrub with droop-
ing pink flowers, which Seibert considered more attrac-
tive than the better known C. buxifolia. Three years later

a  cross  made  between  C.  cuzcoensis collected  in
Urubamba and C. buxifolia, performed at Longwood by
Armstrong, led to a selection named ‘Hot Pants’.

Despite  chilly  weather  and  continuous  rain,  which
inflicted Seibert with an unrelenting cold, collecting con-
tinued  in  the  Cuzco  area  for  a  few  days,  after  which
Seibert  returned  to  Lima  on  10  February.  Several  days
passed during which Seibert prepared his botanical treas-
ures for the trip back to the United States. He also used
the time to visit outdoor markets in Lima. Such places,
where countless local varieties of cultivated fruits, vegeta-
bles,  and  flowers  are  traded,  are  often  ignored  by  plant
explorers  interested  exclusively  in  wild  plants.  Seibert

302

Chilean Reconnaissance

In South America the Mediterranean-climate region
is situated in Chile. This country, stretching across thirty-
six  degrees  in  latitude,  traverses  several  climatic  zones.
The  Mediterranean  climate  prevails  in  central  Chile,
approximately  covering  the  area  between  latitudes  32º
south and 37º south. In 2001 a reconnaissance trip was
organized, with the main purpose to observe and collect
spring-flowering  plants  of  central  Chile.  The  team
included Dr. Mark Bridgen, professor at the University of
Connecticut, Rodney T. Eason, graduate student at the
University of Delaware, and me. Upon landing in Santi-
ago  on  15  October,  we  were  joined  by  Dr.  Eduardo
Olate,  professor  of  Pontifica  Universidad  Católica  de
Chile, our host and guide for the entire trip.

Gentle giants of Nahuelbuta
The  day  after  our  arrival  in  Santiago  we  departed  on  a
flight to the coastal city of Concepción, some 500 km to
the  south.  This  is  the  area  where  the  Mediterranean
climate of central Chile transitions to the cooler, wetter
climate of southern Chile, which once supported exten-
sive coniferous forests of Araucaria araucana, Austrocedrus
chilensis, and  Fitzroya  cupressoides. In  Concepción  we
rented a four-wheel-drive vehicle and drove south to the
Cordillera de Nahuelbuta.

Along the road between Santa Juana and Nacimiento,
a patch of fiery red-orange daylilylike flowers brought our
car to an abrupt stop. The flowers, backlit by afternoon
sun, suddenly roused us from a lethargy caused by long
hours  of  driving  through  a  countryside  scourged  with
monotonous  plantations  of  introduced  eucalypts  and
pines. Before us, occupying a roadside bank, was a large
colony  of  what  turned  out  to  be  Rhodophiala  advena
(011815). After crawling up and sliding down the steep
bank, we gave in to a frenzy of photographing and collect-
ing. Our activities naturally brought out curious onlook-
ers  from  a  nearby  homestead,  who  seemed  amused  by
what  must  have  appeared  to  be  rather  bizarre  behavior.
Still marveling at how a plant of such incredible beauty
could  grow  so  humbly  along  a  roadside,  we  reluctantly
returned to the vehicle and drove away.

Later in the afternoon we arrived at Parque Nacional
Nahuelbuta, established primarily to protect the remain-
ing tracts of forests of Araucaria araucana, monkey puzzle
trees. Araucaria can be found in the Chilean and Argen-
tinean Andes, usually growing on steep volcanic slopes.
To the west of the Andes, the last remnant population is

Paramongaia weberbaueri, which was collected by Seibert near 
Pariacoto, has been exhibited at Longwood since 1967. Photo by
Robert J. Armstrong.

early on developed a deep appreciation for these markets
and used every opportunity he had to browse through the
endless  variety  of  local  selections,  looking  for  unusual
plants.  In  an  open-air  market  in  Lima  he  found
Chenopodium quinoa (65243), grown for its highly nutri-
tious seeds, which are used in making soups; Cucurbita
moschata (65275), known locally as zapallo, with tremen-
dous fruits to 60 cm in diameter; and purple corn, Zea
mays (65241–2),  used  for  making  chicha  morada and
maza morada. These unusual crops were exhibited for the
first time in Longwood’s vegetable garden in the summer
of 1965.

On  17  February,  Seibert  departed  for  Philadelphia.
Many  of  his  collections  were  first  sent  to  the  USDA
Inspection House in Miami, where they were started at
the  introduction  garden.  Among  them  were  bulbs  of
Paramongaia, which were forwarded to Longwood in the
spring of 1965. These came into bloom for the first time
in January of 1967 and were exhibited in the conservato-
ries the following month.

CHILEAN RECONNAISSANCE

Over  the  years  a  whole  array  of  plants  native  to
Mediterranean-climate regions of the world have been
exhibited  in  Longwood’s  conservatories.  Displays
incorporating  these  plants  have  not  only  met  with
interest and acceptance from the public but have also
proved  that  many  Mediterranean  plants  are  quite
amenable to indoor conditions.

303

A colony of Rhodophiala advena (011815) occupied a roadside
bank between Santa Juana and Nacimiento. Photo by Tomasz
Ani´sko.

Chile occupies a narrow strip of land of nearly 760,000 km2
between the Andes and the Pacific Ocean. It is 4200 km long but
at no point wider than 350 km. The Cordillera de la Costa rises to
2200 m, while the highest peak in the Andes, Aconcagua, reaches
6960 m. Further south, both mountain chains gradually decrease
in elevation. Chile is a land of climatic extremes. Much of north-
ern Chile is a desert receiving negligible or no rainfall. The middle
third of the country, between La Serena in the north and Concep-
ción in the south, enjoys a Mediterranean climate and is the center
of Chile’s economic activities. In that region, annual rainfall ranges
from about 80 mm in La Serena to 1270 mm in Concepción, and
most of it comes in winter. Further south, annual precipitation
increases while the summer dry season becomes shorter. The
southernmost regions of Chile are bitterly cold and receive as
much as 4000 mm of rain. Temperatures in Chile are moderate
throughout most of the year thanks to the cold Humboldt
Current. Like the climate, the vegetation of Chile varies greatly
from north to south. The deserts of the north are replaced by
steppe in central Chile. Mixed and evergreen forests predominate
south of Río Bío-Bío but give way to cold steppes in Patagonia.
Chile’s isolation by desert to the north, mountains to the east, and
ocean to the west resulted in a high rate of endemism of its flora,
comparable to that of oceanic islands. Chile is home to about five
thousand species, and of those more than half are endemic.

Chilean Reconnaissance

in the Cordillera de Nahuelbuta, which forms part of the
coastal ranges.

Familiarity with individual Araucaria trees cultivated
as ornamentals in the warmer parts of Europe and North
America, even if sufficient to inspire one to visit the trees
in their natural habitat, is not adequate preparation for
the  experience  of  entering  a  centuries-old  Araucaria
forest. Mountains and hills sparsely clad in these gentle,
silent giants, and extending to the horizon, give one the
sense  of  being  in  another  world.  Trees  crowding  the
slopes  like  colossal  parasols  on  a  beach,  the  hypnotic
movement  of  curtains  of  lichens  hanging  from  the
branches, massive trunks encased in thick bark reminis-
cent of the shell of a Goliath tortoise—all of these things
together  make  such  a  strong  impression  as  to  induce  a
state of exhilaration and euphoria.

As the sun set over the Araucaria forest, we realized
we had to rush down the mountain in order to return to
the  main  highway  before  dark,  and  then  reach  Los
Ángeles, a town southeast of Concepción, where we were
to spend the night.

Black sand and seven waterfalls
Early  the  next  morning  the  team  departed  Los  Ángeles
for Talca, about 250 km to the north. Past Chillán, we
turned off the main highway and took a road toward the
coast.  In  the  afternoon  we  arrived  in  the  small  coastal
town of Pelluhue, squeezed between black sand beaches
and steep hills overlooking the Pacific Ocean. Along the
beach, picturesque cliffs and rocks harbored a most inter-
esting  flora.  Scarlet-red  Phycella  bicolor
(011790,
011801),  although  more  modest  in  size  than  its  cousin
Rhodophiala, was equally attractive. Impressive clumps of
shrubby  Lobelia  tupa, up  to  3  m  across  and  2  m  high,
were a revelation, as we were used to seeing only herba-
ceous  members  of  that  genus. This  species’  red  flowers,
arranged  in  60  cm  long  spikes,  are  pollinated  by  hum-
mingbirds.  A  couple  of  species  of  Alstroemeria, which
were  in  bloom,  seemed  to  favor  crevices  in  the  rocks,
giving them some degree of protection from the wind.

We  reached  our  destination, Talca,  in  late  evening.
The  next  morning  we  visited  the  Universidad  de Talca,
where we met with Flavia Schiappacasse Canepa, a pro-
fessor of floriculture and former student of Bridgen. After
showing  us  the  research  facilities  at  the  university  and
sharing  with  us  some  of  the  plants  being  trialed  there,
Schiappacasse  accompanied  us  to  Altos  de  Lircay,  a

Monkey puzzle trees, Araucaria araucana, growing in the Parque
Nacional Nahuelbuta. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

nature  reserve  in  the  Andean  foothills.  Higher  rainfall
and  a  relatively  short  dry  season  allow  for  broad-leaved
evergreen and mixed forests to flourish in the area. South-
ern beeches, including deciduous Nothofagus obliqua and
evergreen N. dombeyi, predominate in these forests.

Approaching  the  park,  we  spotted  an  impressive
yellow-flowering shrub. Upon closer inspection it turned
out to be Senecio yegua (011809), making a show with its
large panicles heavy with 5 cm wide flower heads backed
by silvery gray leaves. Higher up the hills, inside the park,
spring had not quite arrived, so plants in bloom were few
and far between. A park ranger told us to come back in
December, when the forests would become, in his words,
“a virtual garden.”

On 19 October, Schiappacasse, joined by Doris Lee,
also  Bridgen’s  former  student,  led  us  on  yet  another
outing  in  the  mountains,  this  time  to  the  Reserva

305

Phycella bicolor (011790) occupies rocky cliffs along the black sand
beaches of Pelluhue. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

The author is dwarfed by one of the centuries-old specimens of
Nothofagus dombeyi that abound in Altos de Lircay, a nature
reserve east of Talca. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Shrubby Senecio yegua (011809) was spotted near Altos de Lircay.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Resting along the trail in the Reserva Nacional Las Siete Tazas 
are, left to right, Lee, Schiappacasse Canepa, Eason, Olate, and
Bridgen. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Chilean Reconnaissance

The upper ridges of the coastal ranges are shrouded in clouds near Parque Nacional Fray Jorge. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Nacional Las Siete Tazas, a nature reserve known for a
series of seven majestic waterfalls. Like the day before,
only  the  earliest  bloomers  were  putting  on  a  show.
Noteworthy  examples  included  Lathyrus  subandinus,
sporting eye-catching purple-blue flowers, seen in only
one  location,  and  Rhodophiala  splendens
(011783),
another  lovely  example  of  this  most  garden-worthy
genus.  Upon  returning  to  our  vehicles  several  hours
later,  we  bid  farewell  to  Schiappacasse  and  Lee  and
headed off to Santiago.

El Norte Chico
On  20  October  we  continued  north  from  Santiago
toward  the  town  of  La  Serena.  The  semiarid  region
between  latitudes  28º  south  and  32º  south  is  called  El
Norte Chico, The Little North. With every turn of the
road  the  land  appeared  to  be  drier  and  the  vegetation

more xeric. Nevertheless, spring was in full swing, and we
observed many plants in flower.

Further north, the coastal ranges rise to higher eleva-
tions, forcing the moisture carried by oceanic air to con-
dense into clouds and create nearly permanent conditions
of drizzle and fog along the top ridges, while a rain shadow
affects the slopes and valleys to the east. This is also the
area  where  Parque  Nacional  Fray  Jorge  has  been  estab-
lished to protect the unique ecosystem of these ranges.

Once we reached the mountaintops in the park, we
found ourselves surrounded by a virtual cloud forest, in
stark contrast to the xeric flora at the base. Dense clouds
limited visibility to 15 m, while ferocious winds rocked
our vehicle left and right. Abundant moisture there sup-
ported a lush community of evergreen trees, shrubs, large
herbs,  and  grasses.  In  a  meadow,  Leucocoryne  ixioides
flowered prolifically. Although a most charming plant in

307

South America

Nolana paradoxa flowers in spring in great profusion despite the
extreme conditions of the Atacama Desert. Photo by Tomasz
Ani´sko.

A lonely Rhodophiala bagnoldii grows on a beach in the Parque
Nacional Llanos de Challe. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

every respect, this Leucocoryne had but one fault, as Eason
described in his travelogue: “Later in the day, I regretted
Mark and Eduardo’s decision to collect bulbs of this plant
as  the  flowers  smell  like  rotting  onions.  Unfortunately,
the plants were stored in the back of the 4-Runner near
my head. Eventually, I became immune to the smell, but
only after contemplating how to throw the bulbs out of
the vehicle on several instances” (Eason 2002).

Driest place on earth
On 21 October we continued driving north toward the
Atacama Desert, known as the driest place on earth. The
desert  stretches  north  from  latitude  32º  south  to  the
border  with  Peru.  The  vegetation  there  is  mostly
restricted to a narrow strip along the coast where consis-
tent fog provides moisture.

Although  the  desert  landscape  from  afar  appeared
somber and lifeless, a closer examination revealed scores
of  brightly  colored  plants,  including  yellow-flowering
shrubs, Oxalis gigantea and Balbisia peduncularis; ground-
hugging  Nolana  paradoxa, displaying  brilliant  blue
flowers;  and  an  occasional  slender  Nicotiana  glauca
(011792).

North of Vallenar, we turned off the Pan-American
Highway to reach Parque Nacional Llanos de Challe, sit-
uated in the coastal ranges. Our hope was to find Leon-
tochir  ovallei, the  true  gem  of  the  desert.  This  plant,
related  to  Alstroemeria, is  endemic  to  Chile  and  grows
only at Llanos de Challe. Unfortunately, the spring rains
were  late  the  year  of  our  trip  and  the  plants  remained
dormant  underground.  After  much  searching  among
crumbled rocks, I spotted an old seed head from the pre-

308

Chilean Reconnaissance

vious  year,  which  still  contained  about  twenty  seeds
(011798).

We  then  followed  a  dirt  road  deeper  into  the  park
until  we  reached  the  Pacific  Ocean,  at  which  point  we
turned south along the beach toward the town of Huasco.
While  driving  along  the  beach  we  came  upon  a  dry
streambed filled with all sorts of flowers, various pink and
purple  Calandrinia species  (011787–8),  yellow  Cruck-
shanksia  pumila
and
Rhodophiala bagnoldii.

(011806),  Oxalis  gigantea,

Honey palms
In  Huasco  we  reversed  our  course  and  on  22  October
began our travel south. The next day we headed off to the
hills west of Santiago to study matorral, shrubby sclero-
phyll  vegetation,  typical  of  the  coastal  ranges  and  the
Andean foothills of central Chile. On the way we spotted
a truly magnificent old specimen of Puya venusta, a huge
terrestrial bromeliad, forming a dense mound of silvery
gray  spiky  leaves,  topped  with  towering  inflorescences
carrying  dark  blue  flowers  subtended  by  red  bracts.
Further  up  into  the  hills,  we  came  upon  colonies  of
Alstroemeria  pelegrina growing  together  with  Cestrum
parqui and Sphacele salviae (011789).  By  late  afternoon
we  reached  the  coast  in  Zapallar,  from  where  we  drove
south to Viña del Mar, Chile’s main beach resort.

In Viña del Mar we were joined by Fernanda Larrain,
Olate’s  student,  who  helped  guide  us  around  the  area.
Accompanied  by  Larrain,  we  headed  off  to  the  Parque
Nacional La Campana, established mainly to save some
of  the  last  remaining  groves  of  Chilean  honey  palms,
Jubaea chilensis. Once abundant in the sclerophyll forests
occupying valleys and lower slopes of the coastal ranges,
these palms for centuries have been cut for their sugary
sap. The  sap,  which  flows  for  months  from  the  severed
end of the palm, is processed to make sugar, wine, and
syrup, called miel de palma or palm honey. Among other
noteworthy plants flowering in the park were Aristolochia
chilensis, a  small  vine  cascading  over  rocks,  and  Drimys
winteri, a tall shrub with rhododendron-like foliage and
large inflorescences of showy white flowers.

Back  in  Santiago  we  visited  Pumahuida  Vivero  y
Jardín, a nursery owned by Mónica Musalem, who spe-
cializes in Chilean native plants. Musalem is determined
to bring native plants to Chilean gardens, which have tra-
ditionally  relied  entirely  on  exotic  species  and  garden
selections  of  mostly  European  origin.  The  wealth  of

Puya venusta, found near Puente Quilimari, north of Los Molles,
produces dark blue flowers subtended by red bracts. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

plants  we  saw  in  the  Pumahuida  reflected  Musalem’s
extensive expertise and enthusiasm for the Chilean flora.
We  noticed  many  plants  that  we  had  unsuccessfully
searched for during two weeks of scouting through Chile,
including Passiflora pinnatistipula (011813), Bomarea sal-
silla (011811), and Crinodendron hookerianum (011812).
This  understandingly  caused  a  lot  of  excitement  in  our
group,  and  our  desire  to  acquire  these  plants  was  very
apparent.  Musalem,  concerned  about  the  uncontrolled
exploitation of Chilean flora by European and American
collectors in the past, was at first somewhat uneasy about
our taking these plants—most of which she had collected
herself  in  the  wild—but  agreed  to  share  them  once  we
told her of our collaboration with the Pontifica Universi-
dad Católica de Chile.

309

South America

Remnants of once abundant groves of Chilean honey palms,
Jubaea chilensis, are protected in the Parque Nacional La Campana
east of Viña del Mar. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Aristolochia chilensis cascades from a rock in the Parque Nacional
La Campana. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Our  trip  ended  on  28  October.  Returning  to  the
United  States,  we  carried  with  us  a  modest  bounty  of
thirty-six choice plants but also extensive notes and pho-
tographic documentation of many more species observed
in  bloom.  The  field  observation  formed  the  core  of  a
thesis prepared after the trip by Eason (2002) and permit-
ted compilation of a list of desired plants to be targeted
during future expeditions.

Drimys winteri, a large evergreen shrub, flowers prolifically in the
Parque Nacional La Campana. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

310

Between the Fences

BETWEEN THE FENCES

Based on the experience gained in Chile in 2001, a col-
lecting expedition was planned two years later. To expand
the  range  of  plants  we  might  encounter  in  Chile,  the
expedition  started  a  few  weeks  later  and  included  areas
further south than the first trip. For this new round of
collecting in Chile, I was joined by Tim Thibault, associ-
ate  curator  of  Rancho  Santa  Ana  Botanic  Garden  in
Claremont, California. Our team was led again by Olate.
On  the  morning  of  29  November,  Thibault  and  I
arrived in Santiago, where we were greeted by Olate. After
picking up a rental car at the airport, we were on our way
north.  Spring  was  in  full  swing,  and  once  we  left  the
capital we were able to admire an explosion of wild flowers
along the road. That was the idea, at any rate, until Olate
told  us  that  what  we  were  seeing  were  invasive  exotic
plants,  most  notably  North  American  Lupinus  arboreus
and European Chrysanthemum coronarium. In the course
of this expedition we were to develop an appreciation for
the  scale  of  this  problem,  and  the  many  ways  in  which
introduced plants threaten the native flora in Chile.

Traveling on the Pan-American Highway, we stopped
in  several  locations  to  look  for  bulbs,  which  we  knew
from the previous trip could often be found growing on
sandy banks undercut during road construction. Indeed,
a  few  stops  later  we  had  our  first  collections,  including
two  forms  of  Rhodophiala  bagnoldii (041–2),  one  with
darker and the other with lighter pink flowers, and Leu-
cocoryne vittata (044), which has white flowers with con-
trasting pink or purple markings.

An impressive specimen of Puya venusta spotted from
the highway brought us to a stop near Puente Quilimari,
just north of Los Molles. Since the area appeared fairly
undisturbed, we decided to explore it, and after climbing
a barbed-wire fence, we hiked from the road toward the
ocean. In days to come we were to repeat this maneuver
many times and in the process develop intimate familiar-
ity with Chile’s varied fences. As a result of a great portion
of Chile’s land being dedicated to pastures, it appeared as
if  a  tightly  knitted  web  of  barbed  wire  was  wrapped
around  the  whole  country.  Our  initial  apprehension
about  climbing  these  fences  was  quickly  dispelled  by
Olate, who clarified that the fences were meant to keep
the cows in, not to keep the people out. Luckily for plant
collectors, there are apparently no laws in Chile against
trespassing,  or  at  least  none  that  are  enforced.  On  the

Olate, left, and Thibault collect plants along the rocky shore of the
Pacific near Puente Quilimari. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

other side of the fence, we entered into the coastal mator-
ral. A number of plants were in bloom, including shrubs
such  as  Escallonia  revoluta and  Kageneckia  oblonga and
perennials  such  as  Linum  aquilinum and  Alstroemeria
diluta. An even greater profusion of flowers was present
on  the  rocky  cliffs  overlooking  the  ocean.  Brightly
colored  Alstroemeria  pelegrina, Calandrinia  grandiflora
(046), and Schizanthus litoralis were scattered among the
boulders, while the mat-forming, prostrate Nolana cras-
sulifolia (047)  spilled  over  the  rocks,  enveloping  them
entirely or filling the crevices. From Los Molles we con-
tinued south for about 70 km along the coast, reaching
Zapallar before nightfall.

The next morning we drove to the nearby mountains
rising above Zapallar. Hiking through a sclerophyll forest
in the valley of El Tigre turned out to be quite fruitful.
On  the  south-facing  slopes—which  in  the  Southern
Hemisphere are less exposed to sun—growing in the deep
shade  of  evergreen  trees,  was  Senna  stipulacea (048),  a
shrub  blooming  with  large,  bright  yellow  flowers,  and
Bomarea salsilla (0410), a herbaceous climber related to
Alstroemeria. In open sunny glades of the forest we found
Libertia  sessiliflora (0411),  with  pale  lilac  flowers,  and
Alonsoa  meridionalis (0412)  and  Lobelia  excelsa (049),
both  blooming  bright  red.  On  the  north-facing,  sun-
baked  slopes  we  collected  Conanthera  campanulata
(0413),  a  cormous  plant  with  gracefully  pendant  deep
blue  flowers,  and  Flourensia  thurifera (0414),  a  shrub
covered with large, yellow, daisylike inflorescences.

After  lunch  we  drove  first  inland  to  El  Melón  and
then back to the coast at Horcón, where Olate led us to a

311

South America

Bomarea salsilla (0410), a herbaceous climber belonging to the
Alstroemeriaceae, was collected in a shaded ravine of El Tigre.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Scarlet-flowered Lobelia excelsa (049) was found growing in the
sunny glades of El Tigre near Zapallar. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

large  colony  of  yellow-flowering  Rhodophiala  advena
(0416), which he knew of from his previous excursions in
the area. Unfortunately, because of its proximity to Cau
Cau,  a  popular  beach,  this  population  is  threatened  by
development.  Growing  along  with  Rhodophiala were
Alstroemeria  hookeri ssp.  recumbens (0417)  and  Conan-
thera bifolia, all together making a cheerful combination
of yellow, pink, and blue flowers in this otherwise bleak
habitat. For the night we returned to Zapallar.

On  1  December  we  headed  to  Farellones  in  the
Andes, east of Santiago, to see if spring had yet arrived in
the higher mountains, above 2000 m. First, in the lower
hills  of  the  Andes,  we  saw  many  new  flowering  plants,
probably none more attractive than Alstroemeria ligtu ssp.
simsii (0421),  setting  the  entire  hillside  ablaze  with
orange  flowers.  This  was  our  initiation  to  the  major

undertaking  involved  in  digging  out  Alstroemeria roots.
This plant’s fragile rhizomes are typically found at a depth
of about 30 cm, while the easily breakable storage roots,
essential  for  the  plant’s  survival,  reach  to  about  60  cm
below the surface. Only by patiently and carefully remov-
ing soil and rocks from around the roots could we assure
that the rhizome was not severed from the storage roots.
Once  several  Alstroemeria plants  were  successfully  exca-
vated, we continued up the mountain on a steep, winding
road. Approaching Farellones, we realized we had arrived
too  early  to  see  most  of  the  spring  flora;  therefore,  we
decided to turn back and return to this area at a later date.

Roadside refugia
After spending a night in Santiago, we were on the road
again, this time heading to the Reserva Nacional Las Siete

312

Between the Fences

Olate, left, and Thibault are surrounded by Chusquea cumingii, a
native bamboo, and Fabiana imbricata, a solanaceous heatherlike
shrub, growing above the timberline in the Reserva Nacional Las
Siete Tazas. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

open,  exposed  places.  This  latter  shrub,  despite  its
heatherlike appearance, is a member of Solanaceae. While
typically it has very prolific, but rather dirty white flowers,
occasionally we saw forms with flowers of a more defined
lilac or purple color. One such attractive purple-flowered
form (0426) enticed us enough to collect cuttings. This
shrub not only mimicked a heather in its appearance, but
above  the  timberline  it  became  the  dominant  species,
forming stands comparable to the heaths of the Northern
Hemisphere. Later in the afternoon we departed Las Siete
Tazas  and  drove  to  Lago  Colbún,  about  50  km  east  of
Talca, to spend a night there.

Our  destination  for  4  December  was  Laguna  del
Maule  in  the  high  Andes  near  the  Argentinean  border.
Driving on a road following Río Maule, we made several
stops to browse through the roadside vegetation. During
the  course  of  this  expedition  we  realized  that  the  road-
sides in Chile often offer refugia for plants that by and
large have disappeared elsewhere. Inaccessible to grazing
livestock  and  safe  from  herbicides  applied  in  managed
forest plantations, the roadsides, if not overrun by inva-
sive exotic plants, provide many native plants their best
chance for survival.

Although unsafe road conditions that day prevented
us  from  reaching  Laguna  del  Maule,  we  were  able  to
make  a  number  of  interesting  collections,  including
Alstroemeria  ligtu ssp.  incarnata (0427),  with  flowers  in
various shades of pink and salmon; Calceolaria thyrsiflora
(0428), another shrubby member of the genus, this one
with  dark  green  foliage;  and  a  bright  red  form  of

A yellow-flowered form of Rhodophiala advena (0416) collected
near a popular beach, Cau Cau, at Horcón. Photo by 
Tomasz Ani´sko.

Tazas situated in the lower ranges of the Andes near El
Radal,  some  250  km  south  of  the  capital.  Upon  our
arrival we discovered that the cabins in which we were to
stay  were  locked  and  the  caretaker  was  nowhere  to  be
found. Luckily, the scouts camping nearby told us about
a hostel close to the park rangers’ station. The hostel was
open, saving us from driving back to El Radal late in the
evening on a rather tortuous road.

In the morning, well rested from our long drive the
day before, we started off on a trail along Río Claro, cross-
ing the reserve. The river valley was densely forested, with
Nothofagus dombeyi a dominant species. Among the more
attractive  understory  shrubs  was  Maytenus  chubutensis
(0425), resembling boxwood in its habit but with reddish
new  growth,  while  Fabiana  imbricata frequented  the

313

South America

Shrubby Calceolaria thyrsiflora (0428) was spotted along Río
Maule while traveling towards the Argentinean border, east of
Talca. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

Salpiglossis sinuata (0430). In the afternoon we headed to
Reserva Nacional Altos de Lircay near Vilches, northwest
of Lago Colbún.

Black sand beaches
After  spending  another  night  at  Lago  Colbún,  we
departed for Constitución, a coastal town at the mouth of
Río  Maule.  Then,  driving  along  the  coast,  we  stopped
some 11 km south of La Trinchera to inspect vegetation
on the fringes of the black sand dunes—a testimony of
recent volcanic activity in the Andes—separating the road
from the ocean. To our surprise in what appeared to be a
very inhospitable habitat, we found a quite large popula-
tion of Rhodophiala splendens (0436). Although the plants
were  clearly  impoverished  growing  under  these  spartan
conditions,  their  large  scarlet  flowers  glistened  in  the
setting  sun  like  gems  scattered  in  the  otherwise  austere
landscape.

We started off on 6 December with an excursion to
the  rocky  cliffs  south  of  Constitución.  Such  cliffs,  con-
stantly  subjected  to  the  moderating  influences  of  the
ocean,  are  clad  by  an  amazing  variety  of  plants,  and  in
places where the cliffs are accessible, they offer excellent
plant-hunting possibilities. We collected a bumper crop
of  Phycella (0437)  seeds  and  exceptionally  dark  purple
Calandrinia longiscapa (0438) on one of the massive out-
crops along the black sand beach.

Continuing south along the coast, we stopped in the
small town of Pelluhue, where we explored rock forma-
tions similar to those in Constitución. From Pelluhue we

Olate, left, and the author enjoy lunch in the valley of Río Maule.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

A colony of Alstroemeria ligtu ssp. incarnata (0427) with flowers in
various shades of pink and salmon was found along the road
leading to Laguna del Maule in the Andes, east of Talca. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

314

Between the Fences

Mutisia subulata, a herbaceous vine found near Los Despachos,
south of Cauquenes, boasted these showy gerbera-like 
inflorescences. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

morning after arriving there, we hiked to some of these
thermal  vents  in  the  mountains.  Hiking  through  the
Nothofagus forest, we found Maytenus disticha (0483), a
low-growing  shrub  with  small,  leathery,  glossy  leaves,
which held much promise as a landscape plant for more
warm-temperate  parts  of  the  United  States.  Above  the
timberline we saw large colonies of Lathyrus subandinus,
a  perennial  species  with  prolific  bicolor  flowers,  among
which were interspersed Olsynium philippi and Tristagma
nivale (0443).

On  8  December  we  left Termas  de  Chillán  for  Los
Ángeles and the next morning drove to Parque Nacional
Nahuelbuta  in  the  Cordillera  de  Nahuelbuta,  part  of
Chile’s coastal ranges. We had awaited the opportunity to
explore this park, known for its Araucaria araucana forest,
with great anticipation. Arriving several weeks later than
during the 2001 expedition, we hoped to see many more
spring  flowers  in  bloom.  Unfortunately,  this  day  also
caught us in drenching rain. We pressed ahead, hoping
for a break in the weather, but upon ascending to the top
of the Cordillera de Nahuelbuta we were forced to admit
defeat. A ferocious wind and a constant downpour made
even walking barely possible. Fortunately, we were able to
console ourselves with a few collections made along the
road  leading  to  the  park.  These  included  Rhodophiala
splendens (0448), much larger than  those collected near
La  Trinchera;  Teucrium  bicolor (0449),  a  subshrub  of
Lamiaceae,  adorned  with  loose  racemes  of  soft  pink
flowers;  and  Ugni  molinae (0450),  a  myrtaceous  shrub
with delightfully fragrant flowers followed by equally aro-

The cliffs south of Constitución offered breathtaking views and a
rich flora. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

turned inland toward Cauquenes. Near Los Despachos,
some 20 km south of Cauquenes, we spotted along the
road  a  beautiful  Mutisia  subulata vine  covering  a  large
shrub of Acacia caven and just opening its first inflores-
cences.  Although  we  had  seen  several  Mutisia species
earlier on our trip, none enthused us like this one. It had
large, dark pink, gerbera-like inflorescences, and from the
number of buds waiting to open we could imagine what
a  prolific  bloomer  it  must  be.  To  our  despair,  though,
there were no seeds to collect.

From Los Despachos we drove to Chillán, a town on
the  Pan-American  Highway,  and  from  there  continued
east to Termas de Chillán in the Andes.

Soaking up the rain
Termas de Chillán is a popular health spa in Chile, built
near  several  thermal  vents  and  sulfuric  springs.  The

315

South America

Stunning flowers of Rhodophiala splendens (0448) collected on the
way from Los Ángeles to Parque Nacional Nahuelbuta. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

The Andean backcountry
In  the  morning  we  took  the  road  from  Tolguaca  to
Parque Nacional Conguillio, about 80 km to the south.
Along  the  way  we  collected  several  plants,  including
Fuchsia  magellanica (0451)  and  Alstroemeria  aurea
(0452). Upon arriving in the park we rented a cabin and
took a hike through the forest of Araucaria and Nothofa-
gus along the shore of Laguna Conguillio. To our delight,
the  sky  cleared  in  the  evening,  and  we  could  see  the
majestic, snowcapped Volcán Llaima, 3125 m, dominat-
ing the horizon.

For 12 December we planned a 200 km loop, driving
through  the  mountains  toward  the  Argentinean  border
and  returning  to  Conguillio  for  the  night.  First  we
headed south to Flor del Valle, a picturesque valley sur-
rounded  by  tall,  somber  Andean  peaks  on  all  sides  and
lined with emerald pastures. We hiked up a steep slope in
an  attempt  to  explore  the  forest  beyond  the  reach  of
grazing  cows.  After  an  exhausting  climb,  we  gave  up,
however,  as  signs  of  overgrazing  made  it  clear  the  cows
were  more  fit  than  we  thought  and  had  plundered  the
forest quite far up the mountain. Our only collection at
this site was Sophora cassioides (0453).

Upon reaching Melipeuco, we turned east to Icalma
and from there north to Lonquimay. The day’s collections
included  Francoa  appendiculata (0456),  Gaultheria
pumila (0458), and Mimulus luteus (0457). Probably the
most significant finding was Drimys winteri var. andina
(0455), a shrubby variety of this beautiful Chilean tree.
Plants  we  found  near  Reserva  Nacional  China  Muerta

316

The delightfully fragrant flowers of Ugni molinae (0450) are fol-
lowed by red berries, which are used in preserves and liqueurs.
Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

matic red berries, used in Chile for making preserves and
sweet liqueur.

On 10 December we changed direction and, hoping
to  run  out  from  beneath  the  rain  clouds,  drove  to  the
Termas de Tolguaca, a small spa in the Andes about 100
km south of Los Ángeles. Our attempts to stay dry turned
out  to  be  futile. The  heavy  rain  followed  us,  and  upon
reaching the Termas de Tolguaca we were confined to the
hotel for the rest of the day while the weather took a turn
for  the  worse,  the  rain  changing  to  snow  and  sleet.  It
became clear we would no longer be enjoying the balmy
Mediterranean  climate  of  central  Chile,  and  needed  to
prepare ourselves for the capricious spring weather of the
temperate southern regions.

Between the Fences

The bright yellow flowers of Alstroemeria aurea (0452) were
spotted along the road from Tolguaca to Parque Nacional 
Conguillio. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

were less than 1 m tall and had smaller leaves than the
trees in the lowlands. Because of its compact growth and
possibly greater cold hardiness, this variety may prove to
be a better garden plant.

The following day we headed to Pucón, located on
the east end of Lago Villarrica. Pucón welcomed us with
drizzle, which intensified the next morning. Despite the
weather,  we  started  off  on  the  road  east  to  Curarrehue,
taking  a  dirt  track  through  the  mountains  to  Puerto
Negro. The road itself was in fairly bad shape, with fallen
trees blocking it in several places and one of the bridges
washed out. In addition, the constant rain and slippery
surface  made  driving  more  difficult.  To  our  relief,
however, our four-wheel-drive vehicle, with Olate at the
wheel, stood up to the test. What started off as a rather
hopeless day for collecting turned out to be very reward-
ing when we came across Rhodophiala moelleri (0461), a
rare  member  of  the  genus,  which  added  a  new  purple-
pink color to those we had collected previously. This was
our  last  day  collecting  in  the  Andes,  and  we  never  saw
that plant again.

Mission accomplished
On 15 December we headed to the coast again. By way of
Loncoche,  Lastarria,  and  Puentes,  we  reached  Nueva
Toltén in the afternoon. From there we turned south to
Valdivia,  making  a  stop  near  Queule,  a  small  fishing
village about 100 km north of Valdivia. A few kilometers
south of Queule we explored windswept cliffs overlooking
the Pacific. From our previous experience we knew that in

Rarely seen Rhodophiala moelleri (0461) was collected in the Andes
between Curarrehue and Puerto Negro. Photo by Tomasz Ani´sko.

places  such  as  this,  free  of  grazing  livestock,  interesting
plants  could  often  be  found. We  were  not  disappointed
this time, either. The most intriguing find in Queule was
a prostrate form of Escallonia rubra var. macrantha (0466)
with leathery, glossy leaves and large carmine-red flowers.
Although at first we debated the identity of the plant, we
all agreed it was a garden-worthy shrub.

Valdivia was an anxiously anticipated destination for
us because of the unique Valdivian temperate rain forest,
much of which still survives in the areas south of that city.
This  coastal  region  remains  relatively  undeveloped  and
has  very  few  settlements.  There  are  hardly  any  paved
highways,  and  access  can  be  gained  only  on  logging
roads.  On  the  morning  of  16  December  we  drove  first
from Valdivia to Niebla, a small village on the coast. A
ferry  in  Niebla  took  us  across  Río  Valdivia  to  Corral,

317

South America

anum, one of the botanical gems inhabiting the Valdivian
forest, motivated us to press forward.

Finally, at a rest stop, as Olate and I devoured our
dry  provisions,  consisting  of  crackers  and  candy  bars,
Thibault, who had sought a moment of solitude behind
the bushes, called on us to come see what he had found.
There  it  was,  Crinodendron  hookerianum (0470),  with
its  pendant,  scarlet  flowers,  embedded  in  the  most
impenetrable  growth  of  evergreen  tress,  shrubs,  and
vines imaginable.

With  our  mission  thus  accomplished,  we  soon
decided to turn back and follow the road on which we
had come.

On 17 December we boarded a flight from Valdivia
to Santiago. We left behind the verdant hills of the south-
ern coastal ranges and in less than two hours were back in
the sun-scorched Central Valley. The last couple of days
in Santiago were dedicated to cleaning seeds and cuttings,
organizing  herbarium  specimens,  and  arranging  for  the
phytosanitary certificates. One morning we paid a visit to
Mónica Musalem’s nursery, Pumahuida Vivero y Jardín,
which, as we knew from the previous trip, grew a wide
selection  of  Chilean  native  plants.  Based  on  Musalem’s
suggestions, we picked a number of plants, among them
Alstroemeria  revoluta (0473),  Mitraria  coccinea (0474),
and Tecoma fulva (0475), thus bringing the total number
of collections for this expedition to 120.

Crinodendron hookerianum (0470) is among the most desired
shrubs indigenous to the Valdivian temperate rain forest. Photo by
Tomasz Ani´sko.

from  where  we  continued  south  to  Chaihuin.  At  that
point  our  plan  called  for  a  drive  inland  to  El  Mirador,
through the hills covered by the rain forest. In the mean-
time,  however,  the  paved  highway  all  but  disappeared,
and we had to rely on logging roads not marked on any
of our maps. In other areas we had always been able to
count on finding someone to ask for directions, but this
was not the case in the rain forest; here we were on our
own.  After  guessing  a  couple  of  times  regarding  which
turns to take, we became increasingly skeptical about our
chances  of  crossing  this  vast  expanse  of  forest  before
night.  Still,  the  hope  of  finding  Crinodendron  hookeri-

318

Epilogue

The  story  of  plant  exploration  for  Longwood  Gardens
told in this book encompasses fifty expeditions that took
place between 1956 and 2003. During that span of time,
the world was transformed as the result of social, political,
and  technological  changes.  Plant  exploration  was  not
immune to the forces that shaped our societies and envi-
ronment during the second half of the twentieth century;
it too underwent a remarkable evolution. The expedition
of Frank Kingdon Ward to Burma, the trip that began it
all, was perhaps the last in the long tradition of what has
been described as the Golden Age of plant collecting. A
lonely professional plant explorer, who funds his endeav-
ors through subscriptions from prominent public gardens
and wealthy private collectors, embarks on a ten-month
expedition to conduct a thorough exploration of a single
mountain.  His  progress  is  slow,  encumbered  by  lack  of
roads, primitive means of transportation, and dependence
on a large entourage of porters. His main challenges are
reaching a remote site, finding plants, and assuring they
arrive alive at their destinations in Europe or America after
a long sea journey.

Due to the relative ease of travel and transportation,
expeditions now take weeks rather than months. The trips
almost invariably involve teams of collaborators, none of
whom are plant explorers by profession, but rather garden
curators,  university  professors,  or  nurserymen.  Team
members share the costs of the expedition and combine
their  varied  expertise.  Help  from  local  collaborators  is
essential,  just  as  it  was  fifty  years  ago,  but  in  place  of
porters, today’s expeditions rely, often completely, on the
participation of highly trained experts—botanists, horti-
culturists,  or  nurserymen—who  are  working  in  the  area
being  explored.  Finding  plants  in  the  field  remains  a
matter of both skill and luck, but shipping them is easier
than ever before. Thanks to the conveniences of polyeth-
ylene  bags  and  air  mail,  packages  containing  unrooted
cuttings  can  be  delivered  alive  sometimes  in  less  than  a
week from the time of collection.

On the other hand, the legal environment in which
modern plant explorers have to operate could not be more
different from that known to Frank Kingdon Ward. The
framework of local, national, and international laws regu-
lating  access,  transfer,  and  utilization  of  plants  is  more
complex  than  ever.  Some  of  these  laws  were  enacted  to
facilitate  conservation  of  species  or  habitats  threatened
with extinction. Others protect the proprietary rights to
plants ascertained by commercial interests of individuals,
organizations, or nations. Still others aim to prevent the
introduction  of  exotic  weeds,  pests,  and  diseases,  which
might  endanger  economically  significant  crops  or  cause
damage to the environment. Modern explorers, equipped
with global positioning system receivers, cell phones, and
off-road vehicles, can navigate through the most remote
regions of the world with amazing efficiency, but they may
find it increasingly difficult to map their way through the
maze of regulations applied to plant collecting.

Fifty  countries  on  six  continents  were  visited  in  the
course of the expeditions described in this book. In organ-
izing  these  expeditions,  Longwood  Gardens  did  not  act
alone  but  collaborated  with  a  wide  range  of  institutions
such  as  the  USDA  and  the  International  Dendrological
Research Institute; gardens and arboreta such as the Arnold
Arboretum  of  Harvard  University,  Descanso  Gardens,
Holden Arboretum, Huntington Gardens, J. C. Raulston
Arboretum,  Morris  Arboretum,  Morton  Arboretum,
Rancho  Santa  Ana  Botanic  Garden,  and  U.S.  National
Arboretum; universities such as Harvard University, Uni-
versity of Connecticut, University of Virginia, and Univer-
sity of North Carolina; and nurseries such as Conard-Pyle
Company, Rare Find Nursery, Saunders Brothers Nursery,
and Woodland Nursery. And this is to name only a few. In
fact, out of more than fifty explorers who participated in
these expeditions, only sixteen were Longwood employees.
To this list, dozens of cooperating institutions and individ-
uals in foreign countries, equally important to the whole
endeavor, would have to be added.

319

Epilogue

Their  combined  effort  and  more  than  six  years  of
field work resulted in the introduction of more than thir-
teen  thousand  ornamental  plants  to  the  United  States.
The  plants  were  widely  distributed,  freely  shared,  and
evaluated  to  determine  their  suitability  for  cultivation.
Many failed, and nobody knows how many of them exist
today, but unquestionably their impact on gardening in
America  cannot  be  overestimated.  Longwood  Gardens’
own collection was enlarged from about three thousand
taxa in 1955 to more than thirteen thousand in the early

1970s  and  has  remained  at  this  level  ever  since.  One-
tenth of this increase can be credited to plant exploration.
Plant  exploration  for  Longwood  Gardens  does  not
end with the fifty expeditions described in this book. Two
teams went to Russia and Australia in 2004, another two
traveled to China and Greece in 2005, and future expedi-
tions are in the planning stages. As long as our fascination
with  plants  of  exquisite  beauty  continues,  we  will  seek
them out in the furthest regions of the world.

320

References

All unpublished materials are courtesy of Longwood Gardens Archives.

Anderson, E. 1965b. Victoria water lilies: plants which
stir men’s minds. Missouri Botanical Garden Bul-
letin 53 (5): 1–18.

Apps, D. A. 1986. Letter of 12 September to H. Marc

Creech, J. L. 1962b. Letter of 1 November to Carl O.

Erlanson.

Creech, J. L. 1962c. Letter of 13 November to Carl O.

Erlanson.

Cathey of the U.S. National Arboretum.

Creech, J. L. 1962d. Letter of 29 November to Russell

Apps, D., and L. Batdorf. 1988. The search for and the

J. Seibert.

evaluation of Korean daylily species. The Daylily
Journal 43 (1): 11–19.

Creech, J. L. 1963a. Letter of 30 August to Carl O.

Erlanson.

Barclay, A. S. 1956. Letter of 23 August to Walter H.

Creech, J. L. 1963b. Letter of 13 September to Carl O.

Hodge.

Erlanson.

Barclay, A. S. 1959. New considerations in an old

Creech, J. L. 1963c. Letter of 31 October to Russell J.

genus: Datura. Botanical Museum Leaflets, Harvard
University 18 (6): 245–272.

Seibert.

Creech, J. L. 1966a. Letter of 28 December to Russell J.

Brass, L. J. 1959. Letter of 14 January to Russell J.

Seibert.

Seibert.

Brass, L. J. 1960. Letter of 13 July to Russell J. Seibert.
Campabadal, J. R. 1969. Letter of 6 June to Russell J.

Seibert.

Cathey, H. M. 1986. Letter of 18 July to Frederick E.

Roberts.

Creech, J. L. 1966b. Ornamental plant explorations—
Japan, 1961. Crops Research Division, ARS 34-
75, Agricultural Research Service, USDA.

Creech, J. L. 1967a. Letter of 24 November to Quentin
Jones of the USDA Agricultural Research Service.
Creech, J. L. 1967b. Letter of 24 November to Russell

Creech, J. L. 1956a. Letter of 2 November to Walter H.

J. Seibert.

Hodge.

Creech, J. L. 1956b. Letter of 10 November to Howard

L. Hyland.

Creech, J. L. 1956c. Letter of 28 November to Howard

L. Hyland.

Creech, J. L. 1957. Plant explorations: ornamentals in
Southern Japan. Crops Research Division, ARS
34-1, Agricultural Research Service, USDA.

Creech, J. L. 1967c. Summary trip report: plant explo-

ration to Taiwan, November 8 to December 18.
USDA New Crops Research Branch, Beltsville,
Maryland.

Creech, J. L. 1968. Letter of 10 January to Russell J.

Seibert.

Creech, J. L. 1970a. Letter of 9 July to Howard L.

Hyland.

Creech, J. L. 1961a. Camellia japonica in Japan. Ameri-

Creech, J. L. 1970b. Plant exploration to the Soviet

can Camellia Yearbook 1961: 6–21.

Creech, J. L. 1961b. Letter of 3 May to Walter H.

Hodge.

Creech, J. L. 1961c. Letter of 7 June to Walter H.

Hodge.

Creech, J. L. 1961d. Letter of 23 July to Walter H.

Hodge.

Creech, J. L. 1962a. Letter of 25 October to Carl O.

Erlanson.

Union: July 15 to October 1. Proposal.

Creech, J. L. 1971a. A new look at Siberia: the orna-
mental plant possibilities. Lecture presented at
Longwood Gardens, 15 December.

Creech, J. L. 1971b. Foreign travel report: USSR, June
23 to August 29. Crops Research Division, Agri-
cultural Research Service, USDA.

Creech, J. L. 1971c. Letter of 16 July to Howard L.

Hyland.

321

References

Creech, J. L. 1971d. Letter of 24 July to Howard L.

Hyland.

Creech, J. L. 1971e. Letter of 6 August to Howard L.

Hyland.

Frierson, H. F. 2003. Boxwood in nature: travels to
Azerbaijan and Georgia in 2002. The Boxwood
Bulletin 42 (4): 69–76.

Gerlach, G. G. 1969. Letter of 14 July to Russell J.

Creech, J. L. 1972. Plant collector in Siberia. The Uni-

Seibert.

versity of Washington Arboretum Bulletin 35 (3):
2–6.

Higgins, J. J. 1970. Letter of 18 March to Russell J.

Seibert.

Creech, J. L. 1974. Introduction of foreign plants to

Hodge, B. 1959a. Letter of 30 September to the Hodge

American gardens. Lecture presented at Longwood
Gardens, 7 March.

Creech, J. L. 1987. A trip to Mt. Morrison mixes horti-
culture with adventure. American Nurseryman 165
(9): 130–132.

Creech, J. L. 1988. From Russia with plants. American

Nurseryman 168 (1): 84–90.

family at Longwood.

Hodge, B. 1959b. Letter of 8 October to the Hodge

family at Longwood.

Hodge, W. H. 1944. A botanist’s Dominica diary. Scien-

tific Monthly 58: 185–194, 281–291.

Hodge, W. H. 1956a. Letter of 16 August to Arthur S.

Barclay.

Creech, J. L., and D. H. Scott. 1963. Memorandum of

Hodge, W. H. 1956b. Letter of 5 September to Arthur

18 October to M. W. Parker of the Crops
Research Division, USDA Agricultural Research
Service.

S. Barclay.

Hodge, W. H. 1956c. Letter of 5 September to Richard

E. Schultes.

Crossan, D. F. 1969. Report on Longwood tropical

Hodge, W. H. 1956d. Letter of 5 December to Freder-

study tour. Manuscript.

ick G. Meyer.

Darke, R. 1987a. New crops for Longwood Gardens.

Hodge, W. H. 1957a. Letter of 21 January to Frederick

Chimes 151: 3.

Darke, R. 1987b. Plants and plantings. Chimes 154: 9.
Davis, W. 1996. One River: Explorations and Discoveries
in the Amazon Rain Forest. New York: Simon and
Schuster. 353.

de Freitas, C. L. 1969. Letter of 10 June to Russell J.

G. Meyer.

Hodge, W. H. 1957b. Letter of 10 June to Frank

Kingdon Ward.

Hodge, W. H. 1957c. Letter of 11 November to Arthur

S. Barclay.

Hodge, W. H. 1958a. Letter of 6 January to Arthur S.

Seibert.

Barclay.

de Vos, F. 1963. Plant exploring in Nepal. In 1963

Hodge, W. H. 1958b. Letter of 2 September to Barbara

National Capitol Flower and Garden Show Guide.
Washington, D.C.

T. Hodge.

Hodge, W. H. 1958c. Letter of 10 September to

de Vos, F. 1965a. Letter of 22 April to Henry T. Skinner

Barbara T. Hodge.

of the U.S. National Arboretum.

Hodge, W. H. 1958d. Letter of 10 September to

de Vos, F. 1965b. Letter of 27 April to John L. Creech.
de Vos, F. 1965c. Letter of 8 May to John L. Creech.
de Vos, F. 1965d. Letter of 20 May to John L. Creech.
de Vos, F. 1965e. Letter of 22 June to Russell J. Seibert.
Dodson, C. H. 1964. Undated letter to Russell J.

Seibert.

Eason, R. T. 2002. Mediterranean Plants from Chile for
Displays at Longwood Gardens. M.S. Thesis, Uni-
versity of Delaware.

Donald G. Huttleston.

Hodge, W. H. 1958e. Letter of 11 September to

Barbara T. Hodge.

Hodge, W. H. 1958f. Letter of 12 September to Barbara

T. Hodge.

Hodge, W. H. 1958g. Letter of 14 September to

Barbara T. Hodge.

Hodge, W. H. 1958h. Letter of 20 September to

Barbara T. Hodge.

Fooks, C. T. 2002. Boxwood expedition to the Republic

Hodge, W. H. 1958i. Letter of 22 September to Barbara

of Georgia. The Boxwood Bulletin 42 (1): 12–15.
Frierson, H. F. 2002. Boxwood in nature and gardens:

travels to southern Russia and Ukraine. The
Boxwood Bulletin 42 (2): 27–32.

T. Hodge.

Hodge, W. H. 1958j. Letter of 27 September to Barbara

T. Hodge.

322

References

Hodge, W. H. 1958k. Letter of 13 October to Barbara

T. Hodge.

Hodge, W. H. 1959a. Letter of 19 January to Leonard

J. Brass.

Kingdon Ward, F. 1956c. Plant hunting in Burma 2:
against the odds. Gardener’s Chronicle 140: 85.
Kingdon Ward, F. 1956d. Plant hunting in Burma 3:

the real thing. Gardener’s Chronicle 140: 185.

Hodge, W. H. 1959b. Letter of 20 October to Russell J.

Kingdon Ward, F. 1956e. Plant hunting in Burma 4:

Seibert.

Hodge, W. H. 1959c. Letter of 22 October to Donald
G. Huttleston, Gottlieb A. Hampfler, and Kather-
ine Farquhar of Longwood Gardens.

Hodge, W. H. 1959d. The Longwood Gardens–USDA
plant introduction program. The National Horti-
cultural Magazine 38 (3): 164–167.

Hodge, W. H. 1960a. Byblis gigantea. The American

Horticultural Magazine 39: 55–58.

Hodge, W. H. 1960b. New-Guinea trumpet-creeper.
The American Horticultural Magazine 39: 184.

Hodge, W. H. 1960c. Two unusual hoyas. The Ameri-

the summit. Gardener’s Chronicle 140: 287.

Kingdon Ward, F. 1956f. Plant hunting in Burma 5: the

evergreen forest. Gardener’s Chronicle 140: 486.
Kingdon Ward, F. 1956g. Plant hunting in Burma 6:

Mindat ridge. Gardener’s Chronicle 140: 656.

Kingdon Ward, F. 1957a. Plant hunting in Burma 7:

orchids and all that. Gardener’s Chronicle 141: 123.
Kingdon Ward, F. 1957b. Plant hunting in Burma 8: in

the mist. Gardener’s Chronicle 141: 576.

Kingdon Ward, F. 1958. A sketch of the flora and vege-

tation of Mount Victoria in Burma. Acta Horti
Gotoburgensis 22: 53–74.

can Horticultural Magazine 39: 231–232.

Kingdon Ward, F. 1960. Pilgrimage for Plants. London:

Hodge, W. H. 1961a. Longwood search: botanist col-
lects plants and seed in Indonesia’s Kebun Raya.
The New York Times (22 January): X21.

Hodge, W. H. 1961b. Memorandum of 8 March to

Russell J. Seibert.

George G. Harrap. 106–107.

Lighty, R. W. 1966a. Letter of 15 July to Russell J.

Seibert.

Lighty, R. W. 1966b. Letter of 2 August to Russell J.

Seibert.

Hodge, W. H. 1962. A rarely cultivated pitcher plant.
The American Horticultural Magazine 41: 13–16.

Huttleston, D. G. 1960. Camellias at Longwood

Lighty, R. W. 1966c. Letter of 12 August to Katherine

B. Farquhar and Donald G. Huttleston.

Lighty, R. W. 1966d. Letter of 17 August to Russell J.

Gardens, Kennett Square, Pennsylvania. Rhododen-
dron and Camellia Year Book (1960): 124–128.

Seibert.

Lighty, R. W. 1966e. Letter of 25 August to Russell J.

Huttleston, D. G. 1969a. Letter of 16 July to Robert G.

Seibert.

Wilson.

Lighty, R. W. 1966f. Letter of 4 September to Russell J.

Huttleston, D. G. 1969b. Memorandum of 7 July to

Seibert.

Russell J. Seibert.

Lighty, R. W. 1966g. Letter of 30 September to Russell

Hyland, H. L. 1960. Summary report 1959–1960: new

J. Seibert.

crops—Longwood ornamentals project.

Lighty, R. W. 1966h. Letter of 7 October to Russell J.

Johnson, K. C. 1967. Disa uniflora: a method of cultiva-

Seibert.

tion and its hybridization with D. racemosa.
Journal of Botanical Society of South Africa 53:
19–26.

March, S. G. 1985. Collecting elite plants: Japan.

Report.

Meyer, F. G. 1957a. Letter of 26 January to Walter H.

Kim, K. 1997. Plant exploration to Shaanxi and Gansu

Hodge.

provinces in China. Holly Society Journal 15 (2):
3–11.

Meyer, F. G. 1957b. Letter of 7 March to Walter H.

Hodge.

Kingdon Ward, F. 1955. Letter of 30 September to

Meyer, F. G. 1957c. Letter of 1 May to Russell J.

Russell J. Seibert.

Seibert.

Kingdon Ward, F. 1956a. Letter of 10 August to Russell

Meyer, F. G. 1957d. Letter of 25 May to Russell J.

J. Seibert.

Seibert.

Kingdon Ward, F. 1956b. Plant hunting in Burma 1:

Meyer, F. G. 1957e. Letter of 4 July to Howard L.

the changing scene. Gardener’s Chronicle 140: 8–9.

Hyland.

323

References

Meyer, F. G. 1957f. Letter of 4 July to Walter H.

Hodge.

Seibert, I. L. 1959c. South America. Trip diary.
Seibert, I. L. 1967. Houston to Yucatán, Mexico. Trip

Meyer, F. G. 1957g. Letter of 4 August to Walter H.

diary.

Hodge.

Meyer, F. G. 1957h. Letter of 18 August to Walter H.

Hodge.

Meyer, F. G. 1957i. Letter of 17 September to Walter

H. Hodge.

Meyer, F. G. 1959a. Letter of 26 June to Walter H.

Hodge.

Meyer, F. G. 1959b. Letter of 13 July to Walter H.

Hodge.

Meyer, F. G. 1959c. Letter of 3 August to Walter H.

Hodge.

Seibert, I. L. 1968. Caribbean. Trip diary.
Seibert, I. L. 1971. El Salvador, Guatemala and Hon-

duras. Trip diary.

Seibert, I. L. 1999. A treasure of memories. Manuscript.
Seibert, R. J. 1940. The Bignoniaceae of the Maya area.
Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication 522:
375–434.

Seibert, R. J. 1948. The use of glands in a taxonomic
consideration of the family Bignoniaceae. Annals
of the Missouri Botanical Garden 35: 123–136.

Seibert, R. J. 1956a. Letter of 24 May to Carl O. Erlan-

Meyer, F. G. 1959d. Letter of 18 August to Walter H.

son.

Hodge.

Seibert, R. J. 1956b. Letter of 12 September to Carl O.

Meyer, F. G. 1959e. Plant explorations: ornamentals in
Italy, Southern France, Spain, Portugal, England,
and Scotland. Crops Research Division, ARS 34-9,
Agricultural Research Service, USDA.

Meyer, F. G. 1963. Plant exploration: ornamentals in
the Netherlands, West Germany, and Belgium.
Crops Research Division, ARS 34-32, Agricultural
Research Service, USDA.

Paul, L. W. 1969. Rare orchid on display at Longwood
Gardens. American Horticultural Society Magazine
48 (3): 138–139.

Rycroft, H. B. 1964. Letter of 27 February to Russell J.

Seibert.

Erlanson.

Seibert, R. J. 1958a. Letter of 8 January to Howard L.

Hyland.

Seibert, R. J. 1958b. Letter of 3 February to Samuel
Ayres of the California Arboretum Foundation.
Seibert, R. J. 1959a. Letter of 19 March to Humberto

Fabris.

Seibert, R. J. 1959b. Letter of 21 April to Carlos G.

Cariola.

Seibert, R. J. 1960. Letter of 3 August to H. van Vloten

of De Dorschkamp Forest Research Station in
Wageningen, Netherlands.

Seibert, R. J. 1962. Letter of 2 April to Howard L.

Schelpe, E. A. 1963. Letter of 21 November to Russell

Hyland.

J. Seibert.

Seibert, R. J. 1963a. Letter of 18 July to Carl O. Erlan-

Schultes, R. E. 1956a. Letter of 8 August to Walter H.

son.

Hodge.

Seibert, R. J. 1963b. Letter of 16 September to Everitt

Schultes, R. E. 1956b. Letter of 21 August to Walter H.

L. Miller.

Hodge.

Seibert, R. J. 1963c. Letter of 20 November to H. Brian

Schultes, R. E. 1956c. Letter of 18 September to Walter

Rycroft.

H. Hodge.

Schweinfurth U., and H. Schweinfurth-Marby. 1975.

Exploration in the Eastern Himalayas and the River
Gorge Country of Southeastern Tibet. Geoecological
Research, vol. 3. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Seibert, D. 1962. Sailing across the Andes. Travel (Sep-

Seibert, R. J. 1963d. Letter of 6 December to F. W.

Thorns of Durban Botanic Garden.

Seibert, R. J. 1963e. Memorandum of 18 December to

the trustees of Longwood Foundation.

Seibert, R. J. 1964a. Letter of 17 March to H. Brian

Rycroft.

tember): 39–54.

Seibert, R. J. 1964b. Letter of 7 April to H. Brian

Seibert, I. L. 1959a. Letter of 10 January to Seibert’s

Rycroft.

children.

Seibert, R. J. 1964c. Letter of 5 May to L. Prosser of

Seibert, I. L. 1959b. Letter of 20 January to Seibert’s

Saint George’s Park.

children.

324

References

Seibert, R. J. 1964d. Letter of 17 November to Michael

Williams, L. 1959. Collecting ornamentals in southern

H. Langford of the American Embassy in Lima.
Seibert, R. J. 1964e. Letter of 30 November to Ramón

Brazil. Manuscript.

Wilson, R. G. 1969. Letter of 5 August to Russell J.

Ferreyra.

Seibert, R. J. 1964f. Plantsman’s safari. The Horticul-
tural Society of New York Bulletin 14 (9/10): 3–4.
Seibert, R. J. 1965a. Letter of 9 September to Edward

A. Schelpe.

Seibert.

Winters, H. F. 1970a. Letter of 28 January to John L.

Creech.

Winters, H. F. 1970b. Letter of 30 January to Russell J.

Seibert.

Seibert, R. J. 1965c. Report of 3 May to the trustees of

Winters, H. F. 1970c. Letter of 18 February to Myra L.

Longwood Foundation.

Haines of USDA Inspection House.

Seibert, R. J. 1965d. South African ornamentals for

Winters, H. F. 1970d. Letter of 17 March to Howard L.

American plant connoisseurs. The Garden Journal
15 (2): 67–68.

Hyland of the USDA New Crops Research
Branch.

Seibert, R. J. 1966a. Disa uniflora at Longwood

Gardens. American Orchid Society Bulletin 35:
367–369.

Seibert, R. J. 1966b. Letter of 24 January to Ger

Verhaar.

Seibert, R. J. 1967a. “Cojomaria”: Paramongaia weber-
baueri Velarde, from Peru. Plant Life 23: 43–45.
Seibert, R. J. 1967b. Letter of 22 November to Iris M.

Bannochie.

Winters, H. F. . Letter of 27 March to John L. Creech.
Winters, H. F. 1970f. New germ plasm of ornamental
plants from New Guinea. Proceedings of the Tropi-
cal Region of the American Society for Horticultural
Science 14: 280–284.

Winters, H. F. 1970g. Plant collecting in New Guinea.
Lecture presented at Longwood Gardens, 28 July.
Winters, H. F. 1972. Letter of 24 August to Russell J.

Seibert.

Seibert, R. J. 1967c. Letter of 28 December to Mary

Winters, H. F. 1976. Microcitrus papuana, a new species

Plunkett of Longwood Gardens.

Seibert, R. J. 1967d. Memorandum of 30 June to the

trustees of Longwood Foundation.

Seibert, R. J. 1968a. Letter of 5 February to Iris M.

Bannochie.

Seibert, R. J. 1968b. Letter of 31 December to Robert

G. Wilson.

Seibert, R. J. 1968c. Memorandum of 15 February to

the trustees of Longwood Foundation.

Seibert, R. J. 1970a. Funds for exploring. The New York

Times (4 January): D29.

Seibert, R. J. 1970b. Memorandum of 10 June to the

from Papua New Guinea (Rutaceae). Baileya 20
(1): 19–24.

Winters, H. F., and J. J. Higgins. 1970. Foreign travel
report: Hawaii, New Caledonia, Australia, New
Guinea, Philippines and Indonesia, January
4–April 14. Crops Research Division, Agricultural
Research Service, USDA.

Woodson, R. E., and R. J. Seibert. 1937. Contributions

toward a flora of Panama. I. Collections in the
provinces of Chiriquí, Coclé, and Panama, by R. J.
Seibert during the summer of 1935. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 24: 175–210.

trustees of Longwood Foundation.

Woodson, R. E., and R. J. Seibert. 1939. Contributions

Seibert, R. J. 1970c. Memorandum of 16 November to

Longwood Program fellows.

Seibert, R. J. 1971. Letter of 21 June to Rex Thomas of

the USDA Agricultural Research Service.

Spalding, G. H. 1962. Plant explorations: ornamentals
in Australia. Crops Research Division, ARS 34-33,
Agricultural Research Service, USDA.

Williams, L. 1958. Memorandum of 28 May to

Howard L. Hyland of the USDA Agricultural
Research Service.

toward a flora of Panama. III. Collections during
the summer of 1938, chiefly by R. E. Woodson,
Jr., P. H. Allen, and R. J. Seibert. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 26: 265–324.

Yinger, B. R. 1989a. Plant trek: in pursuit of a hardy
camellia. Flower and Garden 33 (2): 104–106.
Yinger, B. R. 1989b. Plant trek: on site with hardy

camellias. Flower and Garden 33 (3): 6–66.

325

Index

Abies, 110, 112
Abies delavayi, 37
Abies faberi, 42
Abies fargesii, 105
Abies forrestii, 38, 39
Abies georgei var. smithii, 47
Abies holophylla, 109, 111
Abies nephrolepis, 85, 87,

89, 110

Abies nordmanniana, 202,

207

Abies procera, 232
Abies salouenensis, 38
Abies spectabilis, 26, 27, 34
Abies squamata, 41
Abutilon, 153
Acacia, 126, 172
Acacia caven, 315
Acacia dealbata, 131
Acacia drummondii ssp.

elegans, 160, 161

Acacia pentadenia, 161
Acanthephippium

papuanum, 145

Acanthopanax henryi, 100
Acer, 108, 112, 229
Acer buergerianum, 68
Acer campestre, 190
Acer davidii, 100, 106
Acer griseum, 100, 102–103
Acer mandshuricum, 111
Acer mono, 109
Acer okamotoanum, 89
Acer pectinatum, 34
Acer pseudosieboldianum,

79, 86, 111

Acer shirasawanum, 68
Acer sieboldianum, 68
Acer stachyophyllum, 104
Acer stevenii, 190, 194

Acer tataricum ssp. 

semenovii, 190

Acer tegmentosum, 86, 87,

111, 194

Acer triflorum, 87, 88, 111,

112

Acer tschonoskii var.
rubripes, 85, 87

Acer ukurunduense, 86
Aceriphyllum rossii, 77
Achillea ‘Taygetea’, 236
Achimenes erecta, 277
Achimenes lanata, 227
Acnistus arborescens, 267
Aconitum, 47, 100
Acrotrema costatum, 135
Actaea asiatica, 104, 111
Actinidia, 193
Actinidia polygama, 86
Adenanthos obovatus, 160
Adenocalymna, 290
Adenophora, 83
Aechmea calyculata, 285
Aechmea mariae-reginae,

266, 267

Aechmea smithiorum, 247
Aesculus indica ‘Sydney

Pearce’, 237

Aesculus wilsonii, 236
Agapanthus, 233
Agapetes serpens, 227
Agati grandiflora, 251
Agave, 271
Aglaia odorata, 284
Agrostocrinum scabrum, 157
Aiphanes caryotaefolia,

259–260

Alangium platanifolium, 79
Alangium platanifolium var.

macrophyllum, 86
Alberta magna, 164

Alchemilla erythropoda, 236
Alchemilla oligotricha, 206
Allium thunbergii, 68
Alnus hirsuta, 111
Aloe ciliaris, 177
Aloe ferox, 172
Alonsoa meridionalis, 311
Alpinia kumatake, 57
Alsophila, 292
Alstroemeria, 305, 308, 311
Alstroemeria aurea, 316,

317

Alstroemeria caryophyllaea,

283, 284

Alstroemeria diluta, 311
Alstroemeria hookeri ssp.

recumbens, 312

Alstroemeria ligtu ssp. 
incarnata, 313, 314

Alstroemeria ligtu ssp. simsii,

312

Alstroemeria pelegrina, 309,

311

Alstroemeria revoluta, 318
Alternanthera, 223
Amorphophallus forbesii,

141

Amorphophallus titanum,

140–141

Amphilophium paniculatum,

255, 256, 257

Anguloa, 279
Anguloa clowesii, 280
Anigozanthos ‘Baby Roo’,

154

Anigozanthos humilis, 157
Anigozanthos manglesii, 157
Anneslea fragrans, 13
Annona, 275
Anthurium, 152, 252, 282

Anthurium andraeanum,

283

Anthurium cordifolium, 248
Anthurium dominicense,

248

Anthurium lucidum, 248
Anthurium palmatum,

248–249

Anthurium scherzerianum,

283

Anthurium subsignatum,

261

Aphananthe aspera, 89
Aphelandra hartwegiana,

272

Araucaria, 316
Araucaria angustifolia, 281
Araucaria araucana, 303,

305, 315

Archontophoenix, 133
Arctotis gumbletoni, 180
Ardisia crenata ‘Alba’, 180
Ardisia crispa, 69
Ardisia japonica, 65
Ardisia villosa, 54, 55
Argyranthemum ‘Mrs. F.

Sander’, 238

Arisaema, 100
Arisaema yunnanense, 38
Aristolochia chilensis, 309,

310

Aristolochia littoralis, 271
Arpophyllum spicatum, 294
Arrabidaea chica, 255
Arrabidaea floribunda, 255,

257

Artocarpus altilis, 250, 251,

265

Aruncus aethusifolius, 74
Arundina bambusifolia, 18

326

Index

Aster ×frikartii ‘Jungfrau’,

236

Aster tataricus ‘Jindai’, 68,

69

Asteriscus maritimus, 238
Astilbe chinensis var. davidii,

84

Astilbe chinensis var. taquetii

‘Purpurlanze’, 240

Astilbe grandis, 118
Astilbe ‘Inshriach Pink’, 236
Astilboides tabularis, 108,

109

Billbergia amoena, 284
Billbergia speciosa, 285
Blechnum buchtienii, 268
Blechnum dentatum, 146
Bomarea, 263
Bomarea salsilla, 309, 311,

312

Bombax ceiba, 119
Bougainvillea, 166
Brexia madagascariensis, 224
Browallia americana, 153
Browallia speciosa, 263, 271
Brownea macrophylla, 259,

Astrantia ‘Hadspen Blood’,

294

238

Astrantia major, 238
Astrantia maxima, 238
Astrocaryum standleyanum,

272

Atalantia, 149
Athanasia parviflora, 175,

179

Athrotaxis, 131
Athyrium coreanum, 77
Austrocedrus chilensis, 303
Austrotaxus spicata, 143
Avicennia, 276

Bactris gasipaes, 260, 298,

299

Balbisia peduncularis, 308
Banksia dryandroides, 162
Banksia grandis, 161
Banksia repens, 159
Barleria albostellata, 180
Barleria barbata, 245
Barnadesia lanceolata, 293
Begonia pustulata, 261
Berberis, 105
Berberis ×chenaultii, 218
Bergenia ‘Pugsley’s Pink’,

236

Bergenia purpurascens, 48,

49

Betula calcicola, 38
Betula costata, 89, 111
Betula ermanii, 86, 110
Betula litwinowii, 205, 206
Betula utilis, 105
Betula verrucosa, 193, 196

Brugmansia. See Datura
Buddleja, 38
Buddleja crispa var. farreri,

230

Bulbinella floribunda, 174
Bulbophyllum, 14, 34
Buxus balearica, 214–215
Buxus hyrcana, 209, 210
Buxus microphylla var.

koreana, 88

Buxus rugulosa var. 

prostrata, 38

Buxus sempervirens, 190,

197, 209, 212, 213, 215

Buxus sempervirens
‘Pendula’, 237
Buxus sempervirens
‘Prostrata’, 237
Byblis gigantea, 127

Calandrinia, 309
Calandrinia grandiflora,

311

Calandrinia longiscapa, 314
Calanthe, 259
Calanthe discolor, 80
Calanthe discolor f. sieboldii,

62

Calathea crotalifera, 259
Calceolaria thyrsiflora, 313,

314

Callicarpa japonica, 101
Callicarpa japonica var. 

luxurians, 58

Callicarpa tosaensis, 58

Callistemon, 129
Callistemon phoeniceus, 129
Callitris preissii ssp. 

verrucosa, 162

Calocedrus decurrens, 122
Calocedrus macrolepis, 122
Caltha polypetala, 203
Camellia, 90, 123, 229
Camellia azalea, 43
Camellia boreali-yunnanica,

118, 119, 120

Camellia brevigyna, 118
Camellia handelii, 123
Camellia huiliensis, 118
Camellia hunanica,

122–123

Camellia japonica, 53, 62,
64, 65, 66, 67, 80, 81,
82, 84, 85, 220

Camellia japonica ‘Fuji’, 70
Camellia japonica ‘Kobai’,

70

Camellia japonica ‘Korean

Fire’, 85

Camellia japonica ‘Matho-

tiana’, 220

Camellia japonica
‘Osaraku’, 70

Camellia kangdianica, 117
Camellia minor, 118
Camellia nokoensis, 96
Camellia oleifera, 101
Camellia pitardii var. 

yunnanica, 117

Camellia reticulata, 117,

120, 121, 122, 229

Camellia saluenensis, 120,

121, 229

Camellia sasanqua, 53, 54
Camellia sinensis, 118
Camellia tenuivalvis, 119
Camellia tunganica, 122
Campanula, 203, 206
Campanula takesimana, 89
Campanula trachelium

‘Bernice’, 236

Campsis radicans, 254
Campylocentrum 

micranthum, 275

327

Campyloneurum phyllitidis,

285

Canarium ovatum, 271
Canna ‘Ambassadour’, 172
Canna ‘Banner’, 172
Canna ‘King Midas’, 172
Canna ‘Lunniy Svet’, 172,

190

Cantua buxifolia, 299, 301,

302

Cantua cuzcoensis, 302
Cantua ‘Hot Pants’, 302
Carex morrowii ‘Gilt’, 239,

240

Carludovica, 246
Carpinus betulus, 233
Carpinus caroliniana, 273
Carpinus cordata, 86, 106,

111

Carpinus laxiflora, 79, 86
Carpinus orientalis, 194
Carpinus viminea, 16
Carpobrotus modestus, 162
Caryopteris incana, 80
Caryopteris incana ‘Blue

Billows’, 80

Cassia, 256
Castanea henryi, 101
Castanopsis carlesii, 96
Casuarina decussata, 161
Catalpa bungei, 100
Cathaya argyrophylla, 123,

124

Caulophyllum robustum,

111

Cavendishia guatemalensis

var. chiapensis, 276

Cedrus, 85, 195
Celastrus stylosus, 30
Centaurea cheiranthifolia,

240

Cephaelis, 246
Cephalotaxus, 105
Cephalotaxus fortunei, 105
Cephalotaxus sinensis, 106
Cephalotus follicularis,

127–128

Ceratostigma griffithii, 44
Cercidiphyllum japonicum

‘Rotfuchs’, 239

Index

Cercis chinensis, 69
Cercis yunnanensis, 37
Cestrum nocturnum, 284
Cestrum parqui, 309
Chamaecyparis obtusa, 51,

55

Clitoria fairchildiana, 272
Clivia miniata, 172, 182
Clusia, 245
Clusia grandiflora, 290
Coccoloba rugosa, 287
Cochliostema jacobianum,

Chamaecyparis obtusa var.

227

formosana, 92

Chamaedorea, 258, 259
Chamaedorea ernesti-

augusti, 249

Chamaerops humilis, 222,

224, 226

Charianthus corymbosus,

246

Charianthus purpureus var.

rugosus, 246

Chenopodium quinoa, 303
Chionanthus retusus, 37
Chlorophytum alismifolium,

235

Chodanthus puberulus, 254
Chosenia arbutifolia, 108,

109

Cocos nucifera, 276, 277
Codiaeum variegatum var.
pictum ‘Baronne James
de Rothschild’, 235

Codiaeum variegatum var.
pictum ‘Benoît Comte’,
235

Codiaeum variegatum var.
pictum ‘British Empire’,
235

Codonopsis ovata, 236
Coelogyne, 14
Coelogyne corymbosa, 33
Coelogyne cristata, 33
Coelogyne pustulosa, 145
Coffea arabica var. mirta,

259

Chrysanthemum, 84
Chrysanthemum coronarium,

Coleus, 223
Columnea florida, 259, 266,

311

Chrysanthemum

×morifolium, 56

Chrysanthemum

×morifolium ‘Tokyo’, 60

Chusquea cumingii, 313
Cimicifuga, 100, 105
Cimicifuga acerina, 106
Cimicifuga foetida, 104,

106

Cimicifuga heracleifolia, 81
Cimicifuga simplex, 86
Cinchona, 137, 263
Cistus ladanifer, 221
Citrullus lanatus, 188
Clematis ‘Hakuba’, 151
Clematis heracleifolia
‘Cassandra’, 241

Clematis ‘Misette Blue’, 151
Clematis patens, 83
Clethra barbinervis, 51, 70
Clintonia, 42
Clitoria, 244

267

Combretum kraussii, 180
Conanthera bifolia, 312
Conanthera campanulata,

311

Coniogramme fraxinea var.

intermedia, 77

Conospermum, 158
Convallaria keiskei, 83
Coriaria thymifolia, 259
Cornus alba, 108, 194
Cornus controversa, 106
Cornus kousa, 84, 100
Cornus kousa var. chinensis,

106

Cornus mas, 190, 191
Cornus sanguinea, 191
Cortaderia dioica, 240
Corytholoma bulbosum, 285
Costus stenophyllus, 259
Cotinus ‘Grace’, 236
Cotoneaster, 15, 26
Cotoneaster adpressa, 41

Cotoneaster hebephyllus, 49
Cotoneaster microphyllus
‘Emerald Spray’, 30

Cotoneaster morrisonensis,

93, 96

Crambe koktebelica, 236
Crataegus, 188
Crataegus microphylla, 190
Crataegus wilsonii, 105
Crinodendron hookerianum,

309, 318

Crocus speciosus, 190
Cruckshanksia pumila, 309
Cryptomeria, 53, 62, 65
Cryptomeria japonica, 37,

54, 92, 209

Ctenanthe muelleri, 286
Cucurbita moschata, 303
Cunninghamia lanceolata,

92

Cuphea micropetala, 152
Cuphea procumbens, 152
Cupressus, 96
Cupressus duclouxiana, 37
Cupressus funebris, 37
Curcuma longa, 145
Cyathea, 141, 220
Cyathea arborea, 248, 287,

289

Cyathea hodgeana, 248
Cycas circinalis, 286
Cycas revoluta, 268
Cydista diversifolia, 254,

255, 257

Cydista heterophylla, 255
Cymbidium goeringii, 81
Cymbidium grandiflorum,

34

Cymbidium longifolium, 34
Cyperus alternifolius
‘Variegatus’, 231

Cyphostemma juttae, 177,

181

Cypripedium japonicum, 62
Cyrtopodium verrucosum,

285

Cyrtostachys, 138
Cyrtostachys lakka, 134,

268, 294

328

Dactylorhiza, 199
Dahlia, 226
Damnacanthus indicus, 55,

58, 65

Damnacanthus 

macrophyllus, 55

Dampiera linearis, 162
Daphne ×burkwoodii ‘G. K.

Argles’, 236

Daphne cannabina, 32, 33
Daphne glomerata, 204, 206
Daphniphyllum humile, 55
Daphniphyllum pentandrum

var. oldhamii, 96

Datura, 278, 279
Datura arborea, 278, 280
Datura aurea, 280
Datura ×candida, 278, 279,

280

Datura coccinea, 292
Datura ×dolichocarpa, 278,

279

Datura sanguinea, 278,

279–280

Datura suaveolens, 278
Datura versicolor, 278
Datura vulcanicola, 280
Davallia mariesii, 79
Dendrobium, 14, 18, 35
Dendrobium chrysotoxum,

19

Dendrobium flammula, 148
Dendrobium neo-guineense,

146

Dendrocalamus giganteus,

275

Dendroseris litoralis, 292
Deutzia compacta var. 

multiradiata, 45

Deutzia glabrata, 111
Deutzia grandiflora, 100
Deutzia vilmorinae, 104
Dianella ensifolia, 145
Dianthus japonicus, 51
Dianthus superbus, 193
Dichroa febrifuga, 123, 180
Dicksonia, 220
Dicksonia antarctica, 228
Dicranopteris, 248

Index

Dictyosperma album, 282
Didymopanax attenuatum,

Encephalartos woodii, 178
Enkianthus campanulatus,

246

Dieffenbachia oerstedtii, 266
Dierama medium, 181
Dimerocostus tessmannii,

298, 299

Dimorphanthera leucostoma,

148

Dimorphorchis lowii, 134,

135

Dioscorea bulbifera, 253
Diplazium atirrense, 267
Dipteris conjugata, 138
Disa uniflora, 164,

167–168

Disporum viridescens, 89
Distylium racemosum, 54
Diuris, 157
Doryanthes excelsa, 132
Dracaena draco, 221
Drimys, 131
Drimys winteri, 131, 309,

310

Drimys winteri var. andina,

316

Dryandra carduacea, 157
Dryandra polycephala, 157
Drynaria sparsisora, 145
Dryopteris consanguinea,

246

Dypsis lutescens, 282, 283

Echeveria, 223
Echinopanax elatus, 193
Echinops setifer, 84–85
Echium, 178
Echium brevirame, 184
Echium gentianoides, 184,

185

Echium simplex, 178
Echium webbii, 184
Edgeworthia papyrifera, 236
Elaeagnus, 26
Elaeagnus crispa, 57
Elaeis, 260
Emmenopterys henryi, 100,

102, 103

Encephalartos villosus, 172

70

Epidendrum nutans var.

dipus, 284

Epimedium, 100, 122
Episcia lilacina, 227
Eremocitrus, 149
Eria graminifolia, 34
Erica, 161
Erica cerinthoides, 154
Erica ‘Evening Glow’, 234
Erica persoluta, 154
Erica perspicua, 154
Eriobotrya bengalensis, 13
Eriostemon australasius, 154
Eryngium pandanifolium,

226

Erythrina, 173, 287–290
Erythrina altissima, 173
Erythrina americana, 257
Erythrina humeana, 177
Escallonia revoluta, 311
Escallonia rubra var.
macrantha, 317

Etlingera elatior, 137, 282
Eucalyptus, 126, 129, 159
Eucalyptus alpina, 162
Eucalyptus coccifera, 130
Eucalyptus diversicolor, 161
Eucalyptus gigantea, 130
Eucalyptus gunnii, 130
Eucalyptus maculata, 132
Eucalyptus marginata, 161
Eucalyptus pauciflora, 130
Eucalyptus perriniana, 130
Eucalyptus preissiana, 159,

161

Eucalyptus pyriformis, 158
Eucalyptus regnans, 130,

131

Eucalyptus sepulcralis, 161
Eucalyptus simmondsii, 130
Eucalyptus tasmanica, 130
Eucalyptus tetragona, 161
Eucalyptus urnigera, 130
Eugenia guilleminiana, 235
Eulophia horsfallii, 235
Eulophia speciosa, 182

Euonymus fortunei var. 

radicans ‘Longwood’, 64

Euonymus pallidifolius, 93
Euonymus theaefolius, 30
Euphorbia, 275
Euphorbia canariensis, 185
Euphorbia characias ssp.
wulfenii ‘Lambrook
Gold’, 238

Euphorbia nematocypha, 39,

40

Euphorbia pulcherrima, 153
Euptelea pleiosperma, 100,

104

Eurya emarginata, 51
Euterpe, 259
Exochorda tianschanica, 190

Fabiana imbricata, 313
Fabiana imbricata f. vio-

lacea, 238

Fagus multinervis, 89
Fagus orientalis, 201, 207
Fagus sylvatica ‘Ansorgei’,

233

Fargesia murielae, 230
Fatsia japonica, 65
Ficus benjamina, 26
Ficus citrifolia, 249
Ficus erecta, 51
Filipendula vulgaris, 203
Fitzroya cupressoides, 291,

303

Flourensia thurifera, 311
Forsythia ovata, 77
Fortunearia sinensis, 101
Fortunella margarita, 54
Francoa appendiculata, 316
Fraxinus excelsior ‘Hessei’,

232

Fraxinus mandshurica, 109
Fuchsia magellanica, 316

Galega, 199
Garcinia mangostana, 268,

269

Gastrochilus distichus, 17
Gaultheria pumila, 316
Gaultheria tetramera, 49

329

Gaultheria trichoclada, 46
Gazania krebsiana, 180
Geleznowia verrucosa, 158
Gentiana, 18, 40
Gentiana apiata, 106
Gentiana sino-ornata, 18
Gentiana szechenyii, 18
Geranium, 193, 203
Geranium ibericum, 203
Geranium macrorrhizum

‘Czakor’, 238

Geranium sylvaticum, 203
Gerbera, 227
Gerbera jamesonii, 164
Ginkgo, 123
Ginkgo biloba ‘St. Cloud’,

218

Gleichenia, 262
Globularia willkommii, 218
Glomeropitcairnia pen-
duliflora, 246, 247

Glyptostrobus pensilis, 37
Gordonia axillaris, 96
Grammatophyllum
papuanum, 145

Grammatophyllum specio-

sum, 138, 139

Grevillea, 153, 154, 162
Grevillea dallachiana, 153
Grevillea dielsiana, 158
Grevillea dryandroides, 159
Grevillea lanigera, 153
Grevillea ‘Poorinda Tran-

quility’, 153

Grevillea victoriae, 162
Greyia sutherlandii, 182
Gunnera insignis, 265
Gunnera manicata, 286
Guzmania angustifolia, 266
Guzmania megastachya, 246
Guzmania monostachya,

269

Guzmania sanguinea, 262,

267

Gynandropsis pulcherrima,

262

Gypsophila oldhamiana, 84

Index

Haemanthus, 169
Haemanthus magnificus,

173

Hakea, 158
Hakea cucullata, 161
×Halimiocistus

‘Ingwersenii’, 238

Hamamelis ×intermedia

‘Jelena’, 235

Hamamelis ×intermedia

‘Ruby Glow’, 235

Hamamelis mollis, 100
Hardenbergia comptoniana,

157, 161

Haworthia cooperi, 291
Haworthia laetevirens, 291
Haworthia rigida, 291
Hedera helix var. taurica

‘Yalta’, 189, 190

Hedychium sino-aureum, 46
Helichrysum sibthorpii, 238
Heliconia, 275, 294
Heliconia bihai, 247, 252
Heliconia caribaea,

247–248

Heliconia mariae, 272
Heliconia tortuosa, 266
Heliconia wagneriana, 152,

293

Helipterum splendidum, 158
Helleborus niger, 238
Helleborus niger ‘White

Magic’, 236

Helleborus ×sternii, 238
Hemerocallis, 82, 83
Hemerocallis aurantiaca var.

littorea, 53, 54

Hemerocallis coreana, 74
Hemerocallis longituba, 64
Hemerocallis middendorfii,

67

Hibiscus acetosella, 153
Hibiscus coccineus, 188
Hibiscus moscheutos, 188
Hibiscus rosa-sinensis, 277
Hibiscus ‘Shaliapin’, 188
Hibiscus ‘Taj Mahal’, 188
Hieracium, 199
Hippeastrum, 285
Holboellia, 105
Holochlamys beccarii, 146
Homalocladium platy-

cladum, 284

Hovenia acerba, 101
Hoya carnosa, 135
Hoya imperialis, 227
Hoya lacunosa, 135
Huntleya meleagris, 285
Hydrangea aspera, 100, 106
Hydrangea aspera ssp.

strigosa, 104

Hydrangea integrifolia, 96
Hydrangea paniculata, 51
Hydrangea robusta, 46
Hymenophyllum, 55, 248
Hypericum androsaemum
‘Albury Purple’, 236
Hypericum ascyron, 86
Hypocyrta, 262
Hypocyrta perianthomega,

285

Idesia polycarpa var. vestita,

104

Ilex, 105, 229
Ilex ×altaclarensis

‘Smithiana’, 228

Ilex aquifolium ‘Flavescens’,

228

Ilex colchica, 207, 212
Ilex crenata var. radicans, 66
Ilex crenata ‘Sky Pencil’, 70,

Hemerocallis middendorfii

71

var. esculenta, 67

Hepatica maxima, 86
Heracleum sosnowskyi, 204
Heterocentron macrostachy-

um ‘Nanum’, 152

Hibbertia miniata, 157
Hibiscus, 188

Ilex geniculata, 51
Ilex liukiuensis, 57
Ilex macrocarpa, 37
Ilex pernyi, 100
Ilex rugosa, 66
Ilex serrata, 55
Ilex serrata ‘Longwood 

Firefall’, 70

Ilex sugerokii, 55, 66
Illicium simonsii, 119, 120
Impatiens, 146, 148, 150
Impatiens ‘Carousel’, 149
Impatiens hawkeri, 144
Impatiens linearifolia, 148
Impatiens ‘Mt. Kum’, 148
Impatiens repens, 227
Impatiens schlechteri, 148
Indigofera pseudotinctoria,

51

Inula orientalis, 206
Iris, 47
Iris sanguinea, 86
Isoplexis canariensis, 184
Isopogon latifolius, 160, 161
Ixora, 244
Ixora macrothyrsa, 250

Jacaranda mimosifolia, 254
Jacobinia umbrosa, 268
Jacquiniella globosa, 248
Jasminum rex, 287
Jubaea chilensis, 309, 310
Jubaeopsis caffra, 171
Juglans regia, 191
Juniperus, 105, 195
Juniperus conferta, 64
Juniperus ×media

‘Pfitzeriana’, 231
Juniperus pingii, 38
Juniperus rigida, 88
Juniperus squamata, 38, 93,

94, 95

Kadsura japonica, 57
Kageneckia oblonga, 311
Kandelia candel, 57
Kalanchoe, 223
Kalanchoe manginii, 223
Kalanchoe pumila, 223
Kalanchoe rosei var. seyringii,

222

Kalopanax pictus, 86
Kennedia coccinea, 161
Keteleeria davidiana, 96
Keteleeria evelyniana, 37
Kingia australis, 160, 161
Kohleria, 277

Kohleria eriantha, 283
Kolkwitzia amabilis, 101
Kolkwitzia amabilis ‘Rosea’,

230

Laburnum anagyroides, 231
Laburnum ×watereri

‘Vossii’, 228

Lachenalia tricolor var.

aurea, 172

Lactuca keiskeana, 51
Lagenaria siceraria, 291
Lagerstroemia fauriei, 59
Lagerstroemia fauriei

‘Fantasy’, 59

Lagerstroemia fauriei
‘Townhouse’, 59

Lagerstroemia hirsuta, 293
Lagerstroemia indica, 37
Lagerstroemia speciosa, 271
Lagerstroemia subcostata, 95
Laguncularia, 276
Lamium galeobdolon

‘Silberteppich’, 240

Lankesterella, 261
Lantana trifolia, 151
Lapageria rosea, 293
Lapageria rosea var. alba,

292

Larix, 110
Larix griffithiana, 44
Larix potaninii, 41, 42
Larix sibirica, 196
Lasianthus chinensis, 95
Lathyrus maritimus, 51
Lathyrus subandinus, 307,

315

Laurus nobilis, 209, 235
Lavandula buchii, 185
Lechenaultia biloba, 157,

158

Lechenaultia biloba ‘Moora’,

154

Lechenaultia macrantha,

158

Leontochir ovallei, 308
Leptopteris alpina, 141
Leucadendron argenteum,

170

330

Index

Leucadendron discolor, 170
Leucadendron orientale, 154
Leucocoryne ixioides,

307–308

Leucocoryne vittata, 311
Leucospermum, 169, 171
Leucospermum nutans, 170,

171

Lycaste macrophylla ssp.

xanthocheila, 267
Lychnis fulgens, 108
Lycopodium, 138
Lycoris koreana, 78
Lyonia ovalifolia, 92
Lyonia ovalifolia var. ellip-

tica, 100

Leucospermum reflexum,

Lysichiton camtschatcense, 66

170, 171
Leucostegia 

hymenophylloides, 138

Libertia sessiliflora, 311
Ligularia, 100, 105
Ligularia dolichobotrys, 105
Ligularia nelumbifolia, 105
Ligularia veitchiana, 106
Ligustrum ciliatum, 51
Lilium brownii var. 

colchesteri, 105

Lilium hansonii, 76
Lilium martagon, 193
Lilium philippinense, 93
Linaria, 193
Lindera erythrocarpa, 74
Lindera glauca, 100
Lindera glauca var. 

salicifolia, 83

Lindera neesiana, 105
Linum aquilinum, 311
Linum catharticum, 203
Linum hypericifolium, 206
Liparis, 35
Liquidambar styraciflua,

276

Lithocarpus, 119
Lithocarpus edulis, 60
Litsea cubeba, 122, 124
Livistona, 133
Lobelia excelsa, 311, 312
Lobelia tupa, 305
Lonicera, 196
Lonicera tomentella, 49
Lopezia racemosa, 277
Loropetalum, 123
Ludwigia octovalvis, 269
Luma apiculata, 292
Lupinus, 292
Lupinus arboreus, 311

Machilus, 105
Machilus thunbergii, 65
Macrozamia spiralis, 132
Magnolia, 123, 229, 237
Magnolia biondii, 104
Magnolia campbellii, 27,

29, 32

Magnolia grandiflora, 201
Magnolia sieboldii, 80
Magnolia sprengeri, 104
Magnolia stellata, 70
Mahonia lomariifolia, 222
Mahonia moranensis, 222
Mahonia nepalensis, 32
Mallotus apelta, 101
Malus pallasiana, 193
Malus pumila var. 
paradisiaca, 189

Malus rockii, 45
Malus sylvestris, 189
Marattia brassii, 146
Marcgravia umbellata, 227
Mauritia flexuosa, 299
Maxillaria coccinea, 248
Maytenus chubutensis, 313
Maytenus disticha, 315
Meconopsis, 47
Medinilla verrucosa, 137
Melaleuca, 129
Melaleuca pentagona, 129
Melia azedarach, 13
Mesembryanthemum, 221
Methysticodendron ame-

sianum, 278

Miconia magnifica, 69
Microbiota decussata, 193
Microcitrus papuana, 149
Microcitrus warburgiana,

149

Mimosa acerba, 284
Mimulus luteus, 316
Miscanthus sinensis

‘Cabaret’, 71

Mitraria coccinea, 318
Morinda umbellata, 57
Mucuna bennettii, 134, 252
Mucuna rostrata, 252
Musa coccinea, 138
Mussaenda erythrophylla,

173

Nepenthes rafflesiana, 135
Nephrolepis pendula, 267
Nerine, 237, 239
Nerium oleander

‘Aurantiacum’, 222
Nicotiana glauca, 308
Nolana crassulifolia, 311
Nolana paradoxa, 308
Norantea guianensis, 294
Nothofagus, 126, 155, 289,

291, 315, 316

Mussaenda philippica ‘Doña

Nothofagus cunninghamii,

Aurora’, 135

Mutisia subulata, 315
Myosotis alpestris, 206
Myrciaria paraensis, 299
Myrica rubra, 55
Myrtus communis, 224

Narcissus, 220
Narcissus asturiensis, 219
Narcissus bulbocodium var.

citrinus, 218

Narcissus bulbocodium var.

monophyllus, 219

Narcissus pseudonarcissus var.

nobilis, 219

Narcissus rupicola, 220
Narcissus tazetta ‘Aureus’,

226

130

Nothofagus dombeyi, 305,

306, 313

Nothofagus obliqua, 305

Ocotea bullata, 177
Odontosoria gymno-
grammoides, 267
Olea europaea, 225
Oleandra neriiformis, 138
Olsynium philippi, 315
Oncidium, 265
Oncidium cabagrae, 267
Oncidium flexuosum, 285
Oncidium globuliferum, 267
Oncidium ‘Golden

Showers’, 135

Oncidium pusillum, 263,

Narcissus tazetta ‘Italicus’,

274, 275

226

Narcissus tazetta

‘Papyraceus’, 226

Narcissus triandrus, 219
Nelumbo caspica, 190, 210
Neocallitropsis araucarioides,

143

Neofinetia falcata, 58
Neolitsea sericea, 89
Neomacfadya podopogon,

255

Neoregelia ‘Catherine

Wilson’, 267
Nepenthes, 135
Nepenthes ampullaria, 135
Nepenthes ×dormanniana,

234

Nepenthes gracilis, 135
Nepenthes ×hookeriana, 135

Oncosperma horridum, 139
Onobrychis, 199
Onohualcoa fissa, 256, 257
Oplopanax elatus, 109
Oreopanax capitatus, 226
Origanum laevigatum

‘Herrenhausen’, 240

Orobus, 199
Orthophytum vagans, 262
Osmanthus, 123
Osmunda bromeliifolia, 53
Ostrya, 273
Oxalis, 263
Oxalis corniculata var.
atropurpurea, 153

Oxalis gigantea, 308, 309
Oxalis palmifrons, 181
Oxytropis, 49

331

Pachyrhizus erosus, 244
Pachysandra, 65
Paeonia, 105
Paeonia anomala, 192
Paeonia caucasica, 194
Paeonia delavayi var. lutea,

47

Paeonia kavachensis, 194
Paeonia mairei, 105
Paeonia mlokosewitschii, 201
Paeonia obovata, 109, 110
Paeonia officinalis, 222
Paeonia tenuifolia, 194
Paeonia triternata, 194
Papaver, 199
Papaver alpinum, 192
Papuapteris linearis, 141
Paramongaia weberbaueri,

300–301, 303

Paris polyphylla, 104
Passiflora pinnatistipula, 309
Paullinia cupana, 290
Pedicularis, 199
Pelargonium ×domesticum,

237

Pennisetum alopecuroides, 83
Pentas lanceolata, 268
Pericallis appendiculata, 183
Pericallis ×hybrida, 183,

184, 185

Pericallis ×hybrida ‘Corn-
flower Blue’, 183, 185
Pericallis papyracea, 183,

185

Persea americana, 273
Petrea arborea, 257
Petrea volubilis, 283, 284
Petrea volubilis var. albiflora,

252

Petunia integrifolia, 150
Peucedanum japonicum, 53,

83

Phajus maculatus, 60
Phalaenopsis, 156
Philadelphus pekinensis, 101
Philodendron, 274
Philodendron renauxii, 285
Philodendron verrucosum,

283

Philotheca myoporoides, 153

Index

Philotheca ‘Stardust’, 153
Phlomis chrysophylla, 240
Phlox paniculata, 192
Phoebe, 105
Phoebe faberi, 105
Phoenix canariensis, 209
Photinia villosa, 55
Phycella, 314
Phycella bicolor, 305, 306
Phyllagathis rotundifolia,

227

Phytolacca dioica, 290
Picea, 110, 112
Picea brachytyla, 42
Picea likiangensis, 38
Picea likiangensis var.

rubescens, 41

Picea omorica ‘Expansa’,

230

Picea orientalis, 202
Picea pungens ‘Moerheimii’,

230

Pieris, 27
Pieris formosa, 33
Pieris japonica, 65
Pieris taiwanensis, 92
Pinus, 112, 123
Pinus caribaea, 274
Pinus densata, 41
Pinus densiflora, 87
Pinus densiflora var.

sylvestriformis, 110

Pinus henryi, 105
Pinus insularis, 13, 15
Pinus kochiana, 199
Pinus koraiensis, 87, 89,

109, 110, 111
Pinus nigra, 218
Pinus pallasiana, 190, 194
Pinus parviflora, 89
Pinus pumila, 66, 79, 109
Pinus sibirica, 193, 196
Pinus stankewiczii, 190
Pinus strobus, 273
Pinus tabulaeformis, 100
Pinus taeda, 209
Pinus thunbergii, 51, 64
Pinus yunnanensis, 37
Piper auritum, 259

Piper ornatum, 227
Piptanthus nepalensis, 15
Pistacia chinensis, 101
Pitcairnia punicea, 153
Pithecoctenium echinatum,

257

Pittosporum tobira, 51, 55
Pityrogramma dealbata, 276
Pityrogramma triangularis,

276

Platanus orientalis, 20
Platycerium, 270
Platycerium andinum, 301
Plectranthus argentatus, 162
Plectranthus argentatus

‘Longwood Silver’, 162,
163

Pleione praecox, 30
Pleurothallis grobyi, 273
Poa pratensis, 195
Podocarpus, 123
Podocarpus alpinus, 131
Podocarpus latifolius, 177
Podolepis canescens, 158
Podophyllum hexandrum,

44, 47, 236

Podranea ricasoliana, 254
Poitea carinalis, 245
Polybotrya, 248
Polygala virgata, 180
Polygonatum, 42
Polygonatum odoratum var.

pluriflorum, 81

Polypodium hirsutissimum,

284

Polypodium pumilum, 276
Populus koreana, 111
Populus laurifolia, 193
Potentilla, 105
Potentilla glabra var.

veitchii, 106

Potentilla fruticosa, 196
Potentiall fruticosa ‘Hopley’s

Orange’, 239

Potentilla fruticosa ‘Red

Ace’, 239
Primula, 26
Primula denticulata, 15
Primula florindae, 44

332

Prostanthera ‘Poorinda 

Ballerina’, 239

Protea, 169–170, 171
Protea aristata, 170
Protea caffra, 173
Protea compacta, 170
Protea cynaroides, 169, 175
Protea latifolia, 171
Protea obtusifolia, 170
Protea susannae, 170
Prunus, 188
Prunus cerasoides, 15, 29,

30

Prunus laurocerasus, 207,

209, 212

Prunus maackii, 194
Prunus mahaleb, 188
Prunus ulei, 284
Psilotum nudum, 53, 55
Psittacanthus americanus,

263, 264

Psychotria ipecacuanha, 245
Pteris altissima, 262
Pteris cretica var. 
albo-lineata, 53

Pteris quadriaurita, 152
Pterocarya hupehensis, 102
Pterocarya pterocarpa, 202
Pterostyrax psilophylla, 102
Puya dasylirioides, 268
Puya venusta, 309, 311
Pyracantha, 28
Pyrethrum roseum, 206
Pyrostegia venusta, 254

Quamoclit coccinea, 252
Quercus, 229
Quercus aliena, 100
Quercus aliena var. 
acuteserrata, 106
Quercus dentata, 88
Quercus mongolica, 85, 86,

89, 109, 111

Quercus petraea ‘Giesleri’,

233

Quercus petraea

‘Muscaviensis’, 233

Quercus pontica, 231
Quercus robur, 191
Quercus robur ‘Cucullata’,

233

Quercus semecarpifolia, 15
Quercus suber, 225
Quercus variabilis, 99
Quercus wrightii, 51
Quesnelia imbricata, 284
Quillaja brasiliensis, 221

Rabdosia pseudo-irrorata, 44
Ranunculus, 203
Ranunculus caucasicus, 206
Ranunculus cortusifolius,

184

Raphia regalis, 260
Raphia taedigera, 260–261
Renealmia racemosa, 246
Restio tetraphyllus, 162
Rhaphiolepis umbellata, 51
Rhipsalis, 261
Rhipsalis pachyptera, 262
Rhizophora, 276
Rhododendron, 30, 38, 43,

90, 105, 148, 229

Rhododendron adamsii, 193
Rhododendron albrechtii, 67
Rhododendron arboreum,

15, 32, 33, 34

Rhododendron aucklandii,

35

Index

Rhododendron indicum, 58,

Rhododendron serpyllifolium,

235

Rhododendron japonicum,
50, 51, 63, 64, 65, 66

Rhododendron japonicum f.

aureum, 64

55

Rhododendron spinuliferum,

120

Rhododendron tschonoskii,

67, 79

Rhododendron javanicum,

Rhododendron zoelleri, 141,

138

Rhododendron kaempferi,

61, 63, 65, 67

145, 146, 147
Rhodophiala, 305
Rhodophiala advena, 303,

Rhododendron kanehiraei,

304, 312, 313

95

Rhodophiala bagnoldii, 308,

Rhododendron kawakamii,

309, 311

92

Rhododendron kiusianum,

63

Rhododendron konori, 144
Rhododendron lasiostylum,

96

Rhododphiala moelleri, 317
Rhodophiala splendens, 307,

314, 315

Robinia pseudoacacia, 88
Rodgersia, 105
Rodgersia aesculifolia, 45,

Rhododendron ledebourii,

100

193

Rhododendron luteum, 201,

202

Rhododendron macgregoriae,

145

Rhododendron mariesii, 100
Rhododendron metternichii,

58

63

Rhododendron mucronula-

perianum, 294

Rhododendron aurigeranum,

Rhododendron micranthum,

144

88

Rhododendron barbatum, 32
Rhododendron ‘Benifusha’,

Rhododendron morii, 92
Rhododendron mucronatum,

70

Rhododendron brachy-

carpum, 77, 89

Rhododendron caucasicum,

204

tum, 68, 86

Rhododendron nuttallii, 46
Rhododendron oldhamii, 92,

Rhododendron cuffeanum,

93

14

Rhododednron phoeniceum,

Rhododendron dauricum,

63

193

Rhododendron ponticum,

Rhododendron dielsianum,

207

148

Rhododendron falconeri, 33
Rhododendron gaultheri-

ifolium, 148

Rhododendron pseudo-

chrysanthum, 93

Rhododendron rarum, 148
Rhododendron sataense, 61,

Rhododendron gracilentum,

62

145

Rhododendron grande, 33
Rhododendron herzogii, 145

Rhododendron scabrum, 63
Rhododendron schlippen-

bachii, 86

Salvia przewalskii, 45
Sanguisorba officinalis, 81
Santolina, 223
Sapium japonicum, 88
Saponaria ×lempergii, 240
Sarcococca ruscifolia, 222
Saurania, 143
Schima argentea, 117
Schisandra chinensis, 39
Schizanthus litoralis, 311
Scilla natalensis, 179
Scilla scilloides, 81, 83
Scobinaria, 254
Sedum ‘Matrona’, 241
Sedum maximum, 241
Sedum oryzifolium, 81
Sedum spectabile, 241
Selaginella patula, 234
Senecio echaetus, 45
Senecio herreianus, 172
Senecio yegua, 305, 306
Senna stipulacea, 311
Serissa foetida, 85
Sicana odorifera, 287
Sideritis macrostachys, 185
Sideroxylon hookeri, 13
Sinofranchetia, 105
Sinofranchetia chinensis, 106
Sinowilsonia henryi, 104
Smilacina, 42
Smilacina dahurica, 89
Smilacina japonica, 86
Smilax china, 57
Sobralia, 259
Socratea durissima, 259
Solanum hyporhodium, 294
Solenostemon scutellarioides,

263

Solidago virga-aurea var.

minutissima, 68

Solidago virga-aurea var.

praeflorens, 68

×Solidaster luteus, 240
Sophora cassioides, 316
Sophora tetraptera, 154
Sorbus, 108
Sorbus caucasigena, 206
Sorbus commixta, 89
Sorbus koehneana, 106

Rodgersia ‘Parasol’, 238
Rodgersia podophylla, 86
Rodgersia sambucifolia, 38
Roldana chapalensis, 276
Romulea bulbocodium, 220
Rosa acicularis, 108, 196
Rosa pimpinellifolia, 206
Rosa rugosa, 67, 82
Rosa wichuraiana, 51
Roscoea, 18
Roscoea alpina, 34
Roscoea purpurea, 17
Rossioglossum schlie-

Roystonea oleracea, 290
Roystonea regia, 272
Rubus macrocarpus, 273
Rumohra aristata, 53

Salix, 105
Salix fragilis, 192
Salix kusnetzowii, 204
Salix ledebouriana ‘Kuraika’,

193, 194

Salpiglossis sinuata, 314
Salvia dombeyi, 301, 302
Salvia officinalis

‘Berggarten’, 241

Salvia patens ‘Chilcombe’,

239

333

Viburnum sargentii, 85
Vicia, 199
Victoria amazonica, 138,

234, 296–298

Victoria cruziana, 296
Victoria ‘Longwood

Hybrid’, 296

Vieraea laevigata, 185
Virgilia divaricata, 156
Vitex agnus-castus, 226
Vittaria pendula, 284
Vriesea carinata, 285

Wachendorfia thyrsiflora,

179

Watsonia humilis, 181
Wikstroemia pampaninii,

100

Wikstroemia scytophylla, 43
Wittrockia superba, 286

Xanthorrhoea preissii, 127,

157

Yucca, 226

Zamia skinneri, 266
Zantedeschia aethiopica, 166
Zea mays, 303
Zelkova sinica, 100, 102,

103

Ziziphus, 28
Zoysia japonica, 53

Index

Sorbus prattii, 39
Sorbus rufoferruginea, 51
Sorbus rufopilosa, 38
Spathodea campanulata,

254, 255

Sphacele salviae, 309
Spiraea betulifolia, 196
Spiraea salicifolia, 77
Spondias mombin, 275
Stachys macrantha, 206
Stachytarpheta frantzii, 269
Stachyurus praecox var. 

matsuzakii, 69

Staphylea bumalda, 100
Staphylea holocarpa ‘Rosea’,

237

Stevia rebaudiana, 291
Stewartia koreana, 88
Stewartia sinensis, 100, 102
Stifftia chrysantha, 290
Strelitzia reginae

‘Kirstenbosch Gold’, 182
Strobilanthes atropurpureus,

236

Strongylodon macrobotrys,

134

Styrax japonica, 70
Styrax obassia, 89
Suriana maritima, 251
Swietenia mahogani, 250
Symphytum grandiflorum
‘Blaue Glocken’, 240

Symplocos, 15
Symplocos prunifolia, 61
Syringa amurensis, 77
Syringa pubescens ssp. 

microphylla, 106

Syringa reticulata var.
mandschurica, 87
Syringa velutina, 87
Syringa wolfii, 110

Tabebuia, 254, 281, 291
Tabebuia billbergii, 254
Tabebuia chrysantha, 254
Tabebuia leucoxylon, 250
Tabebuia pentaphylla, 254
Tabebuia rosea, 254
Tabebuia serratifolia, 254

Taiwania cryptomerioides,

96

Taraxacum, 23
Taraxacum heybroekii, 23
Taxodium distichum, 37
Taxus baccata, 194, 199
Taxus cuspidata, 85, 86,

111

Tecoma fulva, 318
Tecomanthe venusta, 132,

133

Tectaria, 248
Telopea speciosissima, 132
Tetracentron sinense, 236
Teucrium, 223
Teucrium bicolor, 315
Thalictrum diffusiflorum, 43
Thalictrum uchiyamai, 77
Thecophyllum urbanianum,

247

Thuja koraiensis, 87, 89,

109

Thunbergia gibsonii, 263
Thunia alba, 18
Tibouchina mutabilis, 284
Tilia, 233
Tilia amurensis, 109
Tilia mandshurica, 107,

111

Tillandsia, 253
Torreya nucifera, 80
Trachycarpus fortunei, 222
Trachycarpus nana, 120,

121

Trichantha purpureovittata,

262

Trichipteris aspera, 248
Trichomanes, 248
Trichosanthes palmata, 28
Tricyrtis latifolia, 104
Tricyrtis macranthopsis, 68
Tricyrtis macropoda, 105
Tricyrtis ohsumiensis, 68
Tricyrtis perfoliata, 68
Trillium, 42
Triosteum himalayanum, 44,

49

Triphasia, 149
Tripterygium regelii, 108

Tristagma nivale, 315
Trochodendron aralioides, 59
Trollius, 193
Tsuga canadensis, 112
Tsuga caroliniana, 112
Tsuga chinensis, 104, 112,

113, 115

Tsuga chinensis var. 
formosana, 93, 94

Tsuga chinensis var.

oblongisquamata, 114,
115, 116

Tsuga dumosa, 113, 115,

116

Tsuga forrestii, 116
Tsuga sieboldii, 89
Tutcheria shinkoensis, 96

Ugni molinae, 315, 316
Ulmus chumlia, 22, 23
Ulmus ‘Columella’, 23
Ulmus lanceifolia, 22
Ulmus ‘Nanguen’, 23
Ulmus villosa, 20
Ulmus wallichiana, 19, 20,

21, 22

Ursinia cakilefolia, 180

Vaccinium, 193, 196
Vaccinium bracteatum, 55
Vaccinium myrtillus, 204
Vanda, 14
×Vandachnis Premier grex,

135

Vellozia elegans, 227
Vellozia retinervis, 173
Veltheimia bracteata, 175,

176, 179

Veltheimia viridifolia, 164
Veronica, 193
Verreauxia reinwardtii, 158
Verticordia chrysantha, 158
Viburnum, 38
Viburnum ×bodnantense

‘Deben’, 236

Viburnum erosum, 100, 104
Viburnum kansuense, 39
Viburnum lantana, 191
Viburnum mullaha var.

glabrescens, 45

334

