One  of  the  most  exciting  projects  that  a 
gardener  can  undertake  is  to  propagate  his 
own  plants.  Few  experiences  can  match  the 
thrill  and  awe  felt  by  a  gardener  who  has 
successfully  germinated  an  even  crop  of 
bedding  plant  seedlings  or  a  particularly 
difficult  woody  plant  seed,  or  who  has 
managed 
two 
grafted  parts  of  a  plant. 

to  root  a  cutting  or  unite 

Plant  propagation  has  been  practiced  ever 
since  early  man  abandoned  his  itinerant  life 
and  settled  down  on  the  land,  where  he 
started  to  grow  his  own  food.  The  techniques 
of  vegetative  propagation  developed  in  such 
ancient  civilizations  as  those  of  the  Baby(cid:173)
lonians  and  the  Chinese  are  still  relevant  and 
in  use  in  the  twentieth  century. 

Using this  book 
The  object  of  this  book  is  to  try  to  present 
some  of  the  basic  facts  on  which  successful 
plant  propagation  is  founded,  so  that  the 
gardener  wishing  to  venture  into  this  field 
will  find  the  elementary  principles  explained 
and  will 
their 
then  only  have 
application  from  experience. 

learn 

to 

It  is  not  intended  that  this  book  will  be  a 
complete  answer—it  can  only  be  a  guide. 
Inevitably,  some  techniques  of  plant  propa(cid:173)
gation  have  not  been  included  either  because 
they  are  too  complicated  or  because  they  do 
not  always  produce  satisfactory  results.  Veg(cid:173)
etables  have  not  been  included  as  they  are 
given  detailed  coverage 
in  a  companion 
volume,  Vegetables.  However,  a  comprehen(cid:173)

sive  range  of  techniques  is  described  so  that 
the  gardener  can  propagate  most  plants, 
either  from  seed  or  vegetatively. 
The  gardener  can  discover 

to 
propagate  more than  700  genera  of  plants  by 
referring to  the  index  at the  back  of the  book, 
where the  appropriate  method  is  listed.  A few 
plants,  such  as  rhododendrons,  have  been 
dealt  with  in  detail,  and  so  have  a  page  to 
themselves,  because there are several  equally 
satisfactory  ways  to  propagate  them. 

the  way 

How this  book  is  arranged 
The  concept  and  approach  in  this  book  is 
entirely  my  own,  based  on  my  experience 
gained  over 
the  past  20  years  evolving 
different  systems  of  plant  propagation  and 
teaching  both  horticultural  students  and 
amateur  gardeners. 

My  aim  has  been  to  try  to  present  propa(cid:173)

gation  techniques  in  their  logical  sequence, 
in seven separate sections. For example, I have 
placed  layering  in  the  same  section  as  stem 
cuttings  as  they  are  both  ways  of  inducing 
roots  on a  stem.  Until  now,  plant  propagation 
has  often  been  presented 
in  a  confusing 
manner:  root,  stem  and  leaf  cuttings  have 
lumped 
frequently  been 
together,  when 
logically 
there 
is 
little  or  no  relationship 
between  them. 

The  book  starts  with  a  glossary  of  propa(cid:173)
gation  terms that the gardener may  not  know. 
Although  the  main  text  is  written  in  a  non(cid:173)
technical  style,  some  technical  terms  have 
inevitably  been 
it  is  to  the 

included,  and 

glossary  that  the  gardener  should  refer  if  he 
is  puzzled  by  the  use  of a  certain  word. 

the 

The  section  on 

importance  of  cold 

tools  and  equipment 

is 
essential  reading  before the gardener  sets  out 
find 
to  do  any  propagating.  Here  he  will 
explained 
frames, 
propagators,  mist  units,  etc.,  and  he  will 
discover  tips  on  how  to  select  suitable  pots 
and  seed  trays  from  the  bewildering  array 
that  is available. The  correct  use  of composts, 
fertilizers  and  rooting  hormones  is  also  dis(cid:173)
cussed,  and  he  will  learn  how  to  tackle  the 
ubiquitous  problems  of  pests  and  diseases. 

The  section  on  propagating  from  seeds  is 
divided  into  two  parts:  seeds  in  general,  and 
tree  and  shrub  seeds,  where  the  problems  of 
dormancy  are  explained.  The  information  on 
how  to  collect,  store  and  germinate  various 
kinds  of seeds  and  how to  look  after  seedlings 
is  of  vital  importance  to  any  gardener. 

The  book  then  presents  a  wide  range  of 
ways  to  propagate  vegetatively.  It  starts  with 
a  section  on  roots  and  progresses  through  to 
sections  on  modified  stems,  stems  and  leaves. 
The  last  section  gives  full  details  on  grafting 
and  budding 
is  a 
comprehensive  index  at the  back  of the  book. 

techniques,  and 

there 

Dispelling the  mystique 
The  practice  of  plant  propagation  is  inclined 
to  be  surrounded  by  a  certain  mystique, 
despite  the  enlightened  modern  tendency  to 
share  knowledge.  The  "art"  of  plant  propa(cid:173)
gation  and  the  possession  of  "green"  fingers 
are  not  magical  powers  confined  to  a  few 

fortunate  gardeners;  plant  propagation  is  an 
entirely  rational  and  logical technique, which, 
if  practiced  with  knowledge  and  understand(cid:173)
relatively  simple  and  easy. 
ing,  can  be 
Undoubtedly  some  people  do  seem  capable 
of conjuring success without any basic knowl(cid:173)
edge  and  of  carrying  out  the  various  oper(cid:173)
ations  instinctively,  but  these  people  have, 
perhaps  by  subconscious  observation,  noted 
correct  conditions  and  timing.  The  gardener 
who 
is  gifted  with  "green"  fingers  is  not 
dissimilar  to  the  person  who  is  "good"  with 
animals  or  who  has  the  capability  to  lead  or 
influence  other  people.  It  is  simply  the  result 
of  an 
to  observe  particular 
conditions. 

innate  ability 

Nothing,  however,  can  supersede the value 
of real  knowledge and  understanding that the 
gardener  needs  when  propagating  a  plant. 
Only  once  he  is  fully  versed  in  the  basic 
propagating  techniques  can  he  hope  to  be 
really  successful. 

Although  plant  propagation  is  completely 
logical  and  explainable,  some  gardeners  are 
definitely  more  successful  than  others;  and 
it  is  here  that  the  "art"  of  plant  propagation 
cannot  be  discounted.  The  "art"  is  in  inter(cid:173)
preting information: it is possible to define the 
state  of  plant  materials, 
the  condition  of 
plants  or  the  effect  of  a  particular  environ(cid:173)
ment,  but  success  derives  from  being  able  to 
into  practice  and 
transfer 
interpret 
in 
to  a 
situation  that  is  continually,  but  often  almost 
imperceptibly,  changing. 

this  knowledge 
these  aspects 

relation 

The  many  phases  of  plant  propagation 
The  actual  process  of  propagation  is  only  one 
of  many  phases  in  the  production  of  a  plant. 
The  other  phases  are  selecting  suitable 
plant  material;  preparing  it  so  it  has  a  high 
capacity  to  regenerate;  then  providing  suit(cid:173)
able  conditions  in  which  the  plant  material 
can  regenerate;  and ensuring its survival  until 
the 
the  plant 
material  as an  integrated,  self-supporting new 
plant. 

final  phase  of  establishing 

to  assess 

Selecting  suitable  plant  material 
Often  the  most  overlooked,  but  one  of  the 
most  significant,  phases  is  the  consideration 
and  choice  of  suitable  material  from  which 
to  propagate.  It  is  well  worth  the  extra  time 
and  effort 
the  available  plant 
material  critically  so  that  the  best  selection 
is  chosen,  and  new  plants  are  not  produced 
from  inferior  stock.  Only  the  best  forms  and 
selections  of a  plant  should  be  earmarked  for 
propagation,  and  they  must  always  be  from 
healthy  stock, 
infections. 
Many  plants,  more  especially  the  older  and 
popular  selections,  will  have  deviated  from 
to  some  extent.  Despite  their 
the  normal 
varietal  name, 
they  may  differ  quite  con(cid:173)
siderably  and  will  exist  in  several  clones,  so 
bear 
in  mind  when  choosing  plant 
material  for  propagation. 

from  virus 

free 

this 

Another 

limitation 

that  should  be  con(cid:173)

sidered  if  propagating  by  vegetative  methods 
is that the  capacity  of the  plant to  regenerate 
will  be  affected  by  the  age  of the  cutting  and 

its  parent  plant,  as  well  as  the  age  of  the 
variety  from  which  it  is  taken. 

to 

low 

readily 

its  capacity 

regenerate  more 

regenerate  starts 

Plant  material  of  the  current  year's  growth 
than  older 
will 
material,  and  the  highest  rooting  response 
will  be  found  in  a  plant  that  is  juvenile,  i.e. 
immature  and  unable  to  produce  flowers  or 
fruit.  As  soon  as  a  seed  germinates  and 
produces  a  juvenile  plant,  it  begins  to  "age" 
and 
to 
decline.  Most  plants  subsequently  enter  a 
mature  phase  when  their  regenerative  abili(cid:173)
ties  continue  to  decline.  Old  plants  and  older 
varieties  will  exhibit  very 
levels  of 
response.  Pruning  or  forcing  a  plant  will  only 
recover  a  little  of  this  capacity  to  regenerate. 
Thus 
to 
accept 
that  old  and  very  old  plants  and 
varieties  will  be  difficult  to  propagate.  For 
example,  a  deciduous  azalea,  of  the  Exbury 
type,  which  was  germinated  from  seed  only 
about  40  years  ago,  will  be  much  easier  to 
propagate  than  a  Ghent  azalea,  which  would 
have  been  originated  over 140  years  ago.  It  is 
important  to  realize  this  distinction,  and  that 
all  plants  derived  from  one  selected  form 
must,  physiologically,  be 
the  same  age, 
regardless  of  when  they  were  vegetatively 
propagated. 

the  gardener  must  be  prepared 

Preparing  the  plant  material 
Having  chosen  the  most  desirable  forms,  the 
next  phase  is  to  prepare  the  material  so  that, 
when  the  time  comes  for  propagation,  it  will 
possess  its  maximum  capacity  to  regenerate. 

Such  preparation  of  highly 
regenerative 
material  can  be  done  by  growing  techniques 
such  as  pruning,  feeding  and  watering,  or  by 
forcing  the  plant  in  a  warmer  environment 
than  normal. 

Providing  suitable  conditions  for 
regeneration 
Next,  it  is  necessary  to  stimulate  this  plant 
material  to  regenerate  as  a  new  plant  by 
encouraging  the  processes  that  cause  the 
development  of  a  new  and  complete  plant. 
This can  be done  by placing the  plant  material 
in  a  suitably  controlled  environment,  such  as 
a  cold  frame  or  propagator.  This  will  not  only 
speed  up  regeneration  but  also  lessen  the 
chances  of  the  plant  material  dying  from 
rotting,  disease  or  exhausted  food  reserves. 
A  stem,  for  example,  can  also  be  encouraged 
to  produce  roots  by  dipping  it  in  a  rooting 
hormone  or  wounding  it  toward  its  base. 

The  ability  of  plant  material  to  regenerate 
is  also  influenced  by  the  different  seasons. 
Always,  therefore,  propagate  a  plant  during 
the  season  recommended  by  this  book. 

Ensuring  its  survival 
Once  the  plant  material  is  in  its  propagating 
environment,  it  is  vital  to  ensure  its  survival 
until  it  becomes  established. 

The  only  way  to  do  this  is  by  maintaining 

absolute  hygiene  in  the  propagating  environ(cid:173)
ment  and  by  thoroughly  cleaning  all  tools 
and  equipment.  Also,  treat  the  plant  material 
with  a  fungicide  such  as  Captan  or  Benlate, 

and  protect 
it  with  a  general  or  specific 
pesticide.  The  shorter  this  survival  period  the 
less  time  there  is  for things  to  go  wrong. 

Establishing the  new  plant 
As soon as the plant material has regenerated, 
the last phase in successful  propagation  is the 
establishment  of  this  young  material  as  an 
integrated,  self-supporting  new  plant.  When 
any  cutting,  such  as  a  leaf  or  stem,  is  taken, 
the  new  parts  that  are  required  to  form  a 
complete  new  plant will  need time to  become 
fully  integrated  with  the  original  cutting.  Just 
because  a  stem  cutting  produces  roots  does 
not  imply  a  new  plant—both  systems  must 
grow  sympathetically  so  that  a  balanced  and 
integrated  growth  is  achieved. 
It  is  often 
relatively  simple  to  persuade  a  cutting  to 
regenerate  a  missing  part,  but  it  is  more 
difficult  to  establish  the  plant  material.  This 
has  to  be  done  by  weaning  it  from  its  pro(cid:173)
tected  environment  and  hardening  it  off  until 
it  is a self-supporting  individual  that can grow 
happily  in  a  normal  environment,  whether 
this  is  indoors  or  outdoors.  This  is  often  the 
hardest  part  of  plant  propagation. 

this  book 

the  gardener  uses 

The  path  of success 
to 
Provided 
understand  the  principles  and  basic  practical 
tasks  of  plant  propagation  and  then  follows 
his  judgment  in  relation  to  a  particular  plant, 
he  can  always  approach  propagation  with 
confidence.  It  is  this  last factor that  underlies 
all  aspects  of  successful  propagation. 

To  propagate  plants  successfully,  it  is  neces(cid:173)
sary  to  have  a  clean  and  tidy  working  area, 
efficient  and  effective  tools  and  equipment 
and 
follow  a  standardized  procedure. 
Failure  in  any  part  of  the  system  leads  to 
frustration  and,  more  importantly,  delays that 
will  reduce  the  probability  of  success. 

to 

Most  important  of  the  gardener's  special 
tools  and  equipment  for  plant  propagation 
are  a  sharp  knife,  a  pair  of  shears,  a  dibble, 
suitable  compost  and  a  selection  of  pots  and 
seed  trays.  Not  all  tools  or fancy  bits  of equip(cid:173)
ment  will  necessarily  enhance  the  success  of 
propagation,  but 
important  ones  will 
because  they  make the  gardener's  job  easier, 
and  if the  job  is  easier  it  often  succeeds  more 
readily. 

the 

The  use  of  suitable  tools  gives  the  plant 
material  the  very  best  start.  To  avoid  tearing 
and  crushing, for example,  always  use a sharp 
knife  or  razor  blade  and  a  clean  sheet  of glass 
when  preparing  a  softwood  cutting  for  plant(cid:173)
ing.  If the plant material  is damaged,  it will  die 
and  become  a  site  for  possible  rots  to  infect 
the  cutting.  By the  same token  it  is  important 

not  to  push  a  cutting 
into  the  compost; 
always  first  make  a  hole  with  a  dibble  of 
suitable  size,  and  then  plant  the  cutting  in 
that  hole.  A  dibble  should  be  approximately 
the  same  diameter  as  the  cutting  to  be 
planted. 

Although  many  people  will  use  a  kitchen 
table,  drain-board  or  greenhouse  bench, 
the  most  suitable  place  to  make  cuttings, 
graft  or  sow  seeds  is  a  bench  in  the  garden 
shed  with  a  convenient  shelf  for  all  the  bits 
and  pieces  of  equipment,  tools,  rooting  pow(cid:173)
ders,  etc.  The  height  of  the  bench  will  be  a 
critical  factor  to  the  comfort  of  the  gardener 
if  considerable  time  is  to  be  spent  propagat(cid:173)
ing or potting  plants. Incorrectly sited  benches 
will  encourage  or  enhance  backaches  and 
cricks  in  the  neck.  It is also  important to  have 
good  lighting  placed  directly  over  the  work(cid:173)
bench  itself. 

Plant  propagation  in  many  ways  is  akin  to 
surgery,  and  nowhere  is  there  more  routine 
and  standardized  procedure 
in  an 
operating  theater—where  all  concentration 
is  centered  on  the  patient. 

than 

Therefore 

the  secret  of  success 

for  a 
gardener  lies  in  having  all  the  required  tools 
and  equipment  readily to  hand  and  clean  and 
in  good  working  order,  so  that  any  technique 
of  propagation  can  proceed  smoothly  and  all 
concentration  can  be  centered  on  the  plant 
material. 

After  use  it  is  important  to  clean,  service 
and  restore  all  equipment to  its  correct  place 
so  that  it  is  readily  accessible. 

Basic  tools  and  equipment 
Knives  (1),  safety  razor  blades  (2) 

and  shears  (3) 

Sharpening  stone  (4) 
Oil  for  lubrication  (5) 
Cleaning  rags  (6),  solvent  (7)  and 

emery  paper  (8) 

Pressers  (various)  for  firming 

compost  (9) 

Dibbles  (10) 
Sieve 1/8in mesh) (11) 
Labels  and  soft  lead  pencil  (12) 
Notebook  for  records  (13) 
Polyethylene  bags  and  tape  (14) 
Raffia,  twine,  etc.  (15) 
Split  canes  12 in  or  15 in  (16) 
Hand  sprayer  (17) 
Watering  can  (18) 
Fungicides  (19) 
Pesticides  (20) 
Rooting  powders  (21) 
Panes  of  glass  for  covering 

seed  trays  (22) 

Panes  of  glass  for  cutting  (23) 
Pots  (24)  and  seed  trays  (25) 
Composts  (26)  and  fertilizer  (27) 

The  main  problem  in  propagation  is to ensure 
survival  of  the  propagated  material  (be  it 
seed,  cutting  or  graft)  until  it  establishes  as 
a  new  young  plant.  If the  correct  material  has 
been  used  at  the  start,  and  as  long  as  any 
treatments  or cuts  have  been  made correctly, 
then  success  is  directly  related  to  the  control 
of the environment. The quicker the  regenera(cid:173)
tive processes can  be induced the less chance 
there  is  for  things  to  go  wrong. 

In  plant propagation there are two environ(cid:173)

into  humidity, 

ments:  the  aerial  environment,  which  can  be 
broken  down 
temperature, 
gaseous  balance  and  light  transmission;  and 
the  environment  of  the  medium  (soil  and 
compost),  which  covers  temperature,  moist(cid:173)
ure  status,  aeration  and  its  reaction  (acidity/ 
alkalinity).  Any  equipment  therefore  should 
be  measured  in  relation  to  the  effect  it  has 
on  these  factors. 

An  ideal  environment  is  one  that  allows 
minimum  water  loss  from  the  plant  material, 
cool  air  temperatures,  adequate  light  pene(cid:173)
tration  for  photosynthesis,  a  normal  atmo(cid:173)
spheric  balance  between  compost  and  air, 
good  drainage  and  warm  soil/compost  tem(cid:173)
peratures  with  a  neutral  acidity/alkalinity 
reaction.  The  degree  to  which  a  particular 
system  of  environmental  control  operates 
will  limit the  propagation  techniques that  can 
be  used  successfully  within  it.  In  general,  the 
"softer"  or  less  hardy  the  plant  material  the 
greater  will  be  the  degree  of  environmental 
control  needed 
to  achieve  success.  The 
vagaries  of  the  normal  climate  are  too  great 
for all  but the easiest and  hardiest  plants to  be 
propagated  successfully  outdoors. 

Cold  frames 
To  provide  initial  control  over  the  environ(cid:173)
ment,  place  a  box  with  a  lid  of  glass  on 
ordinary  soil.  This  cold  frame  environment 
helps  to  increase  soil  temperatures,  reduce 
temperature  fluctuation,  maintain  humidity 
and allow light penetration,  and  it can  be used 
for  the  propagation  of  a  wide  range  of  hardy 
plants. Its main disadvantage, which  is shared 
with  all  enclosed  environments,  is  that  air 
temperatures  build  up  when  conditions  are 
sunny.  This  necessitates  either  airing 
the 
frame to  reduce the temperature, and  thereby 
losing  humidity,  or  shading  the  glass  to  cut 
down  the  light  input,  and  so  reducing  photo(cid:173)
synthesis. 

There  are  many  plastics  substitutes  used  in 
place  of  glass,  but  because  of  their  heat/light 
transmission  characteristics 
less 
satisfactory 
to  spring 
period  as 
they  do  not  conserve  heat  so 
effectively  as  glass. 

late  autumn 

they  are 

in 

the 

The  most  manageable  cold  frame  to  con(cid:173)
struct  is  made  with  "Dutch  lights,"  which  are 
single  panes  of glass  held  in  separate wooden 
frames  4 ft  11 in  long  by  2 ft  6 | in  wide.  These 
can  be  laid  side  by  side  across  a  base  frame 
with a distance between  backboard and front-
board  of  4ft  9 in.  For  propagation  the  back(cid:173)
board  is  best  made  at  a  height  of  about  12 in 
and  the  frontboard  at  9 in.  The  slope  of  the 
roof should be pitched in a southerly direction. 
The  cold  frame  can  be  made  more  reliable  by 
improved sealing of any cracks in the structure 
and  by  double  glazing  with  two  layers  of 
"lights"—the  lid  of  a  cold  frame  being  called 
a  "light." 

is 

the  greenhouse,  where 

Greenhouses 
The  next  step  in  the  sequence  of  environ(cid:173)
mental  control 
slightly  more  sophisticated  pieces  of  equip(cid:173)
ment  for  environmental  control  can  be  used. 
Greenhouses  can,  of  course,  be  of  a  wide 
variety  of  shapes  and  sizes.  Wooden-framed 
greenhouses  are  expensive 
to  purchase, 
maintain  and  keep  clean.  Metal  greenhouses 
are  less  expensive,  cheaper  to  maintain  and 
easier  to  keep  clean,  but  unless  they  have  an 
adequate  internal  structure  they  are  subject 
to  considerable  distortion  and  damage 
if 
exposed  to  high-velocity  winds. 

A  closed  case,  which  is  a  frame  with  a  lid 
of  glass  in  a  greenhouse,  provides  a  high-
temperature  system  for  propagation  of  house 
plants  and 
less  hardy  subjects.  Accurate 
control  of  temperature  can  be  attained  by 
installing  a  thermostatically  controlled  soil-
heating  cable,  which  will  provide  bottom 
heat,  into some sand  at the  base of the closed 
case. 

Mist  propagation  units 
The  ultimate  environmental  control  is  pro(cid:173)
vided  by  a  mist  unit.  This  is  an  open  system 
that  automatically  maintains 
the  moisture 
level  while  allowing  the  full  penetration  of 
light  and  the  use  of  bottom  heat  without  an 
increase  in  air temperature.  However,  such  a 
system  requires  both  electricity  and  water  in 
the  greenhouse. 

Propagators 
The  alternative  compromise  is  the  so-called 
"propagator."  This  is  a  portable  unit  and  can 
be  used  either  in  the  greenhouse  or  indoors 
provided  that  adequate  light  is  available.  It 
consists  of  a  fiberglass  base  fitted  with  a 
thermostat  and  heating  cables  and  a  Plexi-
glas-type  dome,  which  provides  the  closed 
environment.  All  sorts  of  variations  are 
available  so  make  sure  that  the  propagator 
you  buy  is  sufficiently  large  for  your  needs. 

Polyethylene  tents  and  tunnels 
At  the  other  extreme  is  a  cheap  and  simple 
arrangement 
that  provides  a  sufficiently 
effective  closed  environment for easily  propa(cid:173)
gated  plants.  Place  a  polyethylene  bag  over 
the  top  of  a  pot  or  tray,  and  support  it  either 
by  one  or  two  bamboo  rods  or  by  a  loop  of 
wire  with  an  end  stuck  in  the  compost;  seal 
with a rubber band. Make a tunnel  over plants 
outdoors by supporting polyethylene sheeting 
with  wire  and  then  sealing  the  ends. 

Without  doubt  the  most  important  piece  of 
equipment  needed  by  a  gardener  wishing  to 
propagate plants is a knife. Choosing it is per(cid:173)
haps  one  of  the  most  difficult  decisions  to 
make,  as  so  much  depends  on  what  sort  of 
work  it  will  be  required  to  carry  out. 

For  most  tasks,  a  medium-weight  knife 
with  a  sharp  carbon-steel  blade  is  best.  For 
grafting,  select  a  fairly  heavy  knife. 

A  budding  knife  has  a  spatula  end  for 
prying open flaps of bark. It is a useful  luxury— 
an  ordinary  propagation  knife  is  really  quite 
adequate.  For  very  soft  cuttings  from  plants 
such  as  dahlias,  chrysanthemums  and  pen-
stemons  the  best  tool  is  a  single-edged  razor 
blade  (that  is,  a  one-sided  blade  with  a  thick 
metal-covered  edge  on  the  opposite  side). 

Most  gardeners  use  a  knife  with  a  straight 
cutting  blade,  which  is  easy  to  sharpen,  but 
some  prefer  a  slightly  curved  blade.  A  knife 
with  a  very  curved  or  hooked  blade  is  not 

suitable  for  plant  propagation.  It 
extremely  difficult  to  sharpen. 

is  also 

A  knife  should  always  be  easy to  open  and 
comfortable  to  hold  when  in  use.  Especially 
with  knives  that  may  be  required  to  cut 
tough material, the blade when opened should 
be  set  back  into  the  handle.  This  avoids 
excessive  play  from  side  to  side  so  that  the 
blade  does  not  loosen. 

Knife  blades  are  either  hollow  ground  on 
both  sides  or on  one side  only:  both types are 
equally  efficient.  One-sided  knives  are  usually 
made  in  both  right-handed  and  left-handed 
patterns. As a general rule the more expensive 
a knife is,  the  better is the quality of blade and 
overall  design.  A good-quaiity steel  blade will 
maintain  its  sharp  cutting  edge  considerably 
longer  than  one  of  poorer  quality  and  is  well 
worth  the  extra  investment. 

Keep  a  knife  just  for  propagation  and  do 
not  use  it  for  pruning,  cutting  string  or  the 

1,001  other  jobs  for  which  an  ordinary  pen(cid:173)
knife  is  more  than  suitable. 

Cut  soft wood  against a  clean  pane of glass 
on  the  bench  in  the  potting shed.  Hard  wood 
should  be  cut  by  holding  the  plant  material 
in  the  left  hand.  With  the  knife  blade  below 
the  stem  and  the  right  thumb  above,  make  a 
shallow  angled  slice  from  beneath,  drawing 
the  right  forearm  backward  and  maintaining 
the  gap  between  the  right  thumb  and  the 
blade.  Never  attempt  to  cut  by  pressing  the 
blade 
can  have 
disastrous  consequences. 

thumb—it 

toward 

the 

When  using  a  knife  for  cutting  plant 
material  the  blade  will 
inevitably  become 
clogged with  resins and  plant juices,  and these 
will  impair  the  cutting  efficiency.  Therefore 
after  use  clean  the  blade  either  with  a  rag 
dipped  in a solvent such  as gasoline or carbon 
tetrachloride  or  by  rubbing  the  blade  with  a 
fine  grade  of  emery  paper. 

Sharpening a  knife 
To  sharpen  a  knife  successfully  is  often  re(cid:173)
garded  as  a  difficult  and  specialist  job,  but  in 
fact  if  a  few  basic  rules  are  observed  it  is 
relatively  simple  provided  that  a  straight-
bladed  knife  is  used  and  that  the  sharpening 
is  carried  out  on  a  broad,  flat  Carborundum 
stone  with  a  coarse  and  fine  side.  The  stone 
should  be slightly  lubricated  with  a  light  oil  to 
aid  easy  movement. 

Push  the  blade gently  along the  coarse  side 
of  the  stone;  then  repeat  the  movement. 
Give a final  "rub"  on  its fine side.  After several 
turns,  repeat  the  operation  on  the  other  side 
of the blade. Always traverse the entire length 
of  the  stone  so  that  it  does  not  become 
unevenly  worn. 

All  sorts  of  curved  and  small  sharpening 
stones  are  available,  but  for  someone  not 
used  to  sharpening  knives  they  are  difficult  to 
handle  and  use  effectively. 

tools, 

than  most 

Care  and  maintenance 
Shears,  more 
require 
constant  maintenance  if  they  are  to  remain 
effective.  After  each  session  wipe  the  blades 
with a solvent such as gasoline or carbon tetra-
chloride  and/or  fine  emery  paper  to  clean  off 
resins,  plant  juices  and  residues  that  other(cid:173)
wise  may  quickly  impair  the  cutting  edges. 
Then  wipe the  blades  with  light  oil  to  prevent 
rusting,  and  similarly  oil  all  the  moving  parts 
to  keep  them  in  good  working  order. 

The  cutting  blade  will  need  periodical 
sharpening  to  maintain  its  edge,  but  this  will 
be  fairly  infrequent  if  a  good-quaiity  pair  was 
obtained 
the  blades  are  kept 
clean.  Usually,  good-quaiity  shears  are  also 
marginally  adjustable 
to  maintain  a  good 
cutting  action. 

initially  and 

The  method  of  sharpening  varies,  but 
usually  the  shears  are  dismantled  and  the 
blade  portion  sharpened  like  a  knife.  In  some 
makes the  blade  is  disposable and  is  replaced 

than  sharpened.  Always  keep 

rather 
the 
leaflet  that  accompanies  the  tool  and  follow 
the  manufacturer's  instructions  carefully.  If 
no  instructions  are  supplied,  take  the  shears 
to  an  expert  for  sharpening. 

Making a  clean  cut 
When  using  shears  it  is  important  to  notice 
where  the  cut  is  actually  being  made;  the 
anvil  blade  is  often  quite  thick  and  it  is  not 
always  possible  to  see  the  actual  cut  when 
making  it.  Also,  ensure  that  any  cut  is  made 
with  the  anvil  blade  away  from  the  proposed 
cut surface so any bruising is  not incorporated 
in  the  propagated  material. 

blades 

together.  Never 

To  make  a  clean  cut,  decisively  squeeze 
the  shear 
force 
shears  to  make  a  cut  as  this  merely  bends 
the  blades,  damages  the  hinge  and  probably 
the  plant  material  as well.  When  dealing with 
a  thick,  hard  stem  move  the  blades  round  a 
bit  after  each  cut  until  they  cut  through  it. 

Although  a  sharp  knife  has  always  been 
regarded  as 
the  gardener's  main  cutting 
instrument  for  propagation,  modern  practice 
makes just as much  use of a suitably designed 
pair  of  shears;  and  where 
these  can  be 
used,  they  are  much  more  effective  than  a 
knife  because  they  are  quick  and  easy  to  use 
and  because they  are  also  less  liable  to  cause 
injury  to  the  plant  material. 

A  pair  of  shears  can  not  only  cope  with 
the final  cut  on  any stem  that  is firm  and  hard 
enough  to  cut  cleanly  but  can  also  be  used 
for  the  initial  cutting  of  softer  stems,  which 
may  at  the  final  stage  need  to  be  trimmed 
carefully  with  a  knife  or  razor  blade. 

There  are 

two  basic  shear  designs: 

the 
"anvil"  type  and  the  "scissor"  type.  Anvil 
shears  have  one 
sharp  blade,  usually 
hollow  ground  on  both  sides,  which  cuts 
through  the  stem  by  "crushing"  it  against  a 
broad  flat  surface  (the  anvil).  Scissor  shears 
also  have  one  sharpened  blade,  but  normally 
only  the  internal  surface  is  ground  flat.  This 
blade  cuts  by  rotating  past  the  anvil  blade  as 
in  a  conventional  pair  of  scissors.  The  scissor 
types  are  preferable  simply  because  they 
make  a  cleaner  cut  and  cause  less  crushing 
and  bruising  in  the  region  of  the  cut.  Other 
shear  designs  such  as  those  with  a  ratchet 
action  are  not  necessary  for  propagation. 

that 

they  are  easy 

When  choosing  a  pair  of  shears  ensure 
that  their  size  is  convenient,  the  handles  feel 
comfortable,  and 
to 
operate.  It  is  best  to  choose  a  spring-loaded 
pair  so  that  they  reopen  automatically  after 
each  cut—it  is  tedious to  have  to  keep  open(cid:173)
ing  the  blades  for  each  incision.  Select  a  pair 
with  a  catch  that  keeps  the  shears  closed 
when  out  of  use  so  they  are  not  dangerous 
and the cutting edge is protected. Some types 
of  shears  have  a  sap  groove,  which  helps 
to  prevent  the  blades  sticking.  Like  all  tools 
for  propagation,  a  pair  of  shears  should 
ideally  be  kept  only  for  this  purpose  to  pre(cid:173)
vent  the  blades  becoming  prematurely  blunt 
and  ineffective. 

As with  knives  it  is  usually  possible to judge 
shears  on 
the  basis  of  cost:  expensive 
types  are  normally  well  designed,  easy  to 
dismantle  and  reassemble  and  have  good-
quaiity  steel  blades  that  retain  their  cutting 
edge  for  a  long  period. 

Normally  a  pot  is  as  deep  as  it  is  broad, 
but  both 
three-quarter  pots  and  half  (or 
dwarf)  pots—sometimes  called  pans—are 
available.  At  the  other  extreme  particularly 
deep  pots  called  "Long Toms"  are obtainable. 
Select  a  container  that  holds  only  sufficient 
compost  for  the  task  in  hand. 

compost  as  a  2  3/4|in  square  pot.  However, 
square  pots  are  a  nuisance  to  fill  as  the 
gardener  must  be  sure  that  the  compost  is 
pushed  well  into  the  corners. 

Another  major 

initial  consideration 

is 
whether  to  use  rigid  or  nonrigid  containers. 
Pots  with  rims  tend  to  be  more  rigid  than 
those  without,  and  they  are  easier  to  stack. 
For  propagation  there  is  no  substitute  for 
rigidity,  although  nonrigid  containers  such  as 
black  polyethylene  sleeve  pots  may  be  used 
at  the  potting-on  stage.  The  problem  with 
nonrigid  containers  is  that  their  tendency  to 
sag  makes  them  a  nuisance  to  fill. 

scrubbing  and  sterilizing  between  use,  which 
is  time  consuming.  Because  clay  pots  are 
porous,  the  compost  dries  out  more  quickly 
than  it  would  in  plastic  pots,  and  so  more 
day-to-day  management  is  needed. 

Broad  pots  have greater  stability,  so,  where 
a  choice  is  available,  look  for  a  pot  with  a 
broad  base  and  almost  vertical  sides.  This 
shape  also  allows  a  greater  volume  of  com(cid:173)
post  within  the  pot  and  therefore  a  more 
usable  surface  area. 

A  vital  consideration  when  choosing  a  pot 
is  its  capacity for  drainage.  It  is  not  necessary 
to  crock  pots  if  a  well-drained  compost  is 
used,  but  the  base  of  the  pot  must  contain 
adequate  drainage  holes;  by  the  same  token 
if  a  capillary  watering  system  is  used  then 
there  must  be  adequate  holes 
the 
moisture  to  rise  up  into  the  compost  from 
the  capillary  medium,  be  it  sand  or  matting. 
Only  the  pot  shown  below  left  has  adequate 
drainage. 

for 

reduced 

The  material  from  which  a  pot  is  made  is 
also important. Traditionally, pots were always 
made  of  clay,  but  considerations  of  cost, 
durability  and  weight  (in  that  order)  have 
now 
their  use.  Nowadays  most 
rigid  pots  are  made  of  some  form  of  plastics 
and these  have the advantage of being cheap, 
lightweight  and  durable.  Some  plastic  pots, 
however, become brittle in time with exposure 
to  ultraviolet 
light.  Polypropylene  pots  of 
heavy quality will  generally provide  best value. 
Plastic  pots  are  also  easily  washed  and 
stored,  whereas  clay  pots  require  soaking. 

Because  of  the  problems  of  cost  many 
gardeners  use  yoghurt  cartons,  vending 
machine  cups,  and  cream  and  cheese  con(cid:173)
tainers  instead  of  "proper"  pots.  These  are 
quite  satisfactory  provided  they  are  clean, 
have  adequate  drainage  holes,  and  are  used 
in  conjunction  with  a  suitable  compost  and 
management  system. 

Square  pots  make  better  use  of  space  than 
round  ones  as  they  can  be  fitted  together 
exactly  to  cover  an  area  without  any  waste 
of  bench or ground space. They also generally 
contain  a  greater  volume  of  compost  relative 
to  their  surface  area—a  conventional  31/2  in 
diameter  round  pot  only  contains  as  much 

Pots 
A  plant  pot  is  perhaps  the  commonest  piece 
of  equipment  that  the  gardener  will  need  for 
propagation.  By  choosing  only  three  or  four 
sizes  in  the  same  pot  range,  tasks  such  as 
watering 
day-to-day  management 
become  standardized  and  are  thus  easier. 

and 

Seed trays 
When  dealing  with  relatively  large  numbers 
of  seedlings  or  cuttings,  as  happens  often  in 
the  production  of  bedding  plants,  a  tray  may 
be  a  more  suitable  container  than  a  pot. 

Traditionally a seed tray is made of softwood 
and  its  dimensions  are  14  in  by  81/2  in  and, 
according  to  its  required  usage,  either  2 in  or 
21/2  in  deep.  These  trays  are  now  relatively 
expensive  to  purchase  and  their  expected 
life  is  fairly  short  as  they  rot  easily.  However, 
they  have  the  distinct  advantage  of  being 
firm  and  rigid. 

trays  of 

Plastic  seed 

is  extraordinarily  variable; 

the  same  basic 
dimensions  are  currently  available  in  many 
different patterns. The most important charac(cid:173)
teristic  is  the  degree  of  drainage  permitted 
in  these,  and  it  is  of  paramount  importance 
to  ensure  that  this  is  adequate.  The  quality 
and  variety  of  plastics  used  for  making  seed 
trays 
the  best 
trays  are  those  of  a  sufficiently  thick  quality 
to  keep  their  shape  when  picked  up  at  a 
corner  and  of  a  type  not  to  become  brittle 
on exposure to ultraviolet light. The advantage 
of  plastics  is,  of  course,  their  durability  and 
that  they  can  be  readily  cleaned.  Plastic  seed 
trays  are  also  made 
"half-tray"  sizes 
measuring 6 in by 81/2 in and 2 in deep. 

in 

There  are  many  other  materials  such  as 
compressed  peat,  processed  paper  and  ex(cid:173)
panded  polystyrene  used  for  seed  trays,  but 
they  tend  to  require  careful  handling.  Some 
trays  are  disposable,  which  overcomes  the 
hygiene  problem  but  inevitably  increases  the 
cost  factor.  Expanded  polystyrene  trays'  with 
individual  growing  compartments  for  each 
seed  or  cutting  retain  warmth  and  so  pro(cid:173)
mote  rapid  growth. 

As  with  pots,  many  containers  such  as 
wooden  " D u t c h" tomato trays, fish  boxes and 
molded  polystyrene  packaging  can  be  sub(cid:173)
stituted  for  conventional  seed  trays  provided 
they  have  adequate  drainage  and  they  are 
properly  cleaned  before  use. 

it 

trays 

Peat  pellets  and  soil  blocks 
As  an  alternative  to  pots  and 
is 
possible  to  substitute  a  system  that  obviates 
their  use:  the  idea  simply  being  to  plant  out 
or  pot  on  the  entire  unit.  This  is  achieved  by 
eliminating a  pot  altogether,  either  by  using  a 
peat  compost,  compressed  into  a  pellet  and 
contained  within  a  net,  that  swells  up  when 
soaked  with  water,  or  by  compressing  the 
compost  into  blocks. 

These systems are useful,  very effective and 
reduce  the  ultimate  root  disturbance  to  a 

minimum,  which  means  the  growth  of  the 
young  plants  is  not  checked  when  they  are 
transplanted. 

The  compressed  peat  pellets  as  typified  by 
the  "Jiffy  7"  are  expensive  but  seem  to  work 
very  well,  and  if  used  for  small  seedlings  or 
sturdy  cuttings  appear  almost  to  enhance 
rooting. 

The  high  initial  cost  of  purchasing  a  soil 
block  mold  may  deter  many  gardeners  who 
do  not  propagate  large  quantities  of  cuttings 
and  seedlings.  It  is  best  to  make  hexagonal 
soil  blocks  as  they  do  not  dry  out  so  readily 
provided  their  sides  touch  each  other.  To 
make  a  soil  block  successfully  it  is  important 
to  ensure  that  the  compost  has  the  correct 
level  of dampness. To test this, take a  handful 
of  moist  compost.  Squeeze  gently  but  firmly; 
the  compost  should  tend  to  crumble.  If  it 
falls  apart,  the  material  is  too  dry;  if  it  does 
not  start  to  crumble,  it  is  too  moist. 

Fill 

the  mold  with 

the  compost,  com(cid:173)

pressing  it  only  until  the  particles  form  a 
block.  Place the soil  block  on  a tray and  leave 
it  to  consolidate  for  24  hours  before  inserting 
a  seed  or  cutting.  As  the  plant  grows  the 
roots  hold  the  block  together.  Plant  out  as 
soon  as  the  roots  emerge  through  the  sides 
of  the  soil  block. 

to 

to  hold  nutrients  and 

Basically  a  compost  is  a  soil  substitute  for 
propagating  and  establishing  plants.  To  carry 
out  this  function  a  compost  requires  certain 
properties—to  be  well  aerated, 
retain 
water, 
to  conduct 
warmth.  Thus  in  constituting  a  compost  the 
components  used  should  be  chosen 
to 
establish  these  particular  conditions  as  well 
as  maintaining  them  throughout  the  life  of 
the  compost.  In  order  to  prevent  the  occur(cid:173)
rence  of  pests,  diseases  and  weeds 
component  materials  should  also  be  sterile. 
The  only  component  of  a  compost  that  is 
not  initially  sterile  is  the  loam.  To  sterilize  it 
place the  loam  in  a  broad, flat  container  such 
as  a  meat  tin  and  put  in  the  oven  at  82°C/ 
180°F for 30  minutes.  Best results are obtained 
if  the  loam  is  dryish  and  if  the  tin  is  covered 
with  foil  so  that  the  steam  generated  en(cid:173)
courages 
riddle  the  loam  before  use. 

the  sterilizing  effect.  Cool  and 

the 

Cuttings  compost 
The  formulation  of  a  compost  for  rooting 
cuttings  really  only  requires  two  consider(cid:173)
ations:  the  retention  of  sufficient  moisture  to 
help  prevent  desiccation  of  the  cutting,  and 
the  provision  of  an  aerating  agent  so  that  air 
can  always  circulate  within  the  medium. 

Conventionally,  peat  has  been  used  as  the 
water-retentive  component  and,  although 
various  peats  are  available,  sphagnum  moss 
peat  is  best as  it  retains a good  structure for a 
long  period.  For  most  reliable  use  and  to 
achieve  uniformity 
riddled 
through a 1/4in sieve. 

it  should  be 

In  horti(cid:173)

Sand  is  used  as  the  aerating  agent,  and  it 
also  allows  adequate  drainage—peat  by  itself 
tending  to  become  waterlogged. 
cultural  parlance  sand  usually  means grit,  and 
for  these  purposes  a  washed  and  crushed 
lime-free  grit  providing  a  particle  size  of 
between  1/8in  and  1/16  in  across  is  the  most 
desirable.  The  particles  should  also  be 
"sharp,"  that  is  they  should  not  be  rounded 
but  have  points  and  corners  and  thus  be 
irregular  in  shape. 

Although  these  two  components  provide 
the  basic  compost  they  can  be  substituted 
with such items as sedge peat, well-weathered 
sawdust,  perlite,  vermiculite  and  graded  coal 
dust—in  fact  by any  material  that  has  suitable 

physical  properties,  and  that  is  chemically 
inactive  and  biologically  more  or  less  sterile. 
Cuttings  composts  are  usually  formulated 
by  evenly  mixing  equal  parts  by  volume  of 
peat  and  grit,  although  it  is  often  difficult 
to  assess  how  much  sieved  peat  there  is  in 
a  particular  mix.  In  the  end  there  is  no  sub(cid:173)
stitute  to  determining  the  "feel"  of  the  com(cid:173)
post  and  whether  it  has  the  right  properties. 

Compost  for  germinating  seedlings 
The  composition  of  a  compost  for  seedling 
germination  does  not  differ  greatly  from  that 
produced  for  cuttings,  except  that  a  little 
more  attention  needs 
the 
nutrient  and  chemical  aspects. 

to  be  paid 

to 

The  basic  components  are  peat  and  sand 
and  for  germination  pure  and  simple  this  is 
sufficient.  However 
if  the  seedlings  are  to 
remain  in  the  compost  for  some  time,  add 
loam  to  act  as  a  buffer  in  holding  nutrients 
and  controlling  drying  out.  The  amount  of 
sterilized  loam  required  need  not  be  great:  a 
formula  of  2  parts  by  volume  peat,  2  parts 
sand  and  1  part  loam  is  satisfactory. 

As  seeds  are  much  more  sensitive  to  the 
acidity  in  such  a  compost,  lime  in  the  form 
of  ground  limestone  should  be  mixed  in  with 
the  sand  at  the  rate  of  11/2  oz  per  bushel  of 
compost. 

Although  it  is  not  usual  to  include  compli(cid:173)

cated  nutrient  mixes  in  seed  composts,  it  is 
important  to  ensure  that  sufficient  phosphate 
is  available.  Therefore  also  mix 3/4oz super(cid:173)
phosphate  per  bushel  of  compost  in  with  the 
sand. 

Potting  composts  for  growing on  young 
plants 
The formulation  of composts for the establish(cid:173)
ment  and  growing  on  of  young  plants follows 
on  from  seed  composts  in  much  the  same 
pattern.  It  is  necessary  to  prepare  a  compost 
that  allows 
root 
system;  contains  adequate  water  to  support 
the  plants  and  sufficient  nutrients  not 
to 
check  growth;  has  a  suitable  acidity/ 
alkalinity  status;  and  does  not  dry  out  too 
easily. 

the  development  of  a 

Nowadays  such  composts are based  on the 
use  of  peat,  although  traditionally  the  John 
Innes  concepts  were  based  on  the  use  of 

sterilized  loam. The  recommendation  of loam 
as  a  base  for  composts  has  had  to  be  dis(cid:173)
continued  because  it  is  no  longer  feasible  to 
obtain  a  standard  material  on  which  a  recipe 
can  be  formulated.  Peat  is  capable  of  being 
relatively standardized  and  so currently forms 
the  basis.  It  is  important,  however,  to  realize 
that  loam  has  a  steadying  and  controlling 
influence  on  both  water  and  nutrient  avail(cid:173)
ability  that  peat  does  not  provide,  and  so 
peat-based  (that  is,  loamless)  composts  re(cid:173)
quire  a  higher  degree  of  management  and 
maintenance.  Therefore  it  is  prudent  to  use 
loam  as  a  minor  component  merely  to  pro(cid:173)
vide the buffering action and  so ease manage(cid:173)
ment.  In  practice  the  aim  is  to  produce  a 
loamless  compost  with  added  loam! 
Young  plants  also  need  nutrient 

in  the 
compost  and  this  should  be  added  at  the 
rate  of  4 oz 
fertilizer  base  per  bushel  of 
compost  unless 
mends  otherwise. 

the  manufacturer  recom(cid:173)

There  are,  of  course,  many  available  pro(cid:173)

prietary  brands  of  peat-based  composts,  all 
of which  have  been  tried  and  tested  success(cid:173)
fully. Their main disadvantage is their capacity 
for  drying  out  and  the  difficulty  of  rewetting 
a  dried  compost,  although  this  latter  factor 
is  less  of  a  problem  if  a  wetting  agent  has 
been  incorporated.  Their  chief  advantage  is 
that  they  are  ready  mixed  and  come  packed 
in  handy-sized  plastic  bags. 

If  a  peat-based  compost  proves  difficult 
to  rewet,  then  add  a small  quantity  of wetting 
agent  or  spreader  such  as  soft  soap.  Do  not 
use  wash-up  liquids. 

How  to  mix  composts 
The  important  aspect  of  mixing  compost  is 
to  obtain  an  even  and  uniform  end  product. 
Thorough  mixing  of  the  ingredients  is  essen(cid:173)
tial.  It  is  also  easier  if  you  have  a  bushel  or 
half-bushel  box  on  which  to  base  the formula 
as  lime  and  fertilizers  are  normally  added  at  a 
bushel  rate.  (A  bushel  is  the  amount  that  will 
fit  into  a  box  22 in  x  10 in  x  10 in  without 
compacting.) 

Evenly 

layer  the 

ingredients 

into  a  pile 
on  a  clean  concrete  floor.  The 
lime  and 
fertilizers  should  be  sprinkled  into  each  sand 
layer.  The  whole  should  then  be  well  mixed 
with  a  clean  shovel. 

in  plants  when  used 

Certain  chemicals  will  promote  or  regulate 
growth  responses 
in 
minute  dosages,  and 
they  are  used  by 
gardeners  not  only  for  plant  propagation  but 
also  to  achieve  a  variety  of  other  responses, 
such  as  encouraging  fruit  trusses  to  set. 

These  plant-growth-regulating  substances 
work  at  very  low  concentrations  and  within 
very  critical 
limits;  a  substance  that  sets 
fruits  at  one  concentration  and  produces 
roots  on  stem  cuttings  at  another  may  be 
used  as  a  weedkiller  at  yet  another.  Thus  it  is 
exceedingly 
follow  dosage 
instructions  exactly  in  order  to  obtain  the 
desired  results. 

important 

to 

they  will  not 

It  is  also  important  to  realize  that  these 
chemicals  do  not  constitute  a  panacea  for 
success: 
induce  rooting  re(cid:173)
sponses  if  the  inherent  ability  of  the  stem  to 
produce  roots  is  not  present.  Their  action  is 
merely  to  enhance  the  innate  capacity  of the 
stem  to  produce  its  roots  both 
in  greater 
quantities  and  quicker  than  might  otherwise 
have  been  the  case.  If  the  stem  cutting  is 
propagated  from  a  healthy  plant  and  at  the 
correct season, then the use of such hormones 
is  usually  of  no  advantage  whatsoever.  They 
should  be  used  with  knowledge,  and  only  as 
and  when  they  are  likely  to  achieve  an  effect. 
The  majority  of  rooting  hormones  available 
on  the  market  are  constituted  as  powders, 
the  base  simply  being  finely  ground 
talc. 
Talcum  powder is used  because it is extremely 
soft  and 
lacks  an  abrasive  quality,  so 
causing  no  damage  to  the  cutting.  Mixed  in 
is 
with 
rooting 
hormone.  Normally 
is  a  chemical, 
B-indolyl-butyric  acid,  known  as  IBA.  Occa(cid:173)
sionally  either  IAA  (B-indolyl-acetic  acid)  or 
NAA  (naphthoxy-acetic  acid)  is  substituted. 
The  concentration 
for  hardwood  cutting 
propagation 
is  normally  0.8  percent  IBA  in 
talc;  softwood  concentrations  are  usually 
much  less—about  a  quarter  of  this  figure. 
All-purpose  hormone  powders  are  usually 
based on NAA. 

talcum  powder 
this 

the 

it 

the 

In  many  cases  fungicidal  chemicals  are 
also incorporated into the powders, so helping 
against  any  rots  that  may  develop  in  the 
cuttings. 

Rooting  hormones  are  also  made  up 

in 
liquid  formulations,  where  the  chemicals  are 

dissolved  either  in  water  or  in  an  organic 
solvent  such  as  alcohol. 

It  is 

important  to  emphasize  that  these 
hormones  should  not  be  used  on  either  leaf 
or  root  cuttings.  For  these  cuttings  chemicals 
are  not  yet  commercially  available  to  aid 
regeneration. 

to  apply 

to  know  how 

How  to  apply  rooting  hormones 
In  order 
rooting 
hormones,  it  is  important  to  understand  one 
or  two  basic  premises.  First,  that  the  con(cid:173)
centration  of  hormone  applied 
induce 
root  formation  is  not  the  best  concentration 
root  development.  Second,  al(cid:173)
to  cause 
though 
the  hormone  may  be  absorbed 
through  the  bark,  most  of  the  hormone  will 
be  taken  up  through  the  cut  base  of the  stem 
cutting. 

to 

In  actually  applying the  hormone therefore 
take  care  to  touch  only  the  basal  cut  surface 
onto  the  powder  so  that  no  powder  adheres 
to  the  outside  of  the  stem;  do  not  dip  the 
cutting even  as deep as 1 in. 

By  applying  the  hormone  the  roots  are  in(cid:173)
duced  to  form,  but  if they  emerge  and  come 
into  contact  with  the  hormone  still  on  the 
bark  this  may  cause  the  roots  to  die  off.  In 
many  cases  this  does  not  happen  totally,  but 
it  may  cause  losses  in  some  plants  or  under 
certain  conditions;  it  is  prudent  to  adopt  a 
system  that  is  suitable for  all  plants. 

If  there 

to  adhere 

is  difficulty 

in  getting  sufficient 
hormone  powder 
the  cut 
surface  at  the  base  of  the  cutting  then  the 
cutting  should  first  be  dipped  in  water.  This 
is  an  especially  valuable  hint  with  softwood 
cuttings,  which  will  benefit  from  the  water 
anyway. 

to 

Make  up  water-based 

formulations  by 
dissolving a pill  in a specified amount of water. 
Then  stand  the  base  of  the  cutting  in  the 
solution for 12-24 hours.  As the concentration 
of  water-based  rooting  hormones  is  much 
lower  than  powder-based  ones,  the  bark  is 
not  adversely  affected  and  so  the  cutting 
can  be  left  standing  in  any  depth  of  the 
solution. 

If  an  alcohol-based  solution  is  used,  dip 
the  base  of  the  cutting  in  solution  and  allow 
to  drain  so  that  the  alcohol  can  evaporate, 
leaving  the  hormone  on  the  cuttings. 

WOUNDING  STEM  CUTTINGS 
Since  certain  chemicals  are  capable  of 
enhancing  root  production  on  a  stem 
cutting,  it  is  possible that  other techniques 
may also cause a surge in  natural  hormone 
production  that  could  improve  rooting. 

In  some  plants  there  exists  in  the  stem 
between  the  bark  tissues  and  the  wood 
tissues  a  sheath  of  material  that  is  capable 
of  inhibiting  root  development.  However, 
when  part  of this  sheath  is  damaged,  then 
roots  will  be  produced  normally.  This 
damage  is achieved  by a technique  known 
as wounding. 

The  commonest  method  of wounding  is 
to  remove  a  slice  of  bark  from  the  bottom 
inch  or  so  of  the  cutting,  using  a  sharp 

knife  so  that  the  wood  tissues  are  just 
exposed.  Alternatively  make  three  or  four 
1 in  long  incisions  in  the  bark  at  the  base 
of the cutting as  deep  as the wood tissues. 
The  technique  of wounding  can  be very 
effective  with  rhododendron,  daphne  and 
juniper,  but  it  is  unwise  to  use  it  as  a 
matter  of  course  as  it  provides  another 
possible  site  for  infection  and  rotting.  It 
may only be necessary on  older,  hardwood 
cuttings; softwood cuttings do not normally 
require  wounding.  The  need  to  wound  a 
cutting  will  only  be  discovered  in  the  light 
of  experience—a  continued 
to 
root  a  cutting,  which  cannot  be  attributed 
to  any  other cause,  may  then  suggest that 
the  cutting  may  respond  to  wounding. 

failure 

to  maintain  growth 

The  use  of  water 
in 
potted  plants  is  seldom  efficient.  The  main 
difficulty  is  that  the  gardener  is  unable  to 
in 
water  as 
the  correct 
quantities,  as 
ideally  need.  A 
number  of  automatic  and  semiautomatic 
systems  are  available,  but  their  operation  is 
only  as  effective  as  the  equipment  and  its 
setup. 

regularly,  and 
the  plants 

For  propagation,  water  is  necessary  for 
evaporation,  so 
level  of 
humidity;  it  is  also  required  to  maintain  the 
turgidity  both  of  a  cutting  without  roots  and 
of  a  plant  by  normal  uptake  by  the  roots. 

increasing 

the 

Moisten  freshly  potted seedlings and rooted 
cuttings  with  tepid  water.  Avoid  cold  water, 
which  will  only  check  growth  and  lower  soil 
temperatures.  If  the  local  water  is  hard,  it  is 
better  for  the  plants  to  use  rainwater. 

Place a tank of water in a greenhouse where 
it will  be warmed  to the ambient temperature. 
The  tank  of  water  has  the  further  advantage 
of  providing  an  evaporating  surface,  which 
will  help  to  maintain  high  levels  of  humidity 
in  the  greenhouse. 

The  biggest  problem  facing the  gardener  is 
knowing  when  sufficient  water  has  been 

applied.  To  gain  experience  use  a  minimum 
number  of  pot  types  and  sizes,  and  as  far  as 
possible  stick  to  one  compost  formula  so 
that  experience  of  these  limited  conditions 
will  improve  watering  technique. 

Watering from  above with  a  rose,  attached 
either  to  a  watering  can  or  a  hose,  will  give 
a  light  rate  of  application.  This  helps  prevent 
severe  caking  of  the  compost  and  so  en(cid:173)
hances  penetration  and  free  drainage.  Water 
little  and  often,  allowing  the  water  to  drain 
each time  it  reaches the  rim  of the  pot or seed 
tray. 

pour  water  over  it.  The  holes  will  ensure  the 
water  does  not  reach  higher  than  1/2  in  below 
the  surface  level  of  the  sand. 

Make  sure 

the  capillary  bed  so 

that  any  containers  are  set 
firmly  onto 
that  the 
water  can  pass  into  the  pot  or  seed  tray 
without  undue  hindrance 
from  air  space 
between  bed  and  compost. 

If  a  compost  is  overwatered,  allow  it  to 

dry  out  before  watering  again. 

Should  a  peat-based  compost  dry  out  and 
prove  difficult  to  rewet,  then  add  a  drop  or 
two  of  soft  soap  to  the  water  to  improve 
water  penetration.  In  many  peat-based  com(cid:173)
posts  a  wetting  agent  is  incorporated  and  a 
rewetting  problem  should  not  arise. 

to 

Watering  by a capillary system  is usually an 
advantage 
is 
difficult  to  overwater,  although  undue  drying 
due  to  poor  capillary  contact  may  prove  a 
problem  until  experience  is  gained. 

the  gardener  because 

it 

Capillary  systems  depend  either  on  a  pro(cid:173)
prietary  matting,  usually  made  of felt  or fiber(cid:173)
glass,  or  on  a  sand  base.  The  former 
is 
easier  to  set  up,  but  sand  provides  a  more 
reliable  contact.  Line  a  tray  that  has  raised 
sides  with  polyethylene  sheeting.  Puncture 
the  polyethylene  several 
line 
around  the  sides  within  1/2  in  of  the  required 
surface  level.  Fill  the recess with fine sand and 

times 

in  a 

There  is  much  misunderstanding  of  the  role 
that  plant  nutrients  play  in  the  growth  of 
the  plant  and  hence  they  are  often  misused 
in  the  propagation  and  establishment  phases 
of  plant  production. 

t he  three  so-called  major  elements  that 
are  required  for  successful  plant  growth  are 
nitrogen,  potassium  and  phosphorus.  These 
materials  are  needed  in  addition  to  carbon, 
hydrogen  and  oxygen  as  the  basic  building 
blocks  of  plant  material.  At  a  secondary 
level  elements  such  as  calcium,  sulfur  and 
magnesium  are  needed 
fair  quantities, 
while  trace  elements,  which 
iron, 
manganese,  boron,  molybdenum  and  cobalt, 
are  used  by  the  plant  in  small  to  minute 
quantities. 

include 

in 

Nitrogen  is  required  wherever  and  when(cid:173)

it 

The 

in 

to  as  being  "important 

tissue.  Often 
for 

ever  plant  growth  is  anticipated.  A  shortage 
of  available  nitrogen  is  typified  by  the  slow, 
stunted  development  of  the  plant  and  pale 
green  leaves.  It  is  usually  taken  up  by  the 
plant  in  the  form  of  either  nitrate  or  ammo(cid:173)
nium  salts.  Nitrogen's  role  in  the  plant  is 
predominantly  as  a  basic 
ingredient  of 
protein  and  it  is  thus  a  necessary  feature  of 
it 
developing  new  plant 
is 
referred 
leafy 
is  essentially  true  because 
growth,"  which 
leaves  constitute  a  major  part  of  plant 
tissue;  however 
is  equally  a  necessary 
component  of  stem,  root,  flower  and  seed 
production.  As a  protein  component  it is also 
a  vital  feature  of  chromosome  development. 
is 
rather  less  easily  explained.  Potash,  as  it  is 
commonly  called,  is  needed  as  a  catalyst 
wherever  chemical 
is 
especially  associated  with  the  food-making 
process  of  photosynthesis and  with  supplying 
nourishment  around  the  plant.  This  again 
explains  its  general  association  with  "leafy 
growth." However potash  is equally  important 
in  virtually  all  parts  of 
the  plant  where 
chemical  reactions  are  occurring.  Potassium 
deficiency  in  plants  is  usually  manifest  when 
the  edges  of  the  leaves  turn  pale  yellow,  and 
as 
the 
outer edges turn  brown  and  appear scorched. 
Phosphorus,  which  is  normally  used  in  the 
form  of  phosphate,  has  two  major  roles  to 
fulfil  in  plant  growth.  First  it  is  an  essential 

this  discoloration  moves 

role  of  potassium 

reactions  occur. 

the  plant 

inward 

It 

component  of those very  specialized  proteins 
that  constitute  the  chromosomes.  Second 
it  is the  basis  on  which  the  energy  needed for 
plant  growth  and  development  is  collected, 
transported  and  released  within  the  various 
chemical  reactions  of the  plant.  A  phosphate 
shortage 
certain  to  describe  especially  when  it  is  only 
a  marginal  amount,  but  generally  stunted 
growth  associated  with  a  purple  or  red  leaf 
discoloration  is  a  typical  symptom;  however 
a  similar  situation  often  arises  with 
root 
damage  caused  by  pests  or  rots. 

is  much  more  difficult  and  un(cid:173)

Most  other  plant  nutrients  occur  in  suf(cid:173)

ficient  quantities  as  minor  components  or 
impurities  in  the  main  fertilizers,  and  they  do 
not  specifically  need  to  be  applied  as  in(cid:173)
dividual  fertilizers. 

The  only  two  nutrients  that  may  cause 
problems  are  magnesium  and  iron.  The  prime 
role  of  magnesium 
is  in  the  formation  of 
chlorophyll,  the  green  coloring  in  the  plant. 
A  lack  of  it  is  typified  by  a  yellowing  of  the 
older  leaves as the  plant transfers  magnesium 
from  its  older  parts  to  its  newly  created  parts 
so  causing  the  "chlorosis"  in  the  old  leaves. 

Iron  has  a  similar  function  to  magnesium 

nutrient,  and  not  one  with  only  that  nutrient 
in  it,  and  use  it  as  recommended. 

Organic  fertilizers  such  as  bonemeal  and 
dried  blood  are  too  slow  acting  to  have  any 
real  beneficial  effect on a  plant with a  nutrient 
deficiency. 

and 

of  potash 

In  the  closed  environment  of  pot  or  seed 
tray,  inorganic  fertilizers  such  as  nitrate  of 
soda,  sulfate  of  ammonia,  sulfate  of  iron, 
sulfate 
superphosphate 
should  also  be  avoided  as they  may  have too 
drastic  a  chemical  effect  on  the  plant  and 
also  upset  the  balance  of the  other  nutrients. 
If  the  gardener  is  plagued  with  regular 
magnesium  deficiency  substitute  magnesian 
limestone  (Dolomite  limestone)  for  ordinary 
limestone  in  the  compost. 

Acid-loving  plants  and  ericaceous  ones 
such  as  heathers  and  rhododendrons  are 
liable  to  have  an  iron  shortage  and  this  can 
be  treated  with  a  chelated  iron  compound 
either  in  the  compost  or  as  a foliar  feed. 

When  applying  a  foliar  fertilizer,  always 
follow the manufacturer's instructions exactly. 
Water  the  nutrients  over  the  plant's  leaves 
using  a fine  rose. 

the  young 

but  it  is  not  reusable  in  the  plant.  Its  de(cid:173)
turn 
ficiency  causes 
yellow  although  the  veins  remain  green,  and 
by  this  characteristic 
it  is  possible  to  dis(cid:173)
tinguish  a  shortage  of  this  element  from  a 
magnesium  deficiency. 

leaves 

to 

is 

important 

that  sufficient 
If 
they 

The  correct  use  of fertilizer 
It 
to  ensure 
nutrients  are  available  to  young  plants. 
composts  are  correctly 
should  contain  an  adequate  amount.  How(cid:173)
ever,  seedlings,  for  example,  are  germinated 
in  a  compost  containing  only  phosphate;  as 
soon  as they  begin  to  show  green  leaves they 
will  benefit  from  feeding  with  nitrogen  and 
potash  to  encourage  growth. 

formulated 

Although  it  is  possible  for  the  gardener 
to  make  up  his  own  soluble  feed  it  is  far 
simpler  and  much  more  reliable  to  use  one 
of  the  several  proprietary  brands  of  liquid 
feeds  that  are  readily  available. 
If  a  plant 
shows signs of, for example, potash deficiency, 
buy  a  proprietary  brand  of  liquid  fertilizer 
with  a  high  balance  of 
that  particular 

The  greatest  stumbling  block  to  successful 
plant  propagation  is  the  loss  of  cuttings  and 
seedlings from  the  action  of various  pests  and 
diseases.  In  many  cases  this  occurs  because 
the  gardener  has  failed 
to  maintain  good 
hygienic  standards. 

A  system  for  successful  propagation  must 
be  based  on  regular  prevention  and  control 
of  all  possible  pathogens. 
It  is  not  just  a 
question  of  keeping  the  cuttings  or  seedlings 
free  of  such  agencies;  it  is  also  necessary  to 
practice  good  standards  of  hygiene  in  the 
potting  and  propagation  environment,  the 
containers  and  tools  used  for  propagation, 
the  composts,  the  propagating  material  itself 
and  the  subsequent  husbandry  practiced. 

in 

Always  keep  a  scrupulously  clean  and  tidy 
workbench 
the  potting  shed.  Before 
leaving  plants  to  propagate  in  a  greenhouse, 
scrub  out  all  of  the  nooks  and  crannies  with 
a  solution  of  disinfectant  so  all  residual  in(cid:173)
fection  is  eliminated.  It  is  considerably  easier 
to  do  this  job  effectively  in  a  modern  metal-
structured  greenhouse  than  in  a  traditional 

elements  they  can  no  longer  be  considered 
to  be  sterile.  All  composts  and  their  com(cid:173)
ponents  should  be  kept  bagged  and  covered 
to  maintain  their  reliability.  Incidentally,  do 
not  attempt  to  reuse  spent  compost,  even 
if  sterilized,  as  the  chemical  balances  will  be 
out  of  proportion. 

The  plant  material  itself  must  also  be  free 
of  infection—do  not  use  diseased  cuttings  or 
grafting  scions  for  propagation.  As  a  pre(cid:173)
caution  against  disease,  dip  leafy  cuttings  in 
a  dilute  solution  of  fungicide  such  as  Captan 
or  Benlate.  After  they  have  been  planted,  it 
is  a  good  precaution  to  water  with  another 
dilute solution  of fungicide.  Similarly,  germin(cid:173)
ating seeds  should  be sprayed with  Captan  or 
a  copper  fungicide  in  an  attempt  to  reduce 
damping-off  diseases  to  a  minimum. 

As  cuttings  and  seedlings  develop,  regu(cid:173)

larly  use  aerosol  sprays  or  smoke  canisters  of 
fungicides  and  pesticides  as  a  routine  pre(cid:173)
caution against possible infections of damping-
off  diseases  and  mildews,  and  infestations  of 
red  spider  mite,  whitefly  and  sciarid  flies. 

so 

their 

wooden-structured  greenhouse, 
take 
extra  trouble  when  cleaning  the  latter.  The 
best  time  to  do  this  is  in  the  early  winter, 
when  the  gardener's  other  activities  in  terms 
of  propagation  are  at 
lowest  ebb. 
Once  clean,  any  remaining  problems  can  be 
controlled  by 
the  routine  use  of  various 
fungicide  and  pesticide  smoke  canisters, 
which  will  permeate  throughout  the  green(cid:173)
house.  At  this  stage,  especial  attention,  by 
the  use  of  the  requisite  chemical,  should  be 
paid  to  the  control  of  such  agents  as  red 
spider  mite, whitefly,  sciarid flies,  mildews and 
damping-off  fungi. 

In  order 

to  avoid  cross-infection 

in  a 
propagating  area,  at  the  earliest  opportunity 
always  remove containers and  spent compost 
that are not in use.  Spent compost will  provide 
a  splendid  home  for  the  multiplication  of 
both  damping-off  fungi  and  sciarid  flies. 

that 

infection  usually  occurs 

Perhaps  the  chief  cause  of  infection  of 
compost-borne  rots  is  in  the  use  of  dirty 
containers for propagation.  It  is  of paramount 
importance  to  ensure 
the  containers 
are  clean,  not  only  of  fungal  spores  but 
especially  of weed  seeds  such  as  chickweed, 
bittercress  and  annual  meadow  grass.  Their 
the 
source  of 
"crusty" 
that 
occurs  as  a  tidemark  on  pots  and  seed  trays. 
Hence  the  containers  should  be  scrubbed 
and  washed  with  soap  solution  so  that  they 
are completely  clean.  Clay  pots will  also  need 
soaking 
is 
important  to  wipe  all  tools  absolutely  clean 
after  use  to  ensure  they  do  not  become  a 
potential  source  of  infection. 

in 
layer  of  soil  and  chemicals 

their  cleanliness. 

to  ensure 

It 

its  nature, 

from  sterile 

the  compost 

The  compost  used  for  propagation  must 
be  sterile.  Usually  this  is  achieved  by  making 
ingredients. 
up 
Peat,  by 
is  highly  acidic  and 
consequently  to  all  intents  and  purposes  is 
sterile.  Sand  should  already  be  sterile,  as  will 
be  the  chemical  additives.  The  only  compo(cid:173)
nent  that  may  have  to  be  sterilized  is  the 
loam  and  this  can  be  done  in  an  oven  at 
82°C/180°F  in  a  broad,  flat  container  covered 
with  foil  so  that  the  steam  generated  en(cid:173)
courages  the  sterilizing  process. 

It  is  important  however  to  remember  that 
while  all  these  components  are  sterile  when 
fresh,  if  they  are  left  lying  about  open  to  the 

Various  pests  may  cause  problems  when 
propagating,  but  as  they  attack  a  wide  range 
of  host  plants  they  need  only  be  considered 
in  a  general  way  so  that  the  gardener  can 
recognize them  and treat them  appropriately. 
W h en  infested  propagating  material,  or  a 
plant, is placed in a propagating environment, 
the 
temperature  and 
humidity  often  cause a  population  explosion. 
It  is  important,  therefore,  to  propagate, 

increased 

levels  of 

later  before 

whenever  possible,  from  material  that  ap(cid:173)
pears to  be free  of  pests.  It  is  safer,  and  often 
easier,  to  control  pests  on  stock  plants  before 
taking  cuttings  rather  than  to  treat  the  cut(cid:173)
they  have  established 
tings 
themselves  as  plants.  This 
is  not  always 
possible,  however,  and  routine  pest  control 
measures  should  always  be  taken 
the 
invasions  of 
propagating  area 
pests  from  infected  plants  elsewhere  in  the 
greenhouse  or  garden. 

to  combat 

in 

Aphids 
Insects,  such  as  greenfly  and  blackfly,  are 
invariably  present  in  small  populations  on 
almost  all  plants  during  the  growing  season, 
and  it  is  important  to  control  them  not  only 
because  they  can  debilitate  plant  material 
very  quickly  with  a  rapid  population  build-up 
but also because they may carry virus diseases. 
the  most  useful 
method  of  applying  insecticides  is  by  using 
aerosols,  preferably  in  the  evening.  The  most 
effective  are 
those  containing  pirimicarb, 
pyrethrum,  bioresmethrin  or  malathion.  Do 
not  spray  with 
the 
plants  are  exposed  to  direct  sunlight. 

In  a  propagating  area 

these  chemicals  when 

Red  spider  mites 
These  are  not,  in  fact,  insects  but  are  related 
to  the  spider.  They  have  eight  legs  and  are 
capable  of  spinning  webs.  Most  of  them  are 
minute  and  are  comparatively  difficult  to  see, 
but  because they  normally  occur  in  such  vast 
quantities  their  collective  action 
is  readily 
apparent. 

A  typical  sign  of  their  presence  is  for  a 
yellow  mottling  to  appear  on  some  leaves. 
This  discoloration  gradually 
rusty 
brown  and  is  followed  by  a  grayish  sheen  of 
web  formation. 

turns  a 

It  is  in  the  propagating  environment  with 
its  increased  temperatures  that  populations 
of  red  spider  mites  can  build  up  unchecked, 
and  they  can  cause  problems  on  plants  as 
diverse  as  cucumber,  cyclamen,  dahlia  and 
conifers. 

Available  methods  of  control  are  not 
always  effective  as  the  most  useful  materials 
are  also  dangerous  to  humans.  The  easiest 
system  is  simply  to  keep  populations  to  a 
minimum  by  reducing  the  mites'  hibernation 
stage  by  routinely  scrubbing  down  all  propa(cid:173)
gating  areas  during the  winter.  However,  out(cid:173)
breaks  will  occur,  and  spraying  at  regular 
intervals  with  chemicals  containing  dimetho(cid:173)
ate  and  malathion,  or  the  use  of  Derris  in 
liquid  formulation,  will  reduce the  infestation. 

Sciarid  flies 
The  movement  of  these  very  small  black-
bodied  flies  is  more  eye-catching  than  the 
flies  themselves.  They  are  a  relatively  new 
phenomenon  and  are  probably  associated 
with  the  increasing  use  of  peat-based  com-

then  proceed 

to  eat  whatever 

posts.  The  adults  are  attracted  by  peat, 
especially  when  it  is  wet,  and  they  will  lay 
their  eggs  in  it.  The  small  white  grubs  that 
hatch 
is 
available — in  this  situation  usually the  young, 
freshly succulent roots of a cutting or seedling. 
Most damage is caused when the compost is 
overwatered,  so  more  eggs  are  laid  and  more 
roots  are  consumed.  Therefore  to  control 
infestation  of  sciarid  flies  do  not  allow  the 
compost  to  be  continually  soaked.  Water 
little  and  often. 

Chemical  control  is  not  easy.  The  adults 

im(cid:173)
because  of  their  mobility  are  virtually 
possible to kill, and control  is therefore limited 
to  an  attempt  to  eliminate  the  larvae.  The 
incorporation  of  a  granular  insecticide  in  the 
compost  will  have  some  effect  as  a  pre(cid:173)
ventative.  If  an  infestation  occurs,  the  best 
results  are  achieved  by  drenching  the  com(cid:173)
post, preferably with BHC. 

Vine  weevils 
The  larvae  of  the  vine  weevil  do  much  more 
damage than  is suspected, and although they 
are  obviously  not  just  pests  of  propagation 
areas  they  can  nevertheless  cause  havoc  in 
newly  potted  young  plants.  If  any  seedlings 
or young  plants  collapse  suddenly,  they  have 
most  likely  been  attacked  by  vine  weevils. 
The  adult  weevil  lays  its  eggs  in  soil  or  com(cid:173)
post.  The  grubs  that  hatch  are  white  with  a 
brown  head,  and  they  feed  on  nearby  roots. 
In  recent  years  vine  weevils  have  become 
more of a  problem  as they no longer show the 
pronounced  seasonality 
life  cycle 
that  had  previously  been  assumed. 

their 

in 

The  only  satisfactory  method  of  control  is 
to  attempt  to  kill  the  grubs  just  after  they 

hatch  by  routinely  incorporating  a  powder 
insecticide  in  the  compost  when  sowing  and 
potting.  The  most  effective  insecticides  are 
those containing BHC. 

larvae 

that  occur  on 

Glasshouse  whiteflies 
These  are  one  of the  most  troublesome  pests 
of plants  grown  under glass. The small, white, 
mothlike  adults  and 
the  greenish-white 
scalelike 
lower  leaf 
surfaces  both  feed  by  sucking  sap,  and  they 
excrete  a  sugary  substance  known  as  honey(cid:173)
dew. This  makes the foliage  sticky  and  allows 
the  growth  of  a  black,  sooty  mold.  The 
larvae  are  fairly  tolerant  of  most  insecticides, 
unlike  the  adults  which  can  be  controlled  by 
insecticides  containing  pyrethrum,  biores(cid:173)
methrin  or  resmethrin. 

Slugs  and  snails 
Slugs and snails feed on the seedlings of many 
crops.  Routine  use  of  slug  bait  should  keep 
damage  to  a  minimum.  If  there  is  a  sudden 
infestation  treat  with  metaldehyde. 

A  propagating  environment  often  provides 
suitable  conditions  for  the  establishment  and 
spread  of  certain  diseases,  but  these  should 
not  become  a  major  problem  provided  that 
correct hygienic  procedures are followed.  It is 
important  for  the  gardener  to  recognize  the 
symptoms  of these  diseases  and to  know  how 
to  apply  the  appropriate  control  measures. 

Gray  mold 
This  disease  is  caused  by  a  fungus  called 
Botrytis  cinerea,  from  which  it  obtains  its  other 
common  name,  botrytis.  It  is  an  organism  of 
general  occurrence  and  is  capable  of varying 
degrees  of parasitism.  It thrives  in  cold,  damp 
conditions,  and  it  can  be  recognized  by  a 
brown  area  of  rotting anywhere  on  a seedling 
or  cutting,  which  eventually  grows  a  cover(cid:173)
ing  of  grayish  mold.  Once  it  obtains  a  foot(cid:173)
hold  it  is  by  no  means  easy  to  control  its 
spread.  To  avoid  an  outbreak  of  gray  mold, 
place  any  seedlings  and  cuttings  in  a  well-
ventilated  warm  atmosphere  and  maintain 
strict  levels  of  hygiene.  If an  infection  occurs, 
the  affected  plants  should  be  picked  out 
carefully and  destroyed. The remaining  plants 
should then be sprayed with Captan, benomyl 
or 
to  cut  down  any 
further  spread  of  the  disease,  but  too  regular 
use  of the  latter  two  fungicides  could  lead  to 
the  buildup  of  resistant  strains  of  the  fungus. 

thiophanate-methyl 

when  threads  of  the  fungus,  which  resemble 
fine  cotton  wool,  spread  rapidly  in  the  soil  or 
over  the  compost  surface.  As  it  comes  into 
contact  with  seedlings  the  parasitic  fungus 
penetrates  the  tissues,  which  then  die.  The 
problem  is  particularly  acute  as  these  fungi 
are  always  present  in  soil  or compost  and  are 
capable  of  survival  without  parasitism.  Old 
soil  or  compost,  therefore,  provides  a  source 
of  infection  and  should  never  be  reused  for 
seed  sowing  or  cuttings.  The  effects  are 
compounded  when  seedling  densities  are 
high;  if  temperature  conditions  are  too  hot 
or  too  cold  for  strong  seedling  development; 
if  ventilation  is  poor  and  the  soil  too  damp; 
and  if  the  seedlings  or  cuttings  suffer  frost 
damage. 

The  disease  can  be  recognized  when  seed(cid:173)

lings  or  cuttings  suddenly  die  in  patches. 

To  avoid  damping-off  disease  sow  seeds  at 
a  correct  density  so  that  the  seedlings  are 
not  overcrowded;  give  them  plenty  of  light, 
air  and  warmth,  and  do  not  overwater.  Spray 
the  seedling  area  before  germination  with  a 
solution  of  Captan  or  a  copper  fungicide. 
Further  control  may  also  be  achieved  after 
the  seeds  have  emerged  by  spraying  again 
with  Captan  or  zineb. 

If  damping-off  diseases  do  become  estab(cid:173)
lished,  the  seedlings  or  cuttings  should  be 
sprayed  with  Captan,  which  will 
limit  the 
disease,  or with  a copper fungicide, which will 
usually  kill 
is 
toxic to some plants, so check the instructions 
carefully  before  applying  a  fungicide  con(cid:173)
taining  copper. 

it  off.  Unfortunately  copper 

Rhizoctonia 
This  particular  fungus  may  cause  many  prob(cid:173)
lems  in  horticulture.  It  is  essentially  a  fungus 
that  survives  in  the  compost  and  infects  and 
destroys  plant  material  where the  humidity  is 
too  high  and  the  conditions  too  warm.  In 
plant propagation the disease normally affects 
cuttings  inserted  in  mist  propagators,  closed 
cases  or  in  pots  under  polyethylene  bags.  It 
causes basal  rot of the cuttings, and  it is  by  no 
means  easy to  control  once  it  has  established 
itself  in  the  propagating  area. 

twice  a  year  sterilize 

To  prevent  initial  establishment  of  rhizoc-
the 
tonia,  once  or 
propagating area.  Always  use equipment and 
containers that have been thoroughly cleaned 
when  propagating  and  ensure the compost  is 
fresh  and  sterile. 

If  the  infection  does  appear,  pick  out  and 

destroy  the  diseased  plants. 

living  organisms  called  viruses. 

Virus  diseases 
Plants  suffer  from  many  diseases  caused  by 
minute 
In 
most  cases  the  plant  merely  tolerates  the 
presence  of  the  virus  and  exhibits  certain 
symptoms 
its  presence—usually 
these  symptoms  are  typified  by  a  yellow 
mottling or  mosaic  effect  on the  leaves. These 
symptoms,  however,  should  not  be  confused 
with  the  yellowing  caused  by  magnesium  or 
iron  deficiencies  (see  page  15). 

indicating 

Unfortunately it is not possible for gardeners 
to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  disease  from  a 
virus-infected  plant. All that can  be done is to 
attempt  to  prevent  the  spread  of  the  disease 
by  digging  up  and  burning  the  whole  of  the 
infected  plant. 

Some  virus  diseases  are  carried  by  aphids 
that  infect  other  plants  when  feeding;  the 
spread  of  virus  diseases  to  uninfected  plants 
is  therefore  best  controlled  by  the  routine 
use  of  pesticide  smoke  canisters  or  sprays. 
Virus  diseases  can  also  be  spread  by  eel(cid:173)
worms  in  unsterilized  soil,  or  merely  by  con(cid:173)
tact  from,  for  example,  a  propagation  knife, 
After  cutting  virus-infected  plants  a  knife  will 
be a fertile area for infection.  Always disinfect 
propagation  tools  and  your  hands  if  virus 
diseases  are  suspected. 

The  only  satisfactory  way  to  avoid  trouble 
when  propagating  is  by  using  plant  material 
that is virus free. This is a counsel of perfection 
as  it  is  not  easy for the gardener to  recognize 
with  certainty  virus  symptoms 
in  many 
plants.  Although  viruses  may  be  passed  on 
through  the  seed  it  is  possible  to  raise  fresh 
virus-free  stock  of  certain  plants,  such  as 
Daphne  mezereum,  where  viruses  do  not 
appear  to  be  transmitted  by  seed.  Virus-free 
rootstocks  are  labelled  EMIA,  and  they  are 
available for  some  fruit  trees  and  a few  orna(cid:173)
mental  crabs  and  cherries. 

Some  virus  diseases,  such  as  Daphne 
mosaic,  can  be  recognized  by  holding  the 
leaf  up  to  the  light  and  by  identifying  the 
mosaic  pattern  of  lighter  yellow  color.  Others 
are  more  difficult 
recognize  and  may 
frequently  be  confused  with  mineral  de(cid:173)
ficiency  symptoms  or  even  pest  damage. 

to 

Damping-off  diseases 
These are usually  caused  by a group of closely 
related  fungi,  although  certain  other  organ(cid:173)
isms  can  cause  damping-off.  These 
cause  problems 

fungi 
to  germinating  seedlings 

The effect of virus  diseases  is  usually simply 

in  vigor  sometimes  means  that  a 

to  reduce  the  vigor  of  the  plant.  This  re(cid:173)
duction 
plant  produces  very 
little  suitable  propa(cid:173)
gating  material  as  its  growth  is  weaker  than 
that  of  a  virus-free  plant  of  the  same  species 
or variety.  It is,  however,  unwise to  propagate 
from  any  plant that you  suspect  is  affected  by 
virus  as  the  virus  will  be  passed  on  to  any 
vegetatively  propagated  offspring. 

embryos  are  given  below:  one  has  the  food 
stored  in  the  endosperm;  the  other  has  the 
cotyledons  adapted  for  food  storage. 

The  successful  propagation  of  plants  from 
seeds  is  a  highly  improbable  process  con(cid:173)
sidering  the  vast  number  of  seeds  produced 
by  the  parent  plant  and  the  relatively  small 
number  of  plants  that  survive  to  maturity 
under  natural  circumstances.  The  gardener, 
therefore,  must  recognize  all 
the  possible 
limitations  to  success,  and  attempt  to  reduce 
or eliminate these and  so  produce  an  accept(cid:173)
able  crop. 

Nevertheless,  for  the  gardener,  the  tech(cid:173)

nique  of  propagating  plants  from  seed  is  a 
very  worthwhile  and  satisfying  exercise  as  it 
can  be  a  prolific  method  of  plant  production. 
It  is  also  gratifying  to  collect  the  bewildering 
variety of seeds  in  the garden  without causing 
injury 
sequence  of  vegetative  propagation. 

the  plants—an 

inevitable  con(cid:173)

to 

is  possible 

to  eliminate 

A  seed  is  produced  from  the  fertilization 
of  the  female  part  of  a  flower  by  pollen  from 
the  male  section.  Seed  is  the  end  product  of 
the  sexual  process  and  as  such  produces  a 
population  of  plants 
that  exhibit  variable 
characteristics.  By  a  controlled  breeding 
program, 
the 
greater  proportion  of 
this  variation  and 
produce  a  population  of  seedlings  that  to  all 
intents  and  purposes  are  similar.  This  is  the 
usual  practice  in  the  production  of  bedding 
plants,  vegetables  and  flower  crops—that  is 
those  plants  with  a  short  enough  life  cycle  to 
allow 
program. 
Woody  plant  seedlings  are  more  variable 
because  of  their  longer  life  cycle  and  their 
tendency  to  cross-pollinate  in  their  natural 
habitat. 

intensive 

breeding 

it 

an 

Seeds  are  a  resting  and  survival  stage  in 
the  continuance  of  a  plant's  existence. 
Basically  a  seed  consists  of  an  embryo,  which 
is the young plant at its  most immature and  in 
its  simplest  components;  a 
food  supply, 
which  maintains  the  embryo  throughout  the 
resting  period  and  provides  the  basis  for 
further  development  when  germination  gets 
under  way;  and  a  seed  coat,  which  acts  as 
the  protective  component.  The  embryo 
consists  of  the  young  root  system,  or  radicle; 
the  young  stem  system,  or  plumule,  which 
carries  the  seed  leaves,  or  cotyledons  (which 
may  be  adapted  for  food  storage);  and  the 
hypocotyl,  which  is the junction  between the 
root  and  shoot  system.  Examples  of  different 

There  are  a  number  of  distinctions  that 

can  be  made  within  seeds  as  a  group. 

inevitably 

The enormous variation  in  the  size of seeds 
the  success  with 
will 
which 
they  are  propagated.  Large  seeds, 
such  as  acorns,  chestnuts  and  hazelnuts,  are 
produced  in  small  numbers,  germinate  satis(cid:173)

influence 

Survival  of  drying,  however,  is  not  just  a 
function  of  the  stored  food;  it  also  reflects 
the  condition  of  the  seed  coat  and  its  ability 
to  protect  the  seed.  Plants,  such  as  willows, 
with very poorly developed  seed  coats survive 
for  only  very  short  periods,  while 
those 
plants,  such  as  sweet  peas,  laburnum  and 
lupine,  with  very  hard, 
impermeable  seed 
coats  usually  survive  for considerable  periods 
in  a  wide  variety  of  conditions.  The  seeds  of 
the 
{Nelumbo  nucifera)  are 
reputed  to  have  retained  viability  in  a  peat 
bog  for  over  one  thousand  years. 

Indian 

lotus 

factorily,  and  as  a  general  rule  establish  well. 
Dustlike  seeds,  such  as  those  from  rhodo(cid:173)
dendrons and  lobelia,  have a low germination 
and  survival  rate. 

Seeds  also  vary  greatly  in  the  materials 
that  they  use  as  food  reserves—that  is  the 
stored  food  in  the  seed.  Those  plants  that 
store  food  as  carbohydrates,  such  as  elder(cid:173)
berries, marigolds and laburnum, are generally 
stable  and 
long-lived,  and  will  withstand 
drying.  Seeds  that  store  food  as  fats  or  oils, 
for  example  peony,  magnolia  and  chestnut 
seeds,  deteriorate  both  with  time  and  drying 
and  so  present  problems  of  storage  and 
survival.  It  is  better  to  allow  these  seeds  to 
mature  on  the  plant  and  collect  them  just 
before  dispersal. 

The  variation  in  characteristics  of the  seed, 
and  more  often  the  fruit,  are  endless;  some 
seeds  and 
fruits  have  large  wings,  hooks 
or  other  projections  that  provide  an  aid  to 
dispersal,  and  these  can  easily  be  trimmed 
or  rubbed  off. The shape of a seed  is designed 
so  that,  when  it  is  dispersed,  it  will  fall  to  the 
ground  and  lie in the  best  position for germin(cid:173)
ation.  Altering 
this 
characteristic,  and  so,  when  planting,  try  not 
to  place  a  seed  upside  down.  If  incorrectly 
positioned  the  stem  of  the  germinating  seed 
may  produce  a  kink. 

its  shape  may  affect 

Commercial  seeds 
As  well  as  being  sold  loose  in  packets,  seeds 
are  now  available  commercially 
in  other 
forms  that  make  sowing  easier  and  more 
accurate.  Pelleted  seeds  are  coated  with  de(cid:173)
composable  material  which  disintegrates 
when  in  contact with  moisture.  It is especially 
convenient  to  buy  small  seeds  in  this  form 
as  they  are  much  easier  to  handle  and  sow. 
Seeds  can  also  be  purchased  evenly  spaced 
on  a  tape  of  decomposable  paper  or  plastic. 
Just  cut  the  tape  to  the  required  length  and 
place  it  in  a  furrow  1/2in  deep  and  then  cover 
with soil. 

Although  it  is  usual  to  buy  seeds  it  is  often 
quite  possible  for  the  gardener  to  collect, 
extract  and  store  his  own  seeds.  This 
is 
especially  satisfactory  with  seeds  from  trees 
and  shrubs, which are dealt with  separately on 
pages  28-32. 

It  is  important  to  label  each  stock  of  seed 
at  all  stages.  Unidentifiable  seeds  will  be  of 
little  use,  so  write  a  nonperishable  label  and 
make  sure 
lot 
through  to  packeting  and  sowing. 

it  accompanies 

the  seed 

Annual  bedding  plants  are  selected  strains 
that  have  been  line-bred  to  come  true  from 
seed. The  problem  in  collecting  seed to  come 
true  is  that  a  plant  may  have  been  chance-
pollinated  by a different variety or species,  and 
so  hybrid,  atypical  plants  will  be  produced. 
Commercially,  the  seed  is  kept  true  to  type 
by  growing  the  parent  plants  in  large  isolated 
blocks.  Certain  plants,  such  as  pansies,  are 
self-pollinating and their seed can be collected 
with  confidence  that  they  will  come  true. 

Collecting  and  drying flower  seeds 
Except  for  those  seeds  that  are  collected  and 
sown 
"green,"  such  as  snowdrops  and 
anemones,  the  majority  of  herbaceous  plants 
are collected, dried and extracted, and stored. 
Their  seeds  should  be  collected  as  they 
become  ripe  and  before  they  are  dispersed. 

the 

fruit, 

form  of 

in  some 

This  requires  careful  observation.  If  they  are 
enclosed 
job 
becomes  much  easier,  because  the  seed  is 
actually  completed  before  the  fruit  matures 
to  a stage  of dispersal.  The  only  problem  then 
is  to  separate  the  seeds  from  the  fruit.  In 
most  cases  this  involves  drying,  either  in  the 
sun, 
in  a  dry  atmosphere  or  in  an  airing 
cabinet. 

If 

individually, 

fruits  are  collected 

they 
should  be  broken  open  and  then  spread  on 
tissue  paper  in  a  shallow  box  or  tray  and  left 
to  dry.  If  whole  flower  heads  are  collected, 
bunch  a  few  stems  together  and  hang  them 
up  to  dry  with  their  heads  enclosed 
in  a 
brown  paper  bag that  is  lightly tied  round  the 
stems.  As  they  dry,  occasionally  shake  the 
bag  so  the  seeds  drop  into  it.  With  small 
flower  heads  leave  the  neck  of  the  brown 
paper  bag  open.  Place 
in  a  warm 
(21°C'70°F)  environment. 

them 

After  drying,  break  up  the  seed  capsules 
to  free  all  the  seed  ana  clean  the  seed  lot; 
depending  on  its  size  it  can  be  picked  over, 
put through a sieve,  or winnowed  in a breeze. 
from 
cyclamen,  lilies and  hellebores will  not usually 
respond  well  to  drying,  and  it  is  better  to 
allow 
the  plant  and 
collect  them  just  before  dispersal. 

Large  fleshy  seeds  such  as 

to  mature  on 

those 

them 

Storing seeds 
The  longer  a  seed  is  stored  the  more  food  is 
used  in  its  survival;  thus  less food  is  available 
for the embryo at germination,  and so germin(cid:173)
ation  becomes  progressively 
less  vigorous. 
Storage  conditions  should  keep  activity  to  a 
minimum. 

Seeds  should  be  stored  dry  in  linen  bags, 

paper  bags  or  packets,  or  cellophane  en(cid:173)
velopes;  plastics such as  polyethylene are not 
advisable  for  flower  and  vegetable  seeds  as 
they 
is 
present.  For  storage  of  seeds  from  trees  and 
shrubs  see  page  32. 

to  conserve  dampness 

tend 

if 

it 

Always  keep  seeds  dry  and  store  them  in 
a  cool  place  such  as  a  loft,  cellar  or  possibly 
a  refrigerator.  If there  is a danger of dampness 
from  the  environment,  place  the  packets  in  a 
polyethylene  bag  for  protection. 

If properly dried,  most flower and vegetable 
seeds  can  be  stored  for  two  or  three  years  at 
least,  because they  store their foods as carbo(cid:173)
hydrates.  Fleshy  seeds,  however,  store  their 
foods  as  oils  or 
therefore, 
short-lived  even  under  the  best  conditions: 
do  not  expect  them  to  survive  for  more  than 
twelve  months.  It  is  probably  best  to  store 
these  seeds  at  the  moisture  content  at  which 
they  are  dispersed,  so  place 
in  a 
polyethylene  bag  in  a  refrigerator. 

fats  and  are, 

them 

GENETICS 
Plants  grown  from  the  seed  of  species  or 
stable  variants  will  come  "true,"  that  is  be 
similar  to  the  parents.  If,  however,  one 
parent  is  unstable  or  normally  propagated 
vegetatively,  then  the  offspring  will  in  all 
probability  be  of  the  normal 
forms  of 
species  and  not  of  the  variant. 

In  plant  breeding  there  is  much  use  of 
the  technique  known  as F1 hybridization. 
This  is  an  involved  process  in  which  two 
true-breeding  species,  or stable variants  of 
the  species,  are  crossed  to  produce  a 
hybrid  generation  (the  first 
filial  or  F1 
generation).  The  advantage  of  these  hy(cid:173)
brids  is  that  they  are  often  more  vigorous 
than  their  parents  and  may  have  charac(cid:173)
teristics  of  height,  form  and  color  that 
make  them  more  desirable. 

then 

If  these  F1  hybrids  cross, 

their 
offspring,  the  F2  generation,  will  not  be 
like  the F1 hybrids  but  will  revert  to  many 
characteristics of the original true-breeding, 
parents.  Hence  the F2 generation  will  not 
possess  all 
the  desirable  characteristics 
that  were  present  in  the F1 generation  and 
it is therefore necessary to produce F1 seed 
afresh  each  year. 

To  assist  with  germination  and  the  establish(cid:173)
ment  of  a  new  plant,  it  is  often  helpful  to 
soak  seeds  in  water  for  12-24  hours  before 
being  sown  in  a  compost  that  will  provide 
adequate  aeration,  sufficient  water-holding 
capacity,  a  neutral  acidity/alkalinity  reaction 
and  sufficient  phosphate.  Thus  a  "sowing"  or 
"seed"  compost  should  be  used. 

Before  choosing  a  pot,  pan  or  tray  decide 
how  much  seed  is  to  be  sown;  the  container 
should  be  large  enough  to  allow the  seedlings 
space  to  develop  to  the  size  at  which  they 
are  to  be  pricked  out. 

Heap 

the  container  with  compost  and 
then,  to  ensure  it  is  evenly  distributed  and 
there  are  no  air  locks,  very  lightly  firm  it  to 

the  corners  and  base  using  the  fingers.  Do 
not  compact  the  compost. 

Using  a  sawing  action,  strike  off  the  com(cid:173)

post  with  a  presser  board  or  other  piece  of 
wood  so  that  it  is  level  with  the  top  of  the 
container.  Then  with  a  presser  board  that  fits 
into  the  container,  lightly  and  evenly  firm  the 
compost  to 1/4-3/8 in  below  the  rim,  ensuring 
that  the  surface  is  level. 

The  container  is  now  prepared  for  sowing. 
The  seeds  should  be  sown  evenly  over  the 
surface  either  by  sowing  large  seeds  one  by 
one  or  gently  shaking  small  seeds  direct  from 
the  packet.  When  shaking,  keep  the  packet 
low  over  the  compost  to  prevent  the  seeds 
being  unevenly  distributed.  If  the  seeds  are 

very  fine  it  is  easier  to  distribute  them  evenly, 
and  see  where  they  are  sown,  if  they  are 
mixed  thoroughly  with  some  dry  fine  sand. 
Sow  the  seeds  by  shaking  across  the  con(cid:173)
tainer,  using  about  half  the  seeds;  then  turn 
the  container  through  90  degrees  and  sow 
the  rest  of  the  seeds  in  the  same  way. 

Gently  shake  some  compost  over 

the 
container  through  a  1/8in  sieve  so  that  an 
even  and  uniform  layer covers the seeds.  As a 
general  rule  seeds  do  not  need  to  be  covered 
by  compost  deeper than  their  own  thickness. 
Finally  label  the  seeds  and  water  them  in 
by  standing  the  container  in  a  shallow  bath 
of  water  so  that  the  water  moves  up  by 
capillary  action.  Do  not  stand  the  container 

in  so  much  water  that  it  overflows  the  rim 
onto  the  seeds  and  compost.  After  watering 
stand  out  to  drain. 

the  water  away 

from 

the  compost 

Alternatively  water 

from 
above,  using  a  watering  can  with  a  fine  rose. 
Start  pouring 
the 
container  and  once  an  even  flow  is  attained 
direct  it  over  the  seeds;  similarly,  to  stop, 
move  the  water  away from  the  container  and 
then  stop  the flow,  so  that  no  drops  fall  on  to 
the  compost. 

Cover  the  container  with  a  piece  of  glass 
and  place  in  a  warm  dark  place,  for  example 
an  airing  cabinet.  Otherwise,  cover  with 
glass  and  a  sheet  of  paper  and  leave  in  any 
warm  (2T'C/'70'F)  environment. 

Germination 
The  germination  of  seeds  covers  the  entire 
process,  from  subjecting  a  resting  seed  to 
suitable  conditions  to  cause  it  to  develop 
to  the  stage  at  which  the  seedling  produces 
true  leaves  and  establishes  as  a  young  plant. 
If  a  seed  is  subjected  to  the  conditions  re(cid:173)
quired  for germination,  and  it  fails  to  germin(cid:173)
ate,  despite  the  fact  that  it  is  alive,  then  the 
seed 
is  described  as  being  dormant  (see 
pages  28-9). 

Water  is  vital  to  allow  plant  growth  to  get 
under  way.  So, 
if  the  seed  has  not  been 
soaked  before sowing,  it  is  important that the 
compost  should  be  watered 
immediately 
after  sowing. 

Once  the  seed  has  sufficiently  imbibed, 
the embryo  inside the seed  begins to  produce 
root  and  stem  systems,  which  eventually 
break  out  of  the  seed. 

To grow,  the embryo  uses  its food  reserves. 

is  combined  with  carbohy(cid:173)

When  oxygen 
drates 
in  these  food  reserves,  the  energy 
necessary  for  growth  is  produced.  Thus  the 
germinating  seed  will  have  a  massive  oxygen 

requirement,  which  can  only  be  satisfied  by  a 
well-aerated environment within the compost. 
All  growth  processes  within  the  seed  are 
chemical  reactions  activated  by  the  addition 
of  water.  To  develop  successfully,  the  seed 
needs  an  increasing  quantity  of  water,  and 
the compost  must  be capable of  holding these 
amounts. 

reactions 

these  reactions  are 

As  all  the  processes  involved  are  basically 
chemical 
they  will  obey  normal 
physical  rules,  the  simplest  of  which  implies 
that  the  higher  the  temperature  is  raised,  the 
faster  will  be  the  rate  of  the  reaction. 
In 
practice,  this  means  that  the  warmer  seeds 
are  kept,  the  quicker  they  will  germinate.  As 
all 
in  a 
biological  context,  there  are  biological  limi(cid:173)
tations  as  to  how  high  the  temperature  can 
be  raised.  In  practice there are also  economic 
considerations,  because  high  temperatures 
are  costly  to  maintain.  Experience  suggests 
that  a  germination  temperature  of  2T^C/70°F 
is  a  reasonable  compromise  for  most  flower 
and  vegetable seeds,  and this  is why an  airing 
cabinet  is  an  excellent  place  for  seeds  to 

taking  place 

germinate.  For  germination  of  tree  and  shrub 
seeds  see  page  35. 

To  keep  seeds  moist  and  warm,  cover  the 
container  with  a  sheet  of  glass  so  that  water 
condenses  on  the  glass  and  falls  back  into 
the  compost.  To  minimize  temperature  fluc(cid:173)
tuations  cover the glass with  a sheet  of  paper. 
As  soon  as  the  seedlings  emerge,  both 
paper  and  glass  should  be  removed.  Spray 
the  seedlings  regularly  with  water  and  place 
them  in  a  well-lit  area,  out  of  strong  direct 
sunlight  to  avoid  scorching. 

Spray  germinating  seeds  with  Captan  or 
they  may 

copper 
succumb  to  damping-off  diseases. 

regularly  or 

fungicides 

If  the  seedlings  are  to  be  kept  in  their 
container for  some time they  should  be given 
a  liquid  fertilizer  diluted  according  to  manu(cid:173)
facturer's  instructions,  because  many  seed 
composts  contain  only  a  phosphate fertilizer. 

Pricking  out 
As  soon  as  seedlings  can  be  handled,  trans(cid:173)
plant  them  into  a  more  suitable  compost, 
unrestricted 
leaving  enough 

space 

for 

development  of  the  young  plants.  This 
known  as  pricking  out  or  potting  on. 

is 

Fill  a  container  with  John 

Innes  No.  1 
compost  or  a  compost  of  similar  structure 
(see  page  12),  and  firm  to  the  base  with  the 
tips  of  the  fingers.  Strike  off  compost  level 
with  the  rim.  Lightly  firm  with  presser  board 
so that the compost is 1/4-3/8in below the rim 
of the  container,  which  is  now  prepared. 

Water  the  seedlings;  then  loosen  them  by 

knocking  the  old  container  so  that  the  com(cid:173)
post  comes  away  from 
the  sides.  Hold  a 
seedling  by  its  seed  leaf  and  gently  lift  with 
the  aid  of  a  dibble,  keeping  its  root  system 
intact.  Never  hold  the  seedling  by  its  stem. 

With  the  dibble,  make  a  hole  in  the  fresh 
compost  big  enough  to  take  the  roots.  Drop 
in  the  seedling  and  gently  firm  the  compost 
back  round  the  roots  with  the  dibble.  Repeat 
this  operation 
for  each  seedling,  spacing 
at  24-40  seedlings  per  tray. 

After  the  tray  has  been  filled,  water  in  the 

seedlings  and  return  them  to  the  warm  en(cid:173)
vironment  (21°C/70'T)  so  that  they  can  re(cid:173)
establish  as  quickly  as  possible. 

Hardening  off 
After  the  seedlings  have  been  pricked  out, 
they  have  to  be  gradually  weaned  to  a  stage 
at which  they  can  be  planted  out  and  survive 
cool 
fluctuating  water  con(cid:173)
ditions  and  the  effects  of  wind  without  their 
growth  rate  being affected.  In  the  plant world 
this  process 
to  as 
hardening  off. 

temperatures, 

is  generally 

referred 

the  year 

Most  seedlings  will  have  been  germinated 
in  a  protected  environment  during  the  early 
part  of 
to  produce  a  plant  of 
sufficient  size  to  be  planted  out  as  soon  as 
the danger of frost is passed. Because so many 
seedlings  are  produced  in  the  early  part  of 
the year,  and  they  are  not  hardy,  and  in  most 
gardens there  is a  premium on  any  space that 
provides  sufficient  protection,  plants  tend  to 
be  grown  at  a  high  density. 

The  problem  with  crowding  plants together 
is  that  an  increase  in  fungal  diseases  both  on 
the  stems  and  leaves  and  in  the  compost  is 
likely  to  result;  the  plants  tend  to  become 
spindly  as  they  compete  for  light;  and  the 
varying  plants  have  different  watering  needs 

there 

this  purpose 

so  more  day-to-day  care  and  attention  are 
needed,  which  is  of  course  time  consuming. 
Once  the  pricked-out  seedlings  have  re(cid:173)
established,  move  them  to  a  cooler  environ(cid:173)
ment.  For 
real 
substitute  for  a  cold  frame,  which  should  be 
kept  firmly  closed.  Over  the  course  of  a  few 
weeks  increasingly  air  the  frame  during  the 
day  by  raising  the 
is 
continually  aired  during  the  day  and  night: 
indeed  the  lid  may  be  completely  removed 
during the  day  if  it  is  warm.  Eventually  the  lid 
can  be  discarded  altogether. 

lid,  until  the  frame 

is  no 

into 

the  cold 

Frosts as severe as — 4°C/25  F are sufficient 
to  penetrate 
if 
this  level  of  cold  is  expected,  provide  some 
insulation  to  protect  half-hardy  plants.  The 
best  and  most  easily  manageable  insulation 
should  be  light  yet  thick;  fibrous  matting  and 
similar  materials  are  useful  and  effective. 

frame,  so, 

Regularly  check  the  seedlings  in  the  frame 

to  ensure  that  they  are  not  drying  out  ex(cid:173)
cessively.  They  should  not  however  receive 
too  much  water.  If  anything  it  is  better  to  err 
on  the  side  of  dryness  rather  than  risk  water(cid:173)

increasingly  susceptible 

logging.  Under  these  cooler  conditions  wet 
composts  are 
to 
fungal  root  rots.  Similarly,  the  close density  of 
plants  creates  conditions  under  which  leaf 
diseases  are  capable  of  taking  hold.  It  is, 
therefore, 
important  that  all  plants  in  the 
frame  are  sprayed  regularly  with  a  fungicide, 
either  Captan,  which will  prevent the diseases 
spreading,  or  a  systemic  fungicide  such  as 
Benlate, which  should  prevent an outbreak of 
the  diseases. 

them  developing 

Another  aspect  of  seedling  management  is 
the  necessity  for  feeding.  Many  pricked-out 
seedlings  will  spend  several  weeks 
in  the 
potting  compost  before  being  finally  trans(cid:173)
planted, and there is no point in starving them 
and  preventing 
to  an 
adequate  size.  Thus  the  seedlings  should  be 
regularly  fed  using  a  proprietary  liquid  fer(cid:173)
tilizer  at  the  intervals  stated  on  the  manu(cid:173)
facturer's  instructions.  Avoid  excessive  feed(cid:173)
ing  as  it  will  produce  overvigorous  plants 
that  will  check  their  growth  on  transplanting; 
it  will  also  increase  the  risk  of  disease  in  the 
cold  frame. 

reason, 

The  main 

The  sowing  of  bedding  plant  seeds 
is  a 
relatively  simple  procedure  and  can  be 
guaranteed,  within 
to  produce  a 
reliable  and  uniform  crop  of  seedlings. 
that 

the 
gardener  will  experience  is  knowing  when  to 
sow  particular  plants.  The  object 
to 
produce,  at  the same time,  all  bedding  plants 

stumbling  block 

is 

at  the  requisite  size  for  planting  out  so  that 
they  will  make  a  significant  impact  when  in 
flower. 

The  sequence  of  bedding  plant  sowing  is 

governed  primarily  by  the  speed  of  germin(cid:173)
ation  and  subsequently  by  the  growth  rate 
of  the  seedlings  of  each  species.  Thus  slow-
developing  plants  are  sown  early  in  the  year 

the  year 

the  very  early  part  of 

—although  it  is  important  to  remember  that 
in 
light 
intensity  is  usually  poor  and  growth  rates  of 
seedlings  will  be  proportionately  depressed. 
Sow  bedding  plant  seeds  in  a  pan  (dwarf 
pot)  or a  seed  tray  depending on the quantity 
of  seed  used.  Because  the  seeds  germinate 
relatively rapidly at warm temperatures,  peat-
based  composts  are  quite  satisfactory,  and 
there  are  many  proprietary  brands  available. 
Fill  the  container  with  compost,  but  keep  it 
light  and  uncompacted  so  that  drainage  is 
maintained.  The  main  problem  with  peat-
based  composts  is  that  they tend  to waterlog 
easily,  causing  both  death  of  the  seeds  and 
poor seedling development—symptoms often 
associated  with  damping-off  diseases  and 
sciarid  fly  attacks. 

Many  bedding  plants,  for  example  lobelia 
incredibly 
and  Begonia  semperflorens,  have 
small, 
that  are 
almost  dustlike,  seeds 
difficult to  sow  evenly  and  at a sufficiently  low 
density.  These  should  be  thoroughly  mixed 
with  some  dry,  fine  sand,  so  that  an  even 
distribution  can  be  achieved.  Covering  with 
compost  is  not  then  necessary. 

With  the seed  packet close to the  container 
sprinkle  the  seeds  evenly  over  the  compost. 
Sow 
to  avoid  having  overcrowded 
seedlings  later  on.  Sift  just  sufficient  com(cid:173)

thinly 

post  over  the  seeds  to  make  an  even  cover. 
Label  the container and water the seeds either 
by  using  a  fine  rose  on  a  watering  can  or  by 
standing  the  container  in  a  basin  of  water. 
Add  a  fungicide  such  as  Captan  to  the water. 
Cover  with  a  sheet  of  glass 
to  conserve 
moisture  and  place  in  a  warm  environment 
(21°C/70°F)  to  promote  germination;  at  this 
stage  light  is  not  important. 

As  soon  as  the  seedlings  emerge,  place 
them  in  the  light  to  encourage  growth  and 
remove the cover  because excessive humidity 
among  seedlings  at  this  stage  will  lead  to 
damping  off. 

The  temperature,  however,  should  still  be 
maintained  at  as  warm  a  level  as  possible  to 
encourage  quick  growth  to  a  size  at  which 
the  seedlings  can  be  pricked  out. 

As  soon  as  the  seedlings  are  large  enough 
to  handle,  prick  them  out  into  individual  pots 
or  seed  trays.  Their  growth  will  inevitably  be 
checked  when  they  are transplanted,  but  the 
smaller  and  less  branched  the  root  system  is, 
the  less  damage  and  therefore  check  will  be 
experienced. 

The  main  problem  will  be  the  likelihood  of 
damping-off  diseases.  This  can  only  be 
avoided  by  scrupulous  hygiene,  light  sowing 
densities  and  regular  sprays  with  fungicides 
such  as  Captan  or  copper-based  chemicals. 

The  growing  of  herbaceous  plants  from  seed 
is  by  no  means  as  widely  practiced  as  the 
growing  of  bedding  plants  or  even  alpines 
from  seed.  This 
largely  because  most 
herbaceous  plants  are  selected  forms  that 
require  vegetative  methods  of  propagation. 
However,  there  are  many  herbaceous  plants, 
such  as  delphiniums  and  lupines,  that  can 
be  grown  successfully  from  seed. 

is 

Most  hardy  herbaceous  plants,  and  es(cid:173)
pecially  those  that  disperse  their  seeds 
in 
the  late  summer  and  autumn,  will  produce 
seeds  that  require  a  period  of  exposure to  the 
cold  to  break  their  dormancy.  Their  seed  is 
sown  in  autumn  or  winter  in  containers  that 
are  then  left  outdoors;  germination  should 
occur  in  the  spring. 

Those  plants  that  disperse  their  seeds  in 
summer,  after  an  early  spring flowering,  often 
do  not  show  any  dormancy  conditions, 
especially 
if  they  are  collected  and  sown 
slightly  green.  This  kind  of  plant  will  then 
germinate  quickly  and  establish  a  seedling 
before  the  onset  of  winter. 

the 

legume 

Some  herbaceous  plants,  and  particularly 
members  of 
family,  such  as 
lupines,  produce  seed  with  a  hard  seed  coat. 
This  prevents  the  seed  germinating  until  it 
decomposes  sufficiently  to  allow  the  seed  to 
take  up water.  To  speed  up  germination,  chip 
the  seed  coat  with  a  single-edged  razor  blade 

W i th  a  presser  board,  firm  the  compost  to 
1/4-3/8in below  the  rim. 
If  seeds  are  large, 
individually  sow  at  recommended  spacing. 
Otherwise,  broadcast  sow  the  seeds.  After 
sowing,  firm  them  into  contact  with  the  com(cid:173)
post;  then  cover  with  grit  if  they  are  to  stand 
out  for  the  winter,  or  with  sifted  compost  if 
germination  will  occur  quickly.  Label 
the 
container  and  water  in  the  seeds.  Stand  out 
on  any well-drained  surface,  if the seeds  need 

chilling.  Otherwise  place container  in  a warm 
(21°C/70°F)  environment. 

Seedlings  of  herbaceous  plants  are  sus(cid:173)
ceptible  to  the  various  damping-off  diseases. 
It is therefore important to water the emerging 
seedlings  at  regular  intervals  with  a  dilute 
solution  of  Captan  or  a  copper  fungicide. 

As  soon  as  herbaceous  plant  seedlings  are 

large  enough 
dividual  pots. 

to  handle  prick  off  into 

in(cid:173)

so that water can  get  in;  alternatively,  rub the 
seeds  with  a  coarse  emery  paper  or  similar 
abrasive  until  the  seed  coat  is  sufficiently 
reduced  to  allow  water  uptake. 

Some herbaceous plants such as some lilies 
and  peonies  exhibit  an  unusual  dormancy 
condition 
that  delays  seedling  emergence. 
If  the  seeds  are  sown  in  the  winter/spring 
period,  the  seeds  germinate  as  the  tempera(cid:173)
ture  warms  up,  but  only  a 
root  system 
emerges.  Exposure  to  a  further  winter's  cold 
is  necessary  for  the  stem  to  develop.  There(cid:173)
fore  it  is  not  until  the  second  spring  that  the 
seedlings  appear.  For 
failure 
should  not  be  accepted  until  after the  second 
spring;  do  not  be  tempted  to  throw  them 
out  if  germination  does  not  occur  in  the  first 
season. 

these  plants 

If 

fill 

the  seeds  are  slow 

Sowing  herbaceous  seeds 
Seeds  should  be  sown  in  pans  (dwarf  pots) 
or  seed  trays,  depending  on  the  quantity  of 
to 
seed  available. 
germinate, 
loam-
based  compost,  which  will  maintain 
its 
structure  over  a  long  period  despite  being 
exposed  to  natural  weather  conditions.  Peat-
based  compost  will  suffice  for  seeds  sown  in 
spring. 

the  container  with  a 

Firm  the  compost  to  the  corners  and  the 
base of container; then  strike off the compost. 

The  propagation  of  trees  and  shrubs  from 
seed  is  rewarding  as  it  allows  the  gardener 
to  practice  a  wide  range  of  techniques  that, 
if  successful,  produce  something  that  has  a 
long-lasting place  in  the garden  or  landscape. 
Although 
is  possible  to  purchase  some 
tree  and  shrub  seeds,  these  are  limited  to 
those  kinds  that  can  be  successfully  dried,  so 
in  most  cases  it  is  necessary for  the  gardener 
to  collect  his  own  seeds. 

it 

It  is  important  to  emphasize that  the  seeds 
used  for  propagation  will  only  produce  the 
kind  of  offspring  that  their  heredity  warrants. 
Seeds  collected  from  species  will  probably 
come true;  if collected from  selected varieties 
then  the  seedlings  will  normally  be  of  the 
species,  unless  of  hybrid  origin  (see  page  20). 
For this  reason  all  fruit trees,  which  are  highly 
specialized  forms,  should  not  be  propagated 
by  seed  but  must  be  increased  vegetatively. 
The  chief  problem  associated with  tree  and 
shrub  seeds  is  the  presence  of  various  kinds 
of dormancy,  which  in  the  extreme are some(cid:173)
times  combined  and  so  present  particular 
difficulties  in  getting  the  seeds  to  germinate. 

Tree  and  shrub  seeds  are  extraordinarily 
diverse  in  their  shape  and  size—varying  from 
the  fine  dustlike  seeds  of  rhododendron  to 
the  large  nutlike  seeds  of  the  horse  chestnut 
or  the  oak,  from  the  flat  disks  of  wisteria  to 
the  hairy  "parachutes"  of  clematis.  All  these 
considerations have a bearing on an individual 
plant's  ability  to  survive  and  germinate:  large 
seeds with a large embryo should have a much 
greater  chance  of  successfully  germinating 
than  small  seeds,  as  they  have  a  larger  food 
reserve,  and  therefore  more  small  seeds  than 
large  seeds  need  to  be  collected. 

Also  affecting  the  quantity  of  seed  to  be 
collected  will  be  the  availability  of  seed  from 
year  to  year.  If  this  can  be  noted  on  a  regular 
basis,  it  may  give  a  guide  for  any  storage 
requirements. Beech is an extreme example as 
it  is  reputed  to  produce good  seed  only  once 
in  "seven  years";  other  plants  also  have 
definite  periodic  responses. 

The  gardener  can  either  purchase  his  tree 
and  shrub  seeds  from  a  reliable  seedsman  or 
he  can  visit  gardens,  parks  and  arboreta  in 
the  hope  of  coming  upon  some  unusual  tree 

or shrub producing a crop of seeds. Gardeners 
are  usually  very  generous  with  their  plants 
and, 
if  asked,  will  frequently  be  only  too 
willing  to  give  some  seeds  or  cuttings. 

is  subjected 

Dormancy 
If  a  seed 
required  for  germination  and  it  fails  to  ger(cid:173)
minate,  despite  the  fact  that  it  is  alive,  then 
the  seed  is  described  as  being dormant. 

the  conditions 

to 

in 

the 

Seed  dispersed 

late  summer  or 
autumn, without an  inbuilt dormancy control, 
would  normally  germinate.  The  seedling 
then  have 
would 
to  survive  unfavorable 
climatic  conditions 
than 
that  more  often 
not  would  kill  it.  The  plant  has,  therefore, 
developed  a  control  mechanism  that  pre(cid:173)
vents  the  seed  germinating  until  the  onset 
of  favorable  conditions  for  germination  and 
subsequent  establishment.  Although 
these 
controls  benefit  the  plant  and  enhance  the 
chances  of  successful  seedling  production, 
they  present  a  very  real  problem 
the 
gardener,  who  either  has  to  wait  for  the 
dormancy  to  be  broken  naturally,  which  can 

to 

take  a  long  time,  or  has  to  attempt  to  over(cid:173)
come  the  problem  artificially,  which  may  be 
difficult  and  complex. 

In  woody  plants  there  are  three  different 

kinds  of  dormancy. 

The  simplest  is  that  caused  by  the  seed 
coat,  which  has 
thickened  and  hardened 
during the maturation of the seed. Its hardness 
stops  water  being  taken  up  by  the  seed; 
therefore 
imbibe  and 
germination  is  prevented.  In  nature,  this  kind 
of  dormancy  is  gradually  reduced  by  bacteria 
and  fungi  in  the  soil  decomposing  the  seed 
coat  until  it  is  no  longer  effective  and  water 
can  be  taken  up. 

the  embryo  cannot 

Dormancy  may  also  be  caused  by  an 
immature  embryo,  which  requires  a  warm 
temperature  in  which  to  develop  to  a  stage 
where  germination  can  proceed. 

The  commonest  form  of  dormancy  in  the 
seeds  of  plants  from  temperate  climates  is  a 
chemical  inhibition  to  the  embryo  develop(cid:173)
ment.  In  nature,  this  dormancy  is  broken  by 
normal  exposure  of  a  seed 
in  the  soil  to 
winter's  cold.  This  initiates  a  chain  of  events 

that  neutralizes  the  inhibitor  chemical  and 
so  allows  germination  to  proceed  as  soon  as 
environmental  conditions  are  suitable. 

in  a  seed 

then  overcoming 

If  only  one  of  these  kinds  of  dormancy 
occurred 
it, 
although  a  problem,  would  be  comparatively 
simple.  Many  plants,  however,  exhibit  com(cid:173)
binations  of  these  dormancy  controls  so  that 
overcoming  them  is  complicated  and  time-
consuming  (see  pages  32-3). 

invariably  dried; 

Seeds that  are  obtained  from  sources  other 
the  gardener's  own  collections  are 
than 
almost 
the  process  of 
ripening is fully complete and all the dormancy 
controls  are  inbuilt,  so  germination  cannot 
proceed  until 
these  problems  have  been 
eliminated. 

it 

is  possible  to  avoid 

However,  for the gardener who  is collecting 
the 
his  own  seed 
development  of  dormancy  by  collecting 
immature seed  and  preventing further drying. 
To  do  this,  collect  the  seed  when  it  is  green 
to  yellow  to  buff  colored,  and  fruit  as  it  just 
turns  yellow.  At  this  stage  the  seed  coat  and 
fruit  are  beginning  to  dry  out  and  so  develop 

into  the  condition  suitable  for  dispersal.  It 
would  appear  that  the  dormancy  controls 
develop  at  this  stage. 

By  collecting  the  seed  when  it  is  anatom(cid:173)

ically  complete  with  its  food  reserves  finished 
but  before  dormancy  becomes  built 
in, 
the  hard  seed  coat  is  avoided  and  the chilling 
requirement  is  at  a  minimum  (just  enough  to 
prevent  germination  until  the  spring).  Thus 
for  germination  to  occur  in  spring,  the  fruits 
of  Daphne  mezereum  should  be  collected 
not in  September but in  early June, when they 
are  small,  hard  and  green.  Complicated 
dormancy  patterns  which  take  a  long  time  to 
overcome  or 
require  a  complex  artificial 
procedure  can  then  be  avoided.  However,  it 
is  easy  to  gather  seed  that  is  too  immature, 
which  will  prove  disastrous. 

Once  dormancy  conditions  are  removed, 
the seed will  germinate,  provided that suitable 
conditions  are  maintained.  A  change  in  con(cid:173)
ditions,  such  as  excessive  heat  or  drying  or  a 
continued  shortage  of  oxygen,  will  cause  the 
development  of  secondary  dormancy,  which 
is  extremely  difficult  to  break  down. 

Buying seeds 
When  purchasing  tree  and  shrub  seeds  there 
are  few  regulations  which  ensure  the  same 
degree  of  certainty  in  production  that  can  be 
attributed 
to  vegetable  and  flower  seeds. 
Virtually  no  guarantees  are  available  because 
the seedsmen themselves have often collected 
the  seeds  from  the  wild  and  they  may  be  in(cid:173)
correctly 
is 
collected  which  is  void  and  so  contains  no 
embryo,  even  though  the  seed  and  fruit  is 
perfectly  formed  when  viewed  externally. 

labeled.  Occasionally  seed 

Seed  collectors  and  wholesalers  usually 
process  seeds  by  drying  them.  This  has  t wo 
distinct  disadvantages.  First, 
the  drying 
processes enhance the  maturation  of the seed 
and  so  produce  deeper  dormancy  effects. 
Second,  for  those  seeds  that  store  their  food 
reserves as oils or fats, the drying degenerates 
the  food  reserves  and  so  produces  a  loss  of 
viability.  The  extent  to  which  viability  is  lost 
will  depend  on  how  much  food  is  stored  as 
oils  or  fats.  Most  nut  seeds  fall 
into  this 
category. 

Despite  these  drawbacks,  there  are  many 
seeds  offered  by  seedsmen  which  are  entirely 

reliable  and  which  are  capable  of  surviving 
the  drying  processes  without  any  detriment 
to  their  condition.  The  gardener  can  only 
learn  by  experience  how  drying  affects 
different  seeds.  In  many  cases  seedsmen  do 
not  even  bother  to  offer  seeds  where  there  is 
doubt  about  their  ability  to  survive the  drying 
process. 

Collecting  seeds 
The  collection  of seeds  from  trees  and  shrubs 
by  the  gardener  has  a  number  of  advantages 
over  buying  seeds. 

The  gardener  knows  the  identity  of  the 
plant  and  that  it  is  reasonably  hardy,  and 
he  can  have  a  clear  idea  of  what  conditions 
suit  a  particular  species,  having  seen 
it 
growing.  As  so  many  aliens  and  exotics  are 
of  doubtful  hardiness  this  is  a  worthwhile 
consideration,  especially  as  purchased  seeds 
probably  come 
from  a  more  southerly 
collection.  A  hardy  parent  does  not  necess(cid:173)
arily  produce  hardy  offspring,  but  it  is  more 
likely. 

Another advantage  is that the gardener can 
collect seeds at the moment he deems correct 

—a  situation  that  is  of  critical  importance 
when  green  seeds  are  being  collected 
to 
avoid  a  dormancy  condition. 

Seeds  that  have  been  collected,  processed 
and  sown  without  drying  will  not  suffer  losses 
in  viability. 

take 

from 

them 

Finally  the  gardener  has  the  advantage  of 
choosing  where  he  collects  his  seeds,  and  he 
should 
those  specimens 
which  are  regarded as desirable forms and  are 
free  from  pests  and  diseases.  Because  the 
seeds  may  be  the  result  of  a  chance  pollina(cid:173)
tion,  it  is  not possible to expect seeds to  come 
true,  but  at  least,  by  attempting  to  provide  a 
better  genetic  base,  good  forms  have  an 
increased  chance  of  being  produced. 

label  all  containers  used 

Seeds  or  fruits  should  always  be  collected 
in  prime  condition,  and  at  all  stages  it  is 
important  to  be  able  to  identify  the  seeds. 
Therefore 
for 
collecting,  recording not  only the name of the 
parent  plant  but  also  the  place  of  origin  and 
the  date  of  collection  so  that  this  information 
may  be  used 
label 
should  always  accompany  a  seed  lot  until  it 
is  sown,  when  the  information  should  be 

for  comparisons.  The 

transferred 
to  a  permanent 
write  labels  with  indelible  ink. 

label.  Always 

Seeds  that  are  green  or  bulky  should  not 
be collected  in  large batches or be kept  in the 
containers for too  long as they are very  prone 
to  "heat  up"  and  this  can  very  easily  cause 
the  embryo  to  die.  These  seeds  and  fruits 
should, therefore, be stored in small batches in 
polyethylene  bags  and  kept  cool  in  a  refrig(cid:173)
erator. Process and sow as quickly as possible. 
Large  cones  should  be  cut  one  at  a  time. 
When  collecting  seeds  it  is  useful  to  have 
both  hands  free,  especially  if  it  is  necessary 
to  stretch 
trees.  For  this  purpose  a 
collecting bag is invaluable. This can  be made 
very  simply  by  cutting  off  the  top  half  from  a 
plastic  fertilizer  or  compost  sack.  Tie  two 
pieces  of  string  to  the  upper  corners  of  the 
remaining  bottom  half  and  then  secure  this 
around  the  waist.  This  kind  of  collecting  bag 
is  far  superior  to  a  basket  or  bucket  as  it  is 
not  bulky  and  will  not  get  in  the  way.  Do  not 
substitute  a  burlap  sack  because  squashy 
and  fleshy fruits  may  soak  through  the  burlap 
into  the  gardener's  clothing—an  unpleasant 
and  (literally)  irritating  experience. 

into 

Some  seeds  from  trees  and  shrubs  will  have 
to  be  separated  from  their  fruit  component 
in  order  to  facilitate  sowing  and  storage.  In 
certain  cases  it  is  also  necessary to  store  seed 
either  from  collection  to  sowing  or  from  year 
to  year.  Both  these  factors  have  a  bearing  on 
a  seed's  viability,  that  is  the  proportion  of  a 
seed  sample  which  is  alive  at  any  time. 

The  cleaning  and  extraction  of  seed  from 
the fruit is often a tedious and time-consuming 
business,  but  it  is  necessary  if  seed  is  to  be 
sown  evenly. 

individual  seeds  from 

Large  dry fruits  in  capsules  should  be  sifted 
the 
to  separate  the 
capsules.  Seeds  that  are  shed  direct  from 
the  fruits,  as  happens  with  many  nut  seeds 
such  as  oaks,  chestnuts,  hazelnuts,  horse 
chestnuts  and  beech,  are  ready for  sowing.  It 
is  simply  a  matter  of  picking  them  up. 

Winged  fruits  should  be  dried  sufficiently 
to  separate  the  wings,  unless,  as  with  maple, 
each  wing  has  its  own  seed.  Where  the  wing 
encloses  the  seed  or  seeds,  such  as  with 
cryptic  fruited  plants  like  hornbeam,  then 
either  each  seed  has  to  be  picked  out  or  the 
whole  fruit  has  to  be  dried  and  the  seed 
separated  by  rubbing  and  winnowing. 

Some  cones,  such  as  those  from  silver  fir 
disintegrate  and  then  the  scales  have  to  be 
separated.  The  gardener  should  never  open 
cones  by  placing  them  in  the  oven  as  exces(cid:173)
sive  drying  can  very  easily  cause  the  seeds  to 

die.  Some  cones,  such  as  those  from  cedars, 
do  not  open  readily  in  response  to  drying; 
instead  put  them  in  a  saucepan  containing 
hot water (7r-82°C/160°-180°F)  and  maintain 
this  temperature  until  the  scales  open  up. 

the  size  of 

fruits  depends  on 

The  extraction  of  seeds  from  berries  or 
fleshy 
the 
individual  seeds  and  the  texture  of  the  flesh. 
Pome 
fruits  such  as  crab  apples,  pears, 
medlars  and  quinces  should  have  the  flesh 
pared  away  before  any  attempt  to  extract  the 
seeds  is  made. 

Separate  relatively  large  seeds  with  soft 
flesh,  for  example  berberis,  by  squashing with 
a  presser  board  and  then  swirling the  material 
and  some  water  around  a  shallow  dish.  The 
seeds  will  tend  to  gravitate  to  the  middle  and 
the  flesh  to  the  outside.  Then  pick  off  any 
berry  skin  that  remains  with  the  seeds. 

Very fleshy  fruits  should  also  be  macerated 
with  a  presser  board  before  being  left  in  a  jar 
of  warm  water  to  ferment;  keep  in  a  warm 
place  for  a  few  days  until  the  flesh  ferments. 
Decant  off  any  flesh  that  is  floating,  leaving 
seeds  untouched  in  the  bottom  of  the  jar. 
Change 
to 
remove  all  the  flesh.  Then  pick  off  any  skin. 

three  times 

the  water 

two  or 

Cones  of  conifers  are  one  of  the  most 
satisfying fruits to  deal  with.  Collect the cones 
before  they  begin  to  shed  their  seeds,  and 
place  them  in  a  paper  bag  in  the  airing  cabi(cid:173)
net.  Shake  regularly  to  separate  the  seeds. 

As 

STORAGE 
The  two  main  considerations  concerning 
the storage  of seeds  from  trees  and  shrubs 
are  moisture  content  and  temperature  of 
storage. 
it 

is  not  always  possible  for  the 
gardener,  without  detailed  information,  to 
know  which  seeds  fall  into  which  groups, 
all  seeds  should  be  treated  similarly  as  a 
standard  procedure.  Surface  dry  all  ex(cid:173)
tracted  seed  to  avoid  moisture  between 
the  seeds  encouraging  fungal  rots. 

If the seeds are to be used within a couple 
of days, store them  at room temperature in 

a  polyethylene  bag  to  maintain  the  moist(cid:173)
ure  content  at  which  they  were  extracted 
or  collected.  This  is  especially  relevant  for 
plants  that store  their food  as fats  and  oils. 
The  cooler the seeds  are  kept the  longer 
they  remain  alive  and  vigorous.  So,  for 
long-term  storage,  put 
in  a 
polyethylene  bag,  label  them,  and  then 
place  them  in  a  domestic  refrigerator  near 
the  spot  where  it  is  coolest.  The  lower  the 
temperature the  more  effective  is  storage, 
as  long  as the  seeds  are  not frozen.  Under 
these  conditions  seeds  can  be  stored  for 
several  weeks. 

the  seeds 

Scarification 
Before  sowing  it  is  necessary  to  break  the 
dormancy  of seeds with  hard  seed  coats,  and 
this  can  be  done  artificially  by  the  gardener 
so  that  germination  will  occur  as  soon  as 
conditions  are  suitable. 

Commercially,  the  dormancy  period  is  re(cid:173)
duced  by  adding, concentrated  acid  to  the 
seed  coat,  which  then  disintegrates.  Simpler 
and  safer  methods  are  to  be  preferred,  how(cid:173)
ever.  Seeds  of  a  sufficient  size  to  be  handled 
individually  can  be  chipped  by  cutting  a 
portion  of the  hard  seed  coat  away  to  expose 
the seed  itself.  It  is  not  necessary to  reduce or 
cut  away all  the seed  coat  but  merely to  allow 
enough  to  be  removed  so  that  water  can 
enter.  The  seed  will  then  swell  and  rupture 
the  remainder  of  the  hard  seed  coat. 

Smaller  seeds  and  seeds  with  coats  that 
do  not  lend  themselves  easily  to  chipping  can 

have their seed coats  reduced  by scarification. 
This  is  a  fairly  simple  process  in  which  the 
seeds  are  rubbed  with  an  abrasive  substance 
until  the  seed  coat  is  eventually  worn  down 
to  a  level  at  which  water  will  enter.  Possibly 
the  easiest  way to  scarify seeds  is to take a jar 
with  a  screw  lid  and  line  it  with  sandpaper. 
Place the seeds  in  the jar and then  shake until 
the  seed  coat  is  sufficiently  abraded  to  allow 
water  uptake. 

Often  a  seed  with  a  hard  seed  coat  also 
needs  to  be  chilled  to  break  dormancy.  In 
this  case  the  seed  is  subjected  to  a  warm 
temperature  to  reduce  the,seed  coat  before 
being  stratified  (see  page  33).  As  most  seeds 
are  shed  in  the autumn,  this  means that such 
seeds  should  be  stored  dry  over  winter  in  a 
warm  environment,  stratified  in  early summer 
and  chilled  during the following winter  before 
being  sown  in  the  spring. 

Stratification 
One  of  the  commonest  forms  of  dormancy 
found  in  seeds  of  trees,  shrubs  and  flowers 
from  the  temperate  regions  is  a  biochemical 
control  of  embryo  development,  which  has 
to  be  overcome  by  chilling. 

There  are  two  parts  to  this  process:  the 
imbibition  of  the  seed,  and  then  its  exposure 
to  a  period  of  cold.  The  simplest  way  to  deal 
with  the  problem  is  to  sow  these  seeds  in 
the  open  ground,  where  they  will  receive 
natural  chilling.  In  a  mild  winter,  however, 
there  will  be  insufficient  cold  to  overcome 
the  dormancy  controls,  and  so  germination 
will  be  delayed  for twelve  months following  a 
further  winter's  cold. 

Thus  to  be  sure  of  germination  an  artificial 
treatment  known  as  stratification  is  required 
to  complete  the  chilling  process. 

To  obtain  a  suitable  medium  for  stratifi(cid:173)

cation,  first  sift  dry  sphagnum  moss  peat 
through  a 1/4in sieve.  Mix  about  4  volumes 
of this  peat with 1  volume of water to  produce 
damp  peat 
just  exudes  water  when 

that 

squeezed  lightly  in  the  hand.  Then  mix  4 
volumes  of  this  damp  peat  to  1  volume  of 
seeds  to  give  the  seeds  plenty  of  moisture.  If 
the  mixture  looks  compact,  add  1  volume  of 
grit  to  improve  aeration.  Place  the  mixture  in 
a  polyethylene  bag and  tie a  label  on  the  out(cid:173)
side.  Leave  for  two  or  three  days  in  warmth 
while  the  seeds  take  up  water  and  swell.  The 
seeds are  now  ready for chilling.  Place the  bag 
in  the  refrigerator  in  the  meat  drawer,  where 
the 
(but  not 
freezing). Turn  and  shake the  bag  every  week 
to  prevent  compaction  and 
to  maintain 
aeration  around  the  seeds. 

temperature  will  be 

lowest 

The  time  needed  for  the  seeds  to  chill  is 
extraordinarily  different  and  may  vary  from 
three to four weeks to 16 to 18 weeks depend(cid:173)
ing  on  the  species. 

Many  seeds  will  not  be  bothered  by  an 
excess  of  chilling  period  as  they  simply  sit 
and  wait  for  the  right  conditions  for  germin(cid:173)
ation 
to 
germinate  regardless  of  temperature  once 
the  required  chilling  period  is  complete. 

the  spring,  but  some  begin 

in 

HOT  WATER  TREATMENT 
Some  seeds  with  hard  or  impermeable 
seed  coats  can  be  prepared  for  sowing  by 
treating  the  seeds  with  hot  water.  This 
extracts  sufficient 
"waterproofing"  and 
allows the  seed  to  take  up water and  swell. 
Using  a  ratio  of  3  volumes  water  to  1 
volume  seeds,  place the seeds  in a shallow 

dish  and  pour  water  that  has  just  gone  off 
the  boil  over  them.  Do  not  use  more  than 
this  ratio  of  water  otherwise  the  temper(cid:173)
ature  will  be  too  high  for too  long  and  this 
may  cause  damage  to  the  embryo.  Place 
the  dish  in  a warm  environment;  leave  for 
24  hours.  If  the  seeds  do  not  swell,  repeat 
the  exercise. 

inevitably  de(cid:173)

An  open  ground  seedbed  is  best  for  tree  and 
shrub  seedling  propagation.  Although  it  is 
quite  possible  to  sow  seeds  in  seed  trays  or 
pans  (dwarf  pots)  containing  compost,  the 
quality  of  the  compost  will 
teriorate  and  germination  may  be  impaired 
after  a  considerable 
time  outdoors.  After 
germination,  the  seedlings  should  be  left  to 
establish  for  a  growing  season  before  trans(cid:173)
planting,  and 
the  restrictive  volume  of  a 
seed  tray  or  pan  may  not  allow  adequate 
space 
root  or  seedling  development. 
Another  drawback  is  that  more  day-to-day 
management 
in 
seed  trays  and  pans  to  ensure  that  watering 
is  not  substandard  and  that  the  seedlings 
have  adequate  nutrients. 

for  seedlings 

required 

for 

is 

The advantage of the open  ground seedbed 
it  is  self-sufficient  and  encourages 
is  that 
unrestricted  growth  of  seedlings.  Nor  does  it 
need  to  be  extensive  as  most  seedlings  can 
be  intensively  grown  on  a  relatively  small 
area:  oaks  and  chestnuts  at  ten  to  twelve 
plants  per square foot;  magnolias  at 25  plants 

per  square  foot;  and  conifers  at  50  to  70 
plants  per  square  foot. 

live 

to 
fulfills  many  of  the 

The  root  system  of  many  trees  and  shrubs 
in  association  with  a 
functions 

is  modified 
fungus 
that 
of  the  root  in  exchange  for  food:  this  associ(cid:173)
ation  is  often  obligatory  on  the  plant  and  is 
necessary  from  an  early  stage  for  normal 
development. 
important  to 
ensure  the  presence  of  these  fungi 
in  the 
seedbed  at  germination,  and  leaf  mold  is  a 
good  source. 

therefore 

is 

It 

The  preparation  of  the  seedbed  should  be 
carried  out  in  winter  so  that  the  soil  can  be 
left  rough  and  allowed  to  weather.  In  order 
to 
improve  drainage,  soil  conditions,  seed 
covering  and  ease  of  seedling  maintenance, 
the  level  of  the  seedbed  should  be  raised 
above  the  surrounding  soil.  Set  up  boards 
8-9 in high round the proposed seedbed. Keep 
the  width  of  the  seedbed  relatively  narrow 
(say  3 ft)  so  that  seeds  can  be  sown  evenly 
across  it. At this width,  covering the seeds and 
general  maintenance  is  much  easier. 

Thoroughly  dig  the  seedbed  with  a  spade 
to  a  spit  deep, 
if 
possible,  leaf  mould.  If  the  soil  is  particularly 
heavy,  also  add  grit. 

incorporating  peat  and, 

In  spring,  knock  the  seedbed  down  to  a 
rough  tilth.  This  encourages  weed  seeds  to 
germinate.  These  can  then  be  sprayed  or 
hoed  off,  so  reducing  the  problem  of  weeds 
later  on. 

rake 

Prior 

to  sowing, 

in  a  phosphate 
fertilizer  at  the  rate  of  4 oz  to  the  square 
yard.  Ensure  the  seedbed  is  level  in  order  to 
facilitate sowing, and more especially seedbed 
watering.  It  also  makes  the  depth  of  seed 
cover  more  easy  to  assess. 

Ideal  sowing  conditions 
The  process  of  germination  in  tree  and  shrub 
seeds,  as  with  any  other  seeds,  should  be 
encouraged 
take  place  as  quickly  as 
possible  so  that  the  best  use  can  be  made  of 
the  available  food  reserves.  Thus,  tree  and 
shrub  seeds  should  be  sown  under  the  best 
possible  conditions  in  a well-drained,  aerated 

to 

seedbed  with  sufficient  supplies  of water  and 
a  warm  environment. 

Germination 

is  primarily  dependent  on 
water,  and  the  seed  must  swell  and  become 
completely  imbibed  before  biological  activity 
can  begin.  After  this  stage,  water  is  still  all-
important  as  it  forms  the  basis  of  all  living 
processes  causing germination.  The seedbed, 
however,  must  not  become  waterlogged.  Air, 
which  contains  oxygen, 
is  also  essential 
around  the  seed.  Energy  is  necessary  for 
growth,  and  it  is  produced  when  oxygen  is 
used  in  the  breakdown  of  the  carbohydrate 
reserves of the seed. Thus, if conditions reduce 
available  oxygen,  germination  is  retarded. 

The  other  major  factor  that  affects  ger(cid:173)

is  a 

function  of 

mination is temperature. All growth processes 
are  chemical  reactions  and  as  such  their 
rate 
the 
warmer the conditions, the faster the reaction. 
Thus 
is  directly 
affected  by  the  seedbed  temperature,  and  it 
is  best  to  sow  seeds  when  soil  temperatures 
are  warming  up  in  the  spring. 

rate  of  germination 

temperature: 

the 

for 

the  seeds 

Sowing  densities 
Before  sowing,  it  is  necessary  to  discover  the 
correct  sowing  density 
to 
germinate  and  establish  as  healthy  plants.  It 
is  as  useless  to  sow  too  thinly  and  so  waste 
space  as  it  is  to  sow  too  thickly  and  have 
very  small,  useless  seedlings  that  are  liable 
to  damp  off.  A  desirable  population  will 
depend  on  the  particular  plant  grown  and 
its  vigor. 

Once the desired  seedling density  has  been 
decided,  this  figure  is  modified  by two factors 
which  will 
then  determine  the  number  of 
seeds  to  be  sown.  The  first  is  the  viability  of 

that  will  affect 

the  seeds—that  is  the  number  of  seeds  that 
are alive and capable of producing new plants. 
Take  a  few  seeds  and,  if  possible,  cut  them 
open  to  see  what  percentage  are  viable.  The 
second  consideration 
the 
sowing  density  is  a  survival  factor.  As  it  is 
unlikely  that  all  the  live  seeds  will  germinate 
and  establish  as  seedlings,  an  estimate  must 
be  made  of  the  likely  losses,  which  may  be 
caused  by  poor  germination  conditions,  rots, 
pests  and  frost.  In  general,  the  larger  the 
seed  and 
the  shorter  the  period  between 
sowing  and  germination  the  greater  chance 
it  has  of  survival. 

Sowing  in  a seedbed 
Having arrived at a sowing rate and  preferably 
on  a  still  day,  sow the seeds  in  the fine tilth  of 
a  well-prepared  seedbed. 

Spot  sow  seeds  that  are  large  enough  to 
be  handled  individually,  spacing them  evenly. 
To  achieve  an  even  distribution  with  smaller 
seeds,  broadcast  sow  with  your  hand  held 
just  above  the  soil  level  so  that  bouncing  is 
minimized.  Once  the  seeds  are  sown,  firm 
them 
is 
intimate  contact  between  seeds  and  soil  and 
water  uptake  is  enhanced.  Then  cover  the 
seeds  with  grit,  a  shovelful  at  a  time.  Place 
the  shovel  as  low  over  the  seeds  as  possible. 

the  seedbed  so 

there 

into 

that 

reduces 

and  then  retract  it  quickly,  leaving the  grit  on 
the  seedbed.  This  method 
the 
possibility  of  the  seeds  bouncing.  The  grit, 
which should be about 1/2in deep, will provide 
a  well-drained  surface  that  will  allow  even 
percolation  of  water  through  to  the  soil  and 
absorb 
raindrops  without 
caking  and  splashing;  it  will  also  keep  the 
seeds well aerated and  make it easy to remove 
weeds. 

impact  of 

the 

Finally,  level  the  grit  with  the  back  of  a 
rake,  clearly  label  the  seedbed  and  water  in 
if  conditions  are  dry. 
This  seedbed  with 

its  grit  covering  will 
maintain  the  seeds  for  an  extensive  period 
despite  exposure 
to  all  sorts  of  weather 
conditions. 

Protecting  the  seedlings 
When  seeds  germinate  they  will  be  exposed 
to  a  number  of  deleterious  influences  which 
may  reduce  growth  or  even  cause  death.  The 
chief  of these  ill-effects  is  wind,  which  causes 
stress 
reducing  growth  con(cid:173)
siderably.  Watering will  not  necessarily  allevi(cid:173)
ate  the  situation  as  the  seedlings  may  not  be 
able  to  take  up  water  quickly  enough 
to 
compensate  for  water  lost.  Therefore,  shelter 
the  seeds  from  wind  by  putting  some  50 
percent  permeable  mesh  round  the  seedbed. 

in  seedlings, 

As  soon  as 

the  seedlings  emerge  and 
produce  green  leaves,  they  will  need  feeding 
with  nitrogen  and  potash  to  supplement  the 
phosphate  already  in  the  seedbed.  Although 
these  nutrients  can  be  supplied  by 
top-
dressing  with  a  granular  fertilizer,  it  is  better 
regularly  to  use  a  proprietary  brand  of  liquid 
fertilizer  at  the  recommended  rate,  applying 
a  small  amount  frequently. 

free  and  shrub  seedlings  are  extremely 
susceptible  to  damage  from  frost.  In  their 
natural  habitat  they  would  be  protected  by 
the  woodland  or  scrub  canopy,  but  in  the 
seedbed  they  are  completely  exposed.  Until 
the  danger  of  frost  damage  is  passed,  there(cid:173)
fore, 
they  must  be  protected  either  by 
stretching  netting with  very small  holes above 
the  seedlings  on  a semipermanent  basis  or  by 
spreading  newspaper  on  top  of  the  seedlings 
on  those  nights  when  frost  is  anticipated. 

In  addition,  it  is  vital  to  control  pests  and 
diseases  such  as  greenfly,  damping-off  fungi 
and  various  mildews  by  spraying  regularly 
with  fungicides  and  pesticides. 

If  the  seedbed  has  been  prepared  ade(cid:173)
quately then  few  weeds  should  be  present  in 
the  bed.  Windblown  weed  seeds,  however, 
will  appear  and  germinate  in  the  grit.  Pull 
these  out  while  they  are  still  small  and  their 
roots  are  in  the  grit  rather  than  the  soil. 

and  spring,  these  roots  will,  if  the  plant  is 
capable,  develop  suckers.  These  suckers,  if 
left  to  establish,  can  then  be  lifted  and  re(cid:173)
planted  at  the  end  of  the  growing  season. 
Plants  that  are  sometimes  propagated  this 
way 
(the  sumacs),  Robinia, 

include  Rhus 

Ailanthus,  Rubus  and  Chaenomeles.  However, 
most  plants  that  regenerate  in  this  way  are 
also fairly easily propagated from root cuttings 
and,  as the latter method  makes  better use of 
space,  the  former  technique  is  not  widely 
employed. 

NATURAL  SUCKERING 

Natural  suckering  occurs  in  some  plants 
such  as  lilacs and  cherries. The  plants send 
up  isolated  shoots  that  develop  their  own 
root  system. 

the  roots  of  a  sucker 

Toward  the  end  of  the  growing  season, 
the 
to  establish. 
lift  the  sucker  and 

sever 
parent  plant  and 
After  a  few  weeks, 
transplant. 

leave 

from 

it 

If  a  grafted  plant  such  as  a  rose  sends 
up  a  sucker, 
it  should  be  completely 
removed  immediately.  If  this  is  not  done, 
the  grafted  plant  will  be  weakened  as  the 
sucker  is  from  the  rootstock  and  not from. 
the  cultivated  variety. 

The  propagation  of  plants  from  roots  is  a 
simple  and  rapid  process  that  has  on  the 
whole  been  neglected. 

As  long  ago  as  1662,  John  Evelyn  wrote  in 
his  famous  book  Silva  of  the  possibility,  when 
a  tree  was  dug  up,  of  leaving  some  of  its 
roots  in  situ  to  develop  as  new  trees.  By  1731 
Philip  Miller, 
in  The  Gardener's  Dictionary, 
was  describing  the  propagation  of  certain 
trees  from  root  cuttings  as  an  established 
practice  amongst  gardeners. 

Since  then,  although  it  has  been  demon(cid:173)

in 

the 

strated  that  it  is  possible  to  propagate  in  this 
way, 
technique  has  never  become 
the  case  of  a  small 
standard,  except 
number  of  mainly  herbaceous  plants. 
It 
appears to  have  been  ignored  largely  because 
of the  aura  of  uncertainty  associated  with  the 
success  of  this  technique.  Such  a  technique, 
however,  should  be  popular  because  large 
quantities  of  plants  can  be  produced  from  a 
very  small  amount  of  propagating  material. 
Therefore, 
is  necessary  to  sort  out  the 
relevant  features 
this  kind  of 
regeneration  and  determine  a  system  that 
eliminates 
the 
uncertainty. 

the  greater  proportion  of 

involved 

it 

in 

those 

Initially,  it  is  important to  divide  plants  into 
two  categories: 
that  will  propagate 
from  roots;  and  those  (apparently)  that  will 
not.  A  plant  that  can  produce  adventitious 
shoot  buds  on  its  roots  should  be  suitable 
for  propagation  from  root  cuttings,  although 
ultimately this  is  not  necessarily  an  indication 
of  its  ability  to  regenerate  a  completely  new 
plant. 

When  the  various  plants  capable  of  pro(cid:173)

ducing  adventitious  buds  on  their  roots  are 
categorized,  it will  be seen that the  responses 
vary: some  plants produce buds on their roots 
as  a  natural  growth  process,  whereas  others 
require  some  other  agency  to  stimulate  bud 
initiation.  Some  of  them  have  buds 
that 
elongate  and  develop  as  shoots;  others  do 
not  grow  in  this  way. 
three 

relevant  methods  of 
propagating  from  roots:  natural  suckering 
and  division;  suckers  from  undisturbed,  but 
isolated,  roots;  and  root  cuttings. 

There  are 

When  a  plant  is 

inevitably  some 
roots  are  severed  and  remain  undisturbed  in 
the  soil.  During  the  subsequent  late  winter 

lifted, 

When  to  take  root  cuttings 
When  propagating  plants  from  root  cuttings 
to  understand  how  seasonality 
it 
affects 
to 
produce  stem  buds. 

the  capacity  of 

root  cuttings 

is  vital 

The  subject  of  " o n"  and  "off"  seasons 
appears  to  have  been  virtually  unconsidered 
until 
the  mid-twentieth  century.  However, 
recent  research  has  established  that  fluctu(cid:173)
ations  in  the  ability  of  roots  to  produce  stem 
to 
is  pointless 
buds  do  exist  and 
propagate  while 
response 
is 
inhibited  by  adverse  seasonal  influences. 

the  plant's 

that 

it 

It  is  this  fluctuation 

in  the  capacity  to 
propagate  that  has  probably  produced  the 
uncertainty  which  has  led  to  the  propagation 
of  plants  from  root  cuttings  being  virtually 
ignored  by  nearly  all  gardeners. 

It 

is 

therefore  necessary 

to  determine 
whether  the  plant  from  which  root  cuttings 
are  required  does  have  different  seasonal 
responses,  and,  if  so,  what  is  the  best  time 
to  take  cuttings. 

Without  prior  guidance, 

in(cid:173)
clination  for  the  gardener  would  be  to  take 
such  cuttings 
in  the  growing  season,  but 

the  natural 

experience  has  shown  that  this  has  met  with 
little  success;  although 
results  sometimes 
improved  if  cuttings  were  taken  very  early  or 
very  late  in  the  season. 

A 

few  plants  can  produce  new  plants 
equally  well  at  any time  of the year,  but these 
are  relatively  uncommon.  Perhaps  the  best 
example  is  the  horseradish,  which  can  make 
itself  into  a  pernicious  weed  by  virtue  of  this 
characteristic:  when  the  roots  are  broken, 
it  is  capable  of  establishing  itself  as  a  new 
plant  from  each  root  piece. 

Virtually  all  other  plants  demonstrate  a 
seasonal  response.  Early  observations  sug(cid:173)
gested  that  plants  propagated  most  success(cid:173)
fully  during  the  winter,  but  experience  has 
shown  that,  although  this  is  typically  true  for 
woody  plants,  the  real  feature  is  not 
the 
winter  but  the  dormant  season.  Many  her(cid:173)
baceous  plants  and  more  especially  alpine 
plants  are  not  necessarily  dormant  during 
the  winter.  Some  alpines,  for  example  the 
Pasque flower {Pulsatilla vulgaris),  start growing 
in  the  new year  and  if  root  cuttings  are  made 
after 
respond; 
success  is only achieved  during their dormant 

they  do  not 

this  period 

season,  which 
early  autumn. 

is  in  the  late  summer  and 

to  succeed 

Although  propagation  from  root  cuttings 
likely 
throughout  a  plant's 
is 
dormant  season,  it  is  best to  keep  to the  mid-
part  of  that  season,  as  a  maximum  response 
may  not  exist  while  the  dormancy 
is  still 
developing  or  once  it  is  phasing  out. 

Preparing  the  plant 
Before  propagating  from  root  cuttings,  it  is 
preferable  to  prepare  the  parent  plant  itself 
so  that  it  will  develop  roots  that  will  have  a 
high  capacity  to  regenerate  stem  buds  and 
so  produce  new  plants. 

This  ability  to  produce  adventitious  stem 
buds  on  a  severed  root  is  already  present 
in  most  plants,  but  it  can  be  enhanced.  Lift 
a  healthy  plant  prior  to  the  growing  season 
and  shorten  any  top  growth.  Reduce  its  root 
system  by  cutting  off  the  roots  close  to  the 
crown  of the  plant,  using  a  knife.  Then  return 
the  plant  to  the  ground.  The  pruning  upsets 
the  natural  root/shoot  balance  of  the  plant, 
and  it  will  grow  quickly  during  the  following 
season  to  bring  the  plant  back  to  its  normal 

equilibrium  between  root  and  shoot.  As  a 
result  of  this  treatment  the  vigorous,  quickly 
grown  roots  will  exhibit  a  very  high  level  of 
ability  to  develop  stem  buds. 

The  roots  will  have  developed  fastest  at 
the  beginning  of  the  season,  and  the  rate 
will  gradually  have  declined  as  the  season 
progressed  until,  as 
the  dormant  season 
approached,  growth  will  have  ceased  alto(cid:173)
gether.  At  the  point  where  any  root  started 
its  growth  in  the  spring,  and  where  it  grew 
fastest,  will  also  be  where  it  has  the  greatest 
capacity  to  produce  buds;  in  other  words, 
there  is  a  direct  correlation  between  the  rate 
at  which  a  root  grows  and 
its  ability  to 
produce  stem  buds.  If,  therefore,  plenty  of 
root  material  is  available,  it  is  best  to  take  a 
root  cutting  only  from  the  top  of  the  root 
where  it  began  its  development  in  the  early 
spring. 

In  order  to  obtain  cutting  material,  lift  the 
parent  plant  and  shorten  any  top  growth. 
Wash  it free of soil  either in  a bucket of water, 
or  by  hosing  it  down.  It  is  then  possible  to 
distinguish the young roots which  are suitable 
for  propagation.  Cut these  close to  the  crown 

of  the  plant,  at  right  angles 
Return  the  parent  plant  to  the  garden. 

to 

the  root. 

Discard  the  thin  root  end  by  slicing  with 
a sloping  cut.  Slice  off any fibrous  lateral  roots 
on  the  cutting  to  ease  handling  and  planting 
later  on. 

The  removal  of  roots  from  the  parent  plant 
for  propagation  will  have  had  the  additional 
effect  of  root  pruning  and  so  will  cause  the 
development  of  further  roots  for  propagation 
in  the  ensuing  propagating  season. 

Size  of  a  root  cutting 
The  size  of  a  root  cutting  may  not  be  critical 
if  only  one  cutting  is  made  from  each  root, 
but,  with  roots  that  regenerate  readily  and 
from  which  it  is  possible  to  make  more  than 
one  cutting, 
the  optimum  size  of  a  root 
cutting  becomes  very  important.  It  is  there(cid:173)
fore  necessary  to  determine  the  minimum 
size  for  a  root  cutting  so  that  maximum  use 
can  be  made  of  the  available  root. 

factors.  First, 

The  size  of  the  root  cutting  depends  on 
requires 
two 
sufficient  food  to  initiate  and  develop  a  stem 
bud  to  the  stage  at  which  it  produces  green 

the  cutting 

leaves  and  can  begin 
itself. 
Second,  the  cutting  requires  sufficient  food 
reserves  to  support  itself  while  this  regener(cid:173)
ative  process  is  going  on. 

to  support 

The  size  of  the  cutting,  therefore,  is  made 

the  quicker 

the  environment 

up  of  the  regenerative  portion  and  the  sur(cid:173)
vival  portion.  The  size  of  the  survival  portion 
depends  on  how  long  the  cutting  will  take  to 
regenerate,  and this  is reliant on the tempera(cid:173)
ture  in  which  the  cutting  is  propagated:  the 
warmer 
the 
stem  will  develop.  A  root  cutting  taken  and 
planted 
the 
winter  may  not  produce  a  shoot  until  May, 
but  if  it  had  been  placed  in  a  propagator  in  a 
temperature  of  18°-24°C/65°-75°F,  it  might 
well  have  regenerated  in  about  four  weeks. 
The  amount  of  food  reserve  required 
for 
temperature 
survival  between 
environments  is  dramatically  different. 

the  open  ground  during 

these 

in 

two 

The size of the regenerative portion  needed, 
however,  will  remain  constant  whatever  the 
temperature  of the  propagating environment, 
so  a  rule  of  thumb  measurement  for  the  size 
of  a  root  cutting  is  based  on  the  variable 
factor—temperature. 

As  a  plant's  roots  will  have  been  pruned 
a  year  before  the  cuttings  are 
taken,  all 
roots  will  show  one  year's  growth  and 
therefore  be  approximately  the  same  thick(cid:173)
ness.  Thus  the  cutting  length  is  unaffected. 

An  open-ground  cutting  should  be  at  least 
4 in  long  as  it  will  need  to  survive  for  some 
16  weeks.  A  cold 
frame/cold  greenhouse 
provides a warmer environment,  and  regener(cid:173)
ation  will  occur  in  about eight weeks and  so a 
smaller  survival  portion  is  required  and  the 
cuttings  need  only  be  just  over  2 in  long.  In 
a  warm  (18°-24°C/65°-75°F)  greenhouse  or 
propagator,  regeneration  time  is  reduced  to 
four  weeks,  halving  the  survival 
time  and 
the  required  food  reserve  once  again  so  that 
in  this  environment  root  cuttings  need  only 
be  about 1 in  long. 

Recognizing the top  of  a  root cutting 
When  propagating  plants  from  root  cuttings 
it  is  very  important  to  notice  the  "polarity" 
of the cutting—that  it  has a top  and  a  bottom 
and  therefore  a  "right  way  up."  Most  people 
suggest  that  root  cuttings  should  be  planted 
horizontally  because  the  cuttings  have  been 

made  in  such  a  way  that  the  top  and  bottom 
cannot  be  recognized,  and  there  is  no  other 
way  in  which  polarity  can  be  recognized 
because  roots  have  no  leaves  and  axillary 
buds.  However,  stem  cuttings are  not planted 
on  their  side,  so  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect 
root  cuttings 
in  what 
direction 
roots  subsequently  grow. 
Cuttings  planted  vertically  and  the  correct 
way  up  will  usually  develop  to  a  maximum 
level  provided  that  the  cuttings  were  taken 
from  a  healthy  plant  and  they  were  given 
suitable  conditions  (see  page  40).  Cuttings 
planted  on  their  side  rarely  achieve  more 
than  a  40  percent  success  rate. 

to  be,  no  matter 

their 

In  order  to  recognize  the  top  of  a  root 
(that  is,  the  end  nearest  the  crown  of  the 
plant)  so  it  can  be  planted  the  right  way  up, 
make  a  flat  cut  at  right  angles  to  the  root 
where  it  was  severed  from  its  parent;  at  the 
bottom  end  cut  away  the  thin  portion  using 
a  sloping  cut.  Always  cut  roots  in  this  way 
so,  whatever  subsequently  happens  to  the 
root  cutting,  it  will  be  possible  to  recognize 
its  correct  polarity  and  so  ensure  that  it  is 
planted  the  right  way  up. 

treatment  the  cutting  may  need 

Treatment 
After  all  the  initial  aspects  have  been  con(cid:173)
sidered  and  the  root  cutting  has  been  made, 
the  next  step  is  to  consider  the  question  of 
what 
in 
order  to  enhance  its  chances  of  producing 
a  stem  bud  and  then  surviving  until  the  bud 
develops  and  establishes  as  a  new  plant.  At 
present  there  are  no  growth-promoting  sub(cid:173)
stances  available  for  root  cuttings,  so  that  it 
is  not  possible  to  enhance  bud  production 
in  this  way.  The  special  powders  produced 
for  inducing  roots  on  stems  should  not  be 
used  on  root  cuttings  as  they  will  actually 
depress  bud  production. 

The  best  way  to  protect  a  root  cutting  is 
to  treat  it  with  a  thin  powder film  of fungicide 
such  as  Captan.  The  root  cutting,  when 
planted,  will  be  more  or 
less  completely 
surrounded  by  soil  or  compost  and  as  such 
could  easily  become  waterlogged  and  so 
subject  to  all  sorts  of fungal  rots.  The  survival 
of  the  cutting  will  very  much  depend  on 
protecting  it  against  this  possibility. 

Place  the  cuttings  in  a  polyethylene  bag, 
add  some fungicidal  powder,  using about one 
teaspoonful  of  Captan 
for  every  100  1 in 

cuttings.  "Balloon"  the  bag  by  twisting  the 
top  and  then  shake  it  vigorously.  Once  the 
cuttings  are  coated  with  a  powder  film,  they 
are  ready  for  planting. 

It  will  be  apparent  why  it  is  important  to 
be  able  to  recognize  the  top  and  bottom  of 
the  cuttings  after  such  processing. 

support 

them,  prevent 

Planting 
Root cuttings  need to  be  planted  in a  medium 
that  will 
them 
drying  out,  allow  adequate  aeration  and, 
when 
regeneration  starts,  provide  basic 
nutrients.  All  these  features  can  be  found 
in  the  ground  outdoors  and  the  root  cuttings 
will  do  well  there  provided  that  the  soil  is 
reasonably  light  or  they  are  placed  under  a 
cold  frame  in  soil  to which  peat and  grit  have 
been  added.  However,  except  perhaps  for  a 
few  very  vigorous  herbaceous  perennials,  it 
is  more  convenient  to  plant  root  cuttings  in  a 
container  and  then  plant  them  out  just  as 
soon  as  they  are  established. 

Select  a  container  of  suitable  size  for  the 
number  of  root  cuttings  to  be  propagated, 
allowing 1-11/2 in for each cutting. For example, 
plant  seven  cuttings  in  a  31/2  in  pot.  Fill  the 

container  with  a  peat-based  compost  con(cid:173)
taining  loam,  which  will  act  as  a  buffer  to 
prevent  excessive  drying  and  will  maintain 
an  even 
level  of  nutrients.  Strike  off  the 
compost  with  a  presser  board  so  that  it  is 
level  with  the  rim.  Then  press  the  soil  down 
to  at  least f in  below  the  rim  of the  container. 
Make  a  hole  in  the  compost  with  a  dibble 
and  then  plant  the  root  cutting.  Place  the 
top  of  the  cutting  just  level  with  the  top  of 
the  compost.  Firm  back  the  compost  around 
the  cutting.  Space  the  remaining  root  cut(cid:173)
tings  evenly  round  the  container. 

into 

Cover  the  cuttings  with  grit.  Strike  off  with 
a  presser  board  until  the  grit  is  level  with  the 
rim  of  the  container.  This  weight  of  grit  tends 
to  compress  the  compost  slightly  so  causing 
the  tops  of  the  cuttings  to  be  pushed  farther 
up 
the  grit.  This  will  provide  almost 
perfect  aeration  for  the  bud  that  will  develop 
at  the  top  of  the  root  cutting.  Do  not  water. 
Label the container and stand it in an environ(cid:173)
ment  (propagator,  cold  frame,  etc.)  that  is 
appropriate  to  the  size  of  the  root  cutting 
(see  page  39). 

Some  plants,  for  example  Romneya  coulteri, 
do  not  like  being  dug  up  and  having  their 

roots  disturbed.  Therefore,  place  only  one  or 
two  of  their  root  cuttings  in  a  small  pot  and 
treat  as  one  plant,  disturbing  their  roots  as 
little  as  possible  when  transplanting  them 
once  they  are  established. 

Aftercare 
Keep  watering  to  a  minimum  to  maintain  a 
well-aerated  compost,  which  encourages  bud 
development  and  reduces  the  likelihood  of 
rotting.  In  fact  there  is  probably  no  need 
to  water  at  all 
if  the  root  cuttings  were 
initially  planted  in  a  reasonably  moist  com(cid:173)
post and a humid  environment  is  maintained. 
Very  often  when  the  bud  first  develops, 
it  produces  a  stem  and  green  leaves  but  no 
root system.  This will  grow later from the base 
of  the  new  stem.  Even  if  the  new  roots  do 
develop  from  the  cutting,  they  too  will  not 
appear  until  after  the  stem  and  green  leaves 
have  grown.  Do  not  water  until  the  roots 
appear  as  the  cutting  is  still  liable  to  rot. 

Place in a well-lit area once the stem appears. 
Harden  off  any  young  plants  propagated  in  a 
warm (2TC/70°F) environment before planting 
out  or  potting  up.  Apply  a  liquid  fertilizer, 
according  to  the  manufacturer's  instructions. 

Some  herbaceous  perennial  plants  die  back 
to a crown  of buds each  dormant  season,  and 
their  roots  are  modified  to  store  food.  These 
specialized  swollen  roots  are  described  as 
tuberous  roots.  They  can  be  distinguished 
from  modified  stems  by  their  structure  and 
from  root  cuttings  by  their  inability  to  pro(cid:173)
duce  adventitious  buds  on  isolated  roots  and 
so  grow  a  new  plant. 

There  are 

two  basic  kinds  of  tuberous 
roots:  those  that  develop  annually,  such  as 
on  dahlias,  and  those  that  are  perennial  and 
simply  increase  in  size,  such  as  on  begonias. 
Annual  tuberous  roots  develop  from  lateral 
roots  at  the  crown  of  the  plant.  During  the 
growing  season,  certain  of  these  develop  as 
food  stores,  swelling  up  and  producing  a 
cluster  of  such  roots.  Each  year  the  new 
shoot  system  develops  at  the  expense  of the 
food  store 
roots,  which 
eventually  die  and  disintegrate. 

in 

the 

tuberous 

Perennial  tuberous  roots  are  much  simpler 
in  their  development.  Usually  the  emerging 
radicle  of  the  seedling  begins  to  modify  as 
a  food  storage  organ,  and  this  increases  in 
size  as  and  when  food  is  available. 

The  division  of  tuberous  roots  is  not  a 
widely  used  technique  as  many  plants  with 
tuberous 
roots  can  be  propagated  more 
satisfactorily  by  stem, 
leaf  bud 
cuttings.  Success  depends  on  how  well  the 
roots  are  stored.  Lift  the  plant  at  the  end  of 
the  growing  season.  Clean  the  crowns  and 
dust  with  a  fungicide.  Wrap  each  plant  in 
thick  newspaper  and  place 
in  a  frost-free 
environment,  below  5°C/42°F. 

leaf  and 

roots 

Just  before  the  growing  season,  divide  the 
tuberous 
into  portions,  each  with 
at  least  one  crown  bud,  from  which  the  new 
stem  will  develop.  Protect  all  cut  surfaces 
from 
rotting  by  dusting  with  a  powder 
fungicide  such  as  Thiram  or  Captan.  Then 
place  the divisions  in  a warm  (21C/70"F),  dry, 
airy  area  for  a  couple  of  days  so  that  the  cut 
surfaces  seal  themselves  quickly  by  develop(cid:173)
ing  a  corky  layer  of  tissue,  to  give  added 
protection.  Pot  up 
in  John 
Innes  No.  1  compost  if  they  are  to  be  trans(cid:173)
planted  within  a  month  or  so;  otherwise 
plant them  in John  Innes No. 2 compost.  Label 
them;  do  not  water.  Place  in  a  frost-free 
area.  Set  in  the  light  once  a  shoot  appears. 

the  divisions 

A  modified  stem  is  an  organ  that  stores food, 
which  the  plant  can  then  use  to  survive  its 
dormancy  period.  Also,  it  is  often  the  means 
by which a plant can spread and  produce new 
plants. 

To  be  classed  among  this  group  a  modified 
stem  must  exhibit  all  the  characteristics  of 
a  stem.  It  must  have  a  stem  structure:  that 
is  it  will  have  an  apical  growing  point;  the 
stem 
in 
their  axils;  and  the  arrangement  of the  leaves 
will  be spiral, alternate or opposite each other. 

leaves  with  buds 

itself  will  carry 

A  corm  is  the  swollen  base  of  a  solid  stem 
which  is  surrounded  by  scale  leaves.  These 
are  attached  to  the  stem  at  distinct  nodes 
which  have  a  bud  in  each  axil.  At  the  apex 
of  the  corm  is  a  bud  that  will  develop  into 
the  leaves  and  the  flowering  shoot. 

An  offset  is  a  lateral  shoot  that  develops 
from  a  leaf  axil  at  the  crown  of  a  plant.  This 
lateral  shoot  usually  has  only  one  bud,  which 
develops  into  a  plantlet  with  its  own  root  and 
growing  point. 

The  stem  is  modified  from  the  normal  in 
that  it  may  not  necessarily  be  above  ground, 
it  often  grows  more  or  less  horizontally,  and 
it  usually  acts  as  a  food  storage  organ. 

There  are  basically  only  six  kinds  of 
modified  stem,  all  with  distinct  habits  and 
growth  patterns.  These  are  tubers,  rhizomes, 
corms, bulbs, offsets and runners. They should 
not  be  confused  with  modified  root  systems, 
which  do  not  possess  all  the  features  asso(cid:173)
ciated  with  a  stem. 

A  tuber,  for  example,  has  "eyes,"  which 
have  a  cluster  of  buds  and  a  leaf  scar.  These 
are  the  nodes  of  a  typical  stem.  They  are 
arranged  in  a  spiral,  alternately  or  opposite 
each  other  beginning  from  the  apical  bud 
on  the  end  opposite the  scar where  the tuber 
was  attached  to  the  parent  plant. 

A  bulb,  on  the  other  hand,  has  a  short, 
fleshy,  usually  vertical  stem  which,  at 
its 
apex,  has  a  growing  point  enclosed  by  thick, 
fleshy  scale  leaves.  New  bulbs  develop 
in 
the  axil  of  these  scale  leaves.  The  flower  bud 
and  foliage  leaves  grow  up  from  the  center 
of the  bulb. 

A  runner  also  develops  from  the  leaf  axil 
at  the  crown  of  a  plant.  It  grows  horizontally 
and, at several of its nodes, forms new plantlets 
from  the  lateral  buds.  These  new  plants  will 
develop  a  flowering  point  and  also  send  out 
their  own  runners  once they  have  established 
themselves. 

A  rhizome  is  a  specialized  stem  that  grows 
horizontally  just  below  the  ground  or  on  the 
surface.  The  stem  appears  segmented  as  it  is 
the 
composed  of  nodes  and 
leaves  and 
from 
apical  or  lateral  buds  on  the  stem.  Roots  and 
a  lateral  shoot  also  grow  from  these  points. 

flower  bud  developing 

internodes, 

Frequently,  modified  stems  are  referred  to 
as  stolons,  but  this  term  has  purposely  been 
avoided  in  this  book  as  it  has  a  multiplicity 
of  meanings. 

The  name  "tuber"  in  horticultural  terms  has 
been  much  misused  and  has  on  occasions 
covered  almost  any  swollen 
food  storage 
organ  that  is  chiefly  underground. 

is  of 

A  tuber  is,  in  fact,  a  swollen  underground 
stem,  modified  as  a  food  storage  organ.  It 
often 
terminating) 
growth and  is normally annual. The leaves are 
scaly  and  membranous,  and  the  axillary  buds 
provide  the  following  year's  shoots. 

roundish 

(usually 

these 

Within 

limitations 

the  number  of 
plants  producing 
is  not  very 
great.  The  commonest  is  the  potato.  Those 
plants,  such  as  Jerusalem  artichokes,  that 
produce opposite rather than spirally arranged 
buds,  such  as  potatoes,  often  have  a  knobby 
[Nymphaea  sp.) 
shape.  Some  water 
produce  small 
that 
develop  from  the  main  rootstock  toward  the 
end  of  the  growing  season. 

tuberlike  structures 

true 

tubers 

lilies 

Although  potatoes  are  prolific  producers 
of  tubers,  this  is  unusual.  Normally,  plants 
that  develop  tubers  do  so  only  in  very  small 
numbers. 

Any  increase  in  numbers  must  be  achieved 
artificially.  As  the  tuber  is  normally  an  organ 
that  allows  a  plant  to  survive  its  dormant 
period,  the  season  to  propagate  tubers  by 
artificial  division  should  be  just  before  growth 
,  would  commence  in  the  spring. 

Cut  the  tuber  with  a  sharp  knife  so  that 
each  piece  has  at  least  one  good  dominant 
bud  or  "eye."  Then  dust  all  the  cut  surfaces 
with  a  fungicide  such  as  Captan  to  reduce 
the  possibility  of  fungal  infection.  Stand  the 
pieces  on  a  wire  tray  and  keep  in  a  warm 
(21°C/70°F),  dry  environment,  for  example  an 
airing  cabinet, 
for  a  couple  of  days.  A 
protective  corky  layer,  which  enhances  their 
survival,  will 
tuber 
"seeds"  should  not  be  kept  in  the  dry  for  any 
longer  than  necessary,  otherwise  the  tuber 
itself  will  desiccate. 

then  develop.  These 

Therefore  plant  them  out  immediately  in 
then 

a  hole  twice 
quickly  produce  roots  and  shoots  and  estab(cid:173)
lish  as  a  new  plant.  Label  them  clearly  at  all 
stages  of  propagation. 

their  depth.  They  will 

A  potato tuber is  marked  by a scar at one 
end,  where  it was  attached  to the  parent 
plant,  and  by  "eyes,"  or  nodes,  placed 
spirally  over  its  surface. 

A  rhizome  is  a  stem  that  grows  laterally  at 
or  above  the  soil  surface,  although  in  some 
plants  it  is  underground.  Normally,  a  rhizome 
stores  food,  but  the  degree  to  which  it  does 
this  varies  from  species  to  species. 

A  rhizome  is  a  perennial,  and  it  is  propa(cid:173)
gated  artificially  by  division  at  an  opportune 
season  of  the  year: 
in  most  cases  this  is 
after  flowering,  when  the  rhizome  is  about 
to  extend  and  produce  new  roots. 

It  has  two  ways  of growing.  In  one,  typified 
by the  German  or bearded  iris, a terminal  bud 
develops  and  flowers;  the  plant  sends  out 
extension  growth  through  a  lateral  bud.  The 
following  season,  this  extension  growth  de(cid:173)
velops  its  own  terminal  bud,  which  flowers, 
and  the  plant  continues  to  extend  through 
its  lateral  buds.  In  the  other  way  of  growing, 
typified  by mint and couch grass,  its extension 
growth  develops  continuously 
the 
terminal  bud  and  occasionally  from  a  lateral 
bud,  which  usually  produces  flower  spikes. 

from 

In  habit,  rhizomes  may  also  vary:  " c r o w n" 
rhizomes,  such  as  asparagus,  have  virtually 
no  extension  growth  annually  and  develop  as 
a  spreading  crown,  whereas  other  kinds  of 
rhizomes,  such  as  mint,  couch  grass  and 

crabgrass,  make 
growth  and  spread  over 
ground  in  a  relatively  short  time. 

rapid  and 

continuous 
large  areas  of 

is 

Perhaps  the  most  prolific  of  garden  plants 
to  be  propagated  using  rhizomes  are  bearded 
irises.  The  best  time  to  divide  their  rhizomes 
immediately 
and  establish  new  plants 
after  flowering,  when 
the  old  root  system 
dies  down  and  a  new  root  system  begins  to 
develop.  Lift  the  clump  of  rhizomes  with  a 
fork  and  knock  off  as  much  soil  as  possible. 
Cut  away  and  discard  any  old  rhizomes,  just 
leaving the current season's flushes of growth. 
Cut  back  their  roots  to  2-3 in,  and  shorten 
the  leaf  blades  to  reduce  water  loss  before 
the  new  root  systems  develop.  The  prepared 
rhizomes  are  now  ready  for  planting. 

As  a  general  rule,  a  rhizome  should  be 

replanted  at  the  same  depth  as  it  was  grow(cid:173)
ing; for  irises this  is  more  or less  in  the surface 
soil.  Usually,  a  rhizome  has  two  rows  of 
roots  longitudinally  on  each  side  underneath. 
Therefore,  when 
two 
linear  shallow  trenches  and  place  the  roots 
in  these.  Firm  back  the  soil  over  these  roots 
and  label  the  rhizome  clearly.  If  necessary, 
settle  in  by  watering. 

replanting,  dig  out 

CROWN  RHIZOMES 
Less  easy  to  propagate  are  the  " c r o w n" 
rhizomes,  such  as  peony  and  asparagus, 
which  have  what  is  traditionally  referred 
to  as  herbaceous  perennial 
rootstock. 
Fairly  massive  cuts  are  needed  to  divide 
such 
into  suitable  pieces  for 
propagation:  each  piece  requiring  at  least 
one  well-developed  bud. 

rootstock 

Divide  crown  rhizomes  in  late  winter 
before  the  buds  enlarge  and  before  the 
to 
new  season's 
develop.  Make  a 
large 

root  system  begins 

relatively 

few 

in  pots  filled  with  John 

divisions,  unless  quick  bulking-up 
is 
essential,  when  it  is  better  to  plant  small 
divisions 
Innes 
No.  1  compost  or  similar  (see  page  12)  in 
order  to  give  them  good  conditions  in 
which  to  become  established.  Dust  the 
cut  surfaces  thoroughly  with  a  fungicide 
to  prevent  bacterial  and 
rots. 
Leave  them  in  a  warm  (21°C/70°F),  dry 
atmosphere  for  the  surface  to  dry  out  and 
develop  the  beginnings  of  a  protective 
corky  layer.  Then  plant  out  the  divisions. 
Label  them  clearly. 

fungal 

Corms  look  very  similar  to  bulbs  and  are 
often  confused  with  them.  However,  struc(cid:173)
turally they  are very  different. A  corm  consists 
of  a  stem  that  is  swollen  as  a  food  store  and 
that  is  shorter  and  broader  than  a  bulb.  The 
leaves  of  the  stem  are  modified  as  thin,  dry 
membranes 
the  corm  and 
protect  it  against  injury  and  drying.  Each  leaf 
has  a  bud  in  its  axil,  the  top  of  the  stem 
usually  develops  as  a flowering stem,  and  the 
roots  are  produced  from  the  corm's  base, 
which  is  often  concave.  In  some  kinds  of 
corm,  several  buds at the top  of the stem  may 
grow  out  and  flower. 

that  enclose 

Each  year a  new  corm  develops  around  the 
base  of  each  stem.  Increase,  therefore,  is 

to 

related 

directly 
the  number  of  stems 
produced  by  a  corm.  Normally,  most  plants 
developing  corms  will  propagate  naturally 
to  give  a  sufficient  increase,  but  should  it  be 
necessary  to  bulk  up  supplies  more  quickly 
then  an  artificial  technique  should  be  used. 
Always  buy corms from a  reputable special(cid:173)

ized  grower,  because  it  is  vital  to  propagate 
from  disease-free  corms. 

Cut  a 

large,  healthy  corm 

into  several 
pieces  just  prior  to  the  season  for  planting 
and  ensure  each  piece  has  at  least  one  bud. 
Dust the cut surfaces with a fungicidal  powder 
such  as  Captan  or Thiram,  in  order to  reduce 
the  risk  of  rotting.  Set  the  pieces  on  a  wire 
cake-tray  and  place  in  a  warm,  dry  environ(cid:173)
ment,  such  as  an  airing  cabinet,  for 48  hours. 
This  will  cause  the  cut  surfaces  to  seal.  Then 
plant  singly  in  a  pot  or  in  the  ground,  and 
label  clearly. 

If  the  corm  is  too  small  to  cut  up  satis(cid:173)

the 

then 

factorily, 
lateral  buds  can  be 
induced  to  develop  more  readily  by  removing 
the  main  stem  either  by  snapping  it  off  or 
digging  it  out  with  a  knife.  Then  dust  the  cut 
surface  with  fungicidal  powder  and  plant  out 
the  corm  in  the  ground.  During  the  growing 
season  it  will  produce  several  shoots,  which 
will  eventually  become  new  plants. 

that  are 
Cormels  are  miniature  corms 
produced  as  offsets  between 
the  new 
corm  and  the  old  disintegrating  corm.  The 
quantity  produced  is  very  much  a varietal 
feature—gladiolus  developing  up  to  about 
50  cormels. 

them  below  5°C/41°F 

The  level  of  cormel  production  will  be 
influenced  by the  depth  at which  the  main 
corm  is  planted;  the  deeper  the  corm  is 
in the ground, the more cormels produced. 
Collect  the  cormels  when  the  corm  is 
lifted  from  the  ground  before  winter  and 
store 
in  a  dry, 
frost-free  environment  with  air  circulating 
round 
that 
become  dry  in  tepid  water  for  24  hours 
before  planting 
following  season. 
Plant  them  outdoors  close  together  and 
label.  They  will  normally  take  two  years  to 
reach  flowering  size. 

them.  Soak  any  cormels 

the 

Bulbils  are  tiny  bulbs  that  grow  in  the  leaf 
axils  of  stems,  which  are  above  ground,  of 
certain  species  of  lily  such  as  L  tigrinum. 

time,  collect 

After  flowering 

the  bulbils 
off  the  plant  as  they  mature.  Set  them  1 in 
apart  in  a  pot  filled  with  John  Innes  No.  1 
compost  or  similar  (see  page  12).  Cover  with 
grit  and  place  in  a  cold  frame.  In  autumn  of 
the  following  year,  transplant  the  bulbils  into 
the  ground. 

fleshy,  but  are  often  relatively  narrow.  The 
roots  are  produced  in  midsummer  or  later, 
and  persist  through  to  the  following  year. 

eventually  starts  flowering.  In  some  plants, 
notably  tulips  and  bulbous  irises  (see  below), 
the  original  bulb  disintegrates  after flowering, 
leaving  a  cluster  of  small  bulbs  as  well  as  a 
new  flowering  bulb.  In  autumn,  pull  these 
apart  and  plant  out  at 
their  own 
depth. 

twice 

Bulbs  are  modified  stems  in  which  the  scale 
leaves  are  modified  for  food  storage.  There 
are  two  kinds  of  bulbs,  tunicate  and  scaly, 
and  they  differ  in  the  development  of  their 
scale  leaves. 

Tunicate  bulbs 
Tunicate  bulbs,  such  as  daffodils  and  tulips 
(see  below),  have  fleshy,  very  broad  scale 
leaves,  more  or  less  surrounding the  previous 
leaf  so  that  the  leaves  make  nearly  complete 
concentric  rings  around  the  growing  point. 
Each  scale 
leaf  has  an  axillary  bud.  The 
outer  scale  leaves  become  dry  and  mem(cid:173)
branous  and  give  the  bulb  good  protection 
against  drying  and 
injury.  The  roots  of  a 
tunicate  bulb  develop  at  the  beginning  of  its 
growing  season  on  the  outside  edge  of  the 
basal  plate. 

Bulblets  are  offsets  that  develop  on  some 
longiflorum  and  L 
level  either 

lilies,  such  as  Lilium 
bulbiferum, 
just  below  ground 
above  or  below  the  main  bulb. 

In  late  summer,  gently  detach  any  bulblets 
and  plant  the  bulb  and  bulblets  straight  into 
the  ground  at  twice  their  own  depth. 

Unfortunately,  only  a  few  species  naturally 
grow  bulblets  in  any  quantity,  although  some 
other  important  species,  such  as  L  auratum, 
L  speciosum  and  L  tigrinum,  do  produce  a 
small  number. 

Natural  bulb  reproduction 
Bulbs  propagate  naturally  by  division  and  for 
some  this  is  the  only  way  they  can  be  prop(cid:173)
agated.  In  the  annual  growth  cycle the  apical 
bud  develops  and  produces  a  new  bulb 
during  the  growing  season.  If  an  axillary  bud 
develops  into  an  active  growing  point,  then 
this  also  develops  as  a  bulb  that  may  take  a 
year  or  two  of  further  growth  before  it  sepa(cid:173)
rates  from  its  original  parent  (see  below)  and 

Scaly  bulbs 
Scaly  bulbs,  such  as  fritillaries,  nomocharis 
and  lilies  (see  below),  do  not  develop  a  dry, 
membranous  covering  and  are  very  much 
more  susceptible 
tunicate 
bulbs.  The  leaves  are  normally  scaly  and  very 

to  drying 

than 

As  soon  as  these  bulblets  appear,  remove 
the  scale  leaves  from  their  bag  and  plant 
them  vertically  in  John  Innes  No.  1  potting 
compost  or  equivalent  (see  page  12).  They 
can  either  be  planted  singly  in  a  3-31/2in  pot 
or  lined  out  into  a  deep  tray,  depending  on 
numbers.  Ensure  the  tips  of  the  scales  are 
just  visible  above  the  compost.  Cover  with 

grit  and  label.  Water  sparingly.  Keep  the  new 
plants in a warm (21" C/70"F), light environment. 
In  early spring the bulblets will  produce leaves 
above  the  compost.  In  summer,  harden  off 
the  plants. 

At  the  end  of  the  season,  when  the  leaves 
have  died  down,  lift  and  separate  the  new 
young  bulbs.  Replant  immediately. 

increase  a  particular  variety  of  bulb 

To 
rapidly  it  is  necessary  to  use  artificial  tech(cid:173)
niques,  because  the  natural  rate  of  increase, 
although  steady,  is  generally  slow. 

One  technique 

is  to  take  leaf  cuttings, 
although, with bulbs, these leaves are modified 
in  the  form  of  bulb  scales  and  the  technique 
is  known  as  bulb  scaling. 

Scaly  bulbs,  such  as  lilies  and  fritillaries, 
have  relatively  small,  narrow  scale 
leaves 
which  can  readily  be  pulled  off  the  basal 
plate  of  the  bulbs.  W h en  they  can  best  be 
propagated  depends  on  the  availability  of 
bulbs.  Ideally,  it  is  easier  to  deal  with  fresh 
bulbs,  and  these  are  normally  available  in 
October/November.  Imported  bulbs  are  not 
usually  available  until  January/March,  and 
these  will 
invariably  have  wilted  slightly, 
which  makes  them  less  than  ideal  as  propa(cid:173)
gating  material. 

Take  cuttings  from  a  fresh  bulb  in  a  turgid 

condition  by  pressing  the  scale  leaves  out(cid:173)
wards  until  they  snap  off  close  to  the  basal 
plate  of the  bulb.  With  a flaccid  bulb,  cut  the 
scale  leaves  as  close  to  the  basal  plate  as 
possible,  using  a  sharp  knife. 

To  propagate  from  one  bulb,  cut  off  only 
a  few  scale  leaves  from  the  outside  of  the 
bulb.  Some  bulbs,  for  example  lilies,  do  not 
like  being  lifted  and  replanted;  therefore  dig 

a  hole  around  the  bulb,  break  off  some  scales 
and  replace  the  soil  round  the  bulb. 

Any  scale  leaves  will  carry  potential  rotting 
agents  and  so  they  must  be  protected.  Place 
the  scales  in  a  polyethylene  bag  filled  with  a 
fungicidal  powder  such  as  Captan.  Shake 
the  bag  vigorously  until  the  scale  leaves  are 
completely  covered  with  a 
film  of 
fungicide. 

thin 

to  develop 

Mix  the  scale  leaves  with  four  times  their 
volume  of  an  extending  medium,  which  will 
allow  them 
in  a  damp,  well-
aerated  environment.  Various  materials,  such 
as  damp  vermiculite,  can  be  used  very 
successfully, but, provided that it is adequately 
sterile,  a  mixture  of  equal  proportions  of 
damp  peat  and  grit  is  just  as  suitable.  Place 
the mixture and a label  in a  polyethylene  bag. 
Blow  into  the  bag;  when  fully  expanded,  tie 
its  neck.  Store  in  a  warm  (21°C/70°F)  place, 
such  as  an  airing  cabinet,  so  that  new  plant(cid:173)
lets  can  develop. 

The  rate  at  which  regeneration  occurs  is 
related  chiefly  to  temperature,  but  is  also 
a  varietal  characteristic—some  being  quicker 
to  propagate  than  others.  Generally  activity 
may  be  expected  in  about  six to  eight weeks. 
The  new  plant  will  initially  take  the  form 
of  a  bulblet  and  will  develop  on  the  broken 
surface  at  the  base  of  the  scale  leaf. 

Some  tunicate  bulbs,  such  as  hyacinth,  grow 
larger  each  year  and  propagate  very  slowly 
by  natural  division  of the  bulb.  They  therefore 
have  to  be  propagated  artificially  if  a  signifi(cid:173)
cant  increase  in  numbers  is  required. 

The  scale  leaves  of tunicate  bulbs  are  large 
and  encircle  the  bulb;  they  are  not  as  readily 
removed  from  the  basal  plate  as  the  leaves 
of  scaly  bulbs.  It 
is  therefore  necessary  to 
leave 
in  situ  while 
inducing  them  to  produce  plantlets.  There 
are  two  ways  of  doing  this:  scooping  and 
scoring. 

their  cut  scale 

leaves 

Scooping 
This  is  carried  out  toward  the  end  of  the 
bulb's  dormant  season.  To  scoop  the  bulb 
successfully,  and  with  minimum  damage, 
requires  a  special  tool:  an  old  teaspoon  with 
one  sharpened  edge  is  excellent.  Use  it  to 
in  one  scooping 
cut  out  the  basal  plate 
movement, 
the 
rest  of 
the  bulb 
undisturbed  and  the  cut  surfaces  of  all  the 
scale  leaves  exposed.  Although  it  is  possible 
to  do  this  with  a  knife,  it  is  inadvisable  as  the 
center  of  the  bulb  may  become  macerated 
and  subject  to  rotting.  Once  the  basal  plate 
has  been  removed,  dust  the  cut  scale  leaf 
surfaces  liberally  with  a  fungicidal  powder  to 
minimize  potential  rotting. 

leaving 

The  process 

follows  exactly 

the  same 
pattern  as  for  scooping  except  that,  instead 
of  cutting  away  the  basal  plate  of  the  bulb, 
the  basal  plate  is  scored  with  a  sharp  knife. 
Cut through  the  basal  plate of a tunicate  bulb 
until  the  scale  leaves  are  scored  to  a  depth 
of  about  1/4in.  Make 
four  equally  spaced 
scores  if  the  bulb  is  large;  on  smaller  bulbs 
two  scores  at  right  angles  will  suffice. 

Then  place  the  scored  bulb  in  a  warm 
(21C/70°F),  dry  environment  for  a  day;  this 
will  cause  the  cuts  to  open  out.  Dust  the  cut 
surface  with  a  fungicide  such  as  Captan. 
Subsequently,  the  treatment  is  the  same  as 
for  scooped  bulbs. 

The  bulblets  produced  in  this  way  usually 
only  require  a  further  two  or  three  years  to 
reach  flowering  size. 

Set  the  bulb  upside  down,  with  the  scale 
leaf  bases  exposed,  on  a wire tray  or  in  a tray 
containing  dry  sand.  Place  in  a  temperature 
of  at  least  21°C/70°F  to  encourage  calluses 
to  form  on  the  scale  leaf  bases  and  so  further 
combat  any  chance  of  infection.  At  the  same 
time,  the  bulb  should  be  kept  as  dry  as 
possible,  but  ensure  that  the  scale  leaves  do 
not  desiccate.  An  airing  cabinet  is  probably 
a  suitable  environment,  but  dampen 
the 
sand  occasionally. 

In  about  two  to  three  months  the  new 
bulblets  will  develop  on  the  cut  surfaces  of 
the  scale  leaves.  Plant  the  bulb  in  a  pot,  still 
placing  it  upside  down  so  that  the  bulblets 
are  just  below  the  surface  of  the  compost. 
Label  clearly.  Harden  off  and  then  leave  in  a 
cold  frame. 

In spring, the bulblets will grow and produce 

leaves  and  the  old  bulb  will  gradually  dis(cid:173)
integrate.  At  the  end  of  the  season  lift  and 
separate  the  bulblets,  and  replant.  They  will 
normally  take  a  further  three  or  four  years 
before flowering  size  is  reached. 

Scoring 
Flowering  bulbs  can  be  produced  in  a shorter 
time  by  using  a  similar 
technique  called 
scoring,  which  makes  fewer,  larger  bulblets 
as  there  are  less  cut  scale  leaf  surfaces. 

Dividing a plant is a common way to propagate 
many  herbaceous  perennials,  and  it  is  also 
used  to  rejuvenate  favorite  plants  and  keep 
them  in  a  vigorous  condition.  Propagation 
by division  is also successful  with shrubs,  such 
as  sumac,  that  produce  suckers;  with  semi-
woody  perennials,  such  as  New  Zealand  flax, 
that  produce  a  crown  of  offset  shoots;  and 
with  most  plants with  modified  stems,  such  as 
bearded  iris  (see  pages  42-9). 

the  central  part  of 

Herbaceous  plants  with  fibrous  crowns 
The  commonest  method  of  propagating 
plants  by  division  is  that  used  for  herbaceous 
perennials,  such  as  chrysanthemums,  with 
fibrous  roots  and  a  relatively  loose  crown. 
Normally, 
the  crown 
becomes  woody  over  the  course  of  two  or 
three  years.  As  this  woody  area  does  not 
produce  many  shoots  and  generally 
loses 
vigor,  it  is  discarded  and  the  remainder  of 
the  clump 
into  suitable-sized 
portions  for  planting  out  and  reestablishing 
a  new  crown. 

is  divided 

The  only  variable  feature  of  this  form  of 
propagation  is  the  time  at  which  division  is 
carried  out.  As  a  general 
the  most 

rule, 

time 

to  divide  such  plants 

opportune 
is 
directly  after  flowering,  as  this  is  when  the 
new vegetative shoots are being produced and 
the  new  root  system  is  developing.  In  very 
late-flowering  subjects, 
this  would  be  the 
following  spring. 

Lift  the  parent  plant  and  shake  off  as  much 
soil  as  possible.  Then  wash  the  crown  in  a 
bucket,  or  hose  it  clean  of  any  residual  soil. 
The  plant  can  be  divided  without  this  pre(cid:173)
liminary  preparation,  but  it  is  much  easier  to 
deal  with  clean  plants,  especially  if the  soil  is 
wet and  muddy.  Shorten  any tall  stems above 
the  ground  to  prevent  unnecessary  water 
loss,  especially  if  the  division  takes  place  in 
summer.  Break  off  a  piece  with  at  least  one 
good  "eye"  from  the  periphery  of  the  crown, 
where  the  young  shoots  are  generally  pro(cid:173)
duced; avoid the central woody crown, which 
is  of  no  value  and  should  be  discarded.  If the 
piece  proves  rather  intractable  to  remove, 
cut  it  off,  using  an  old  carving  knife  or  similar 
blade.  Plant  out  the  new  clump  as  quickly  as 
possible  to  the  same  depth  as  it  was  growing 
previously.  When 
it  should  be 
labelled  and  watered  in—indeed  "puddled" 
in  would  be  more  appropriate. 

replanted 

Herbaceous  plants  with  fleshy  crowns 
Many  herbaceous  plants,  such  as  hostas, 
develop  a  compact,  fleshy  crown  that  is  not 
easy  to  pull  apart. 

The  best  way  to  propagate  these  plants 
is by  division  toward  the end of their  dormant 
season,  when  buds  will  begin  to  shoot,  in(cid:173)
dicating  the  most  vigorous  areas. 

Lift  the  parent  plant  and  shake  off  as  much 
soil  as  possible.  Wash  the  crown  thoroughly. 
With  a  convenient-sized  knife,  cut  the  crown 
into  pieces.  The  size  of  divisions  will  depend 
on  preference,  but  must  include  at  least  one 
developed  shoot.  Avoid  latent  buds,  which 
do  not  always  develop  satisfactorily.  Dust 
the  cut  surfaces  with  fungicidal  powder  to 
reduce  the  chances  of  fungal  rots.  Do  not 
allow 
really 
fleshy  rooted  plants  such  as  hostas,  to  dry 
excessively.  Therefore  replant  the  divisions 
either  in  the  ground  or  in  a  pot  as  quickly  as 
is feasible.  Label  them  clearly. 

the  divisions,  especially 

from 

Naturally  dividing  alpines 
There  are  a  number  of  alpine  plants,  such 
as  campanulas,  which 
lend  themselves  to 
propagation  by  division  because  their  crowns 

separate  naturally  into  individual  new  plant(cid:173)
lets  each  season. 

and  replant-  the  divisions 
avoid  the  roots  drying. 

fairly  quickly 

to 

in 

the  spring 

After  flowering,  or 

if  the 
plant flowers  in  the autumn,  as does  Gentiana 
sino-ornata, 
tease  apart 
the  divisions.  Replant  as  soon  as  possible. 
Label  and  water  in  well. 

the  plant  and 

lift 

This  is  a  very  simple  but  effective  system 
of  increasing  plants.  If  the  crowns  are  lifted 
and  divided 
rate  of 
increase  can  be  quite  dramatic.  However, 
plants 
tend 
to  produce  only  a  few  large  divisions. 

in  situ  for  a 

long  period 

frequently 

fairly 

the 

left 

Semiwoody  herbaceous  plants 
Some  perennials  with  upright,  swordlike 
leaves, 
in 
size by producing a sort  of offset that develops 
into  a  large  crown  of  individual  shoots,  each 
with  its  own  root  system. 

for  example  Phormium, 

increase 

To  propagate  these  plants,  it  is  best  to 
divide  them  in  the  spring,  although  it  can 
be  done at any time of the year.  Lift them  and 
shake  out  the  .soil,  if  necessary  hosing  or 
washing  the  crown  clean.  Pull  the  various 
pieces  apart.  Cut  the  clump  with  a  spade  or 
hatchet  if  it  is  hard  and  woody  in  the  middle. 

into 

that  produce  suckers,  which 

Woody  shrubs 
There  are a few woody  shrubs,  such  as  black(cid:173)
thorn, 
then 
develop 
individual  clumps  of  stems. 
Lift  these  plants  in  the  dormant  season  and 
wash  thoroughly.  Divide  the  clump  of  stems 
into  convenient-sized  portions.  Normally  the 
main  core  of  the  clump  will  be  woody  and 
will  carry  few  roots.  This  will  be  of  little  value 
for  propagation,  purposes,  so  take  the  new 
pieces 
the  younger,  more  vigorous 
growth  on  the  outside  of  the  clump. 

from 

Cut  back  the  branches  fairly  drastically  to 
reduce  water  loss,  as  the  buds  will  break  in 
the  spring  before  sufficient  roots  have  been 
produced.  Replant  the  divisions  back  in  the 
ground  as  soon  as  possible  and  label. 

Lift  relatively  isolated  suckers  individually 
in  the  dormant  season  and  use  to  establish 
new  plants. 

If  the  plant  has  been  grafted—as  may 
it  is 
the  cultivated  variety, 

happen  with  Japanese  quinces—then 
the 
that  is  divided. 

rootstock,  not 

Plants,  such  as  Michaelmas  daisies,  that 
produce  particularly  loose  crowns  can 
be  propagated  by  separating  off  single 
stems  on  the  periphery  of  the  crown  so 
that  each  has  an  adventitious 
root 
system.  These  single  stem  portions  are 
described  as  "Irishman's  cuttings,"  and 
they  should  be  planted  at  once. 

Offsets 
An  offset  is  a  plantlet  that  has  developed 
laterally  on  a  stem  either  above  or  below 
ground:  the  stem  arises  from  a  crown  bud 
and  usually  carries  no  other  buds. 

Most  plants,  such  as  sempervivums,  that 
produce  offsets  first  grow  a  miniature  plant 
with  only  minimal  roots.  A  root  system  will 
not  fully  develop  until 
late  in  the  growing 
season. 

To  speed  up  this  process  of  propagation, 
pull  away  the  offset  from  its  parent,  usually 
in  spring.  Either  plant  out  in  the  garden  or 
pot 
it  up,  using  a  cuttings  compost  with 
added  grit,  which  will  drain  freely  and  so 
ensure  good  root  development. 

Where  offset  development  is  poor,  it  is 
possible 
removing 
the  plant's  growing  tip.  This  has  the  same 
effect  as  removing  a  terminal  bud. 

to  stimulate  offsets  by 

that 

from 

is  separated 

Although  the  term  offset  is  normally  used 
for  a  plantlet 
its 
parent  during  the  growing  season,  it  is  also 
used  to  describe  slower-developing  shoots 
that  are  produced  by  mainly  monocotyledo(cid:173)
nous  plants  such  as  yuccas.  Eventually  these 
shoots  should  be  sufficiently  mature  to  be 
separated  from  the  parent  and  planted  on. 

A  pineapple  plant  produces  offsets  that 
can  be  used  for  propagation  once  its  fruit  is 
nearly  mature.  These  offsets  are  variously 
described  as  slips,  ratoons  or  suckers.  Cut 
them  off  the  plant  close  to  the  crown  and 
plant  out. 

Many  corm  and  bulb  plants,  such  as 

fritillarias,  each year produce  miniature  repro(cid:173)
ductions  of  themselves  from  the  bases  of the 
newly  developing  corms  or  bulbs.  These  are 
known  as  cormels  (see  page  45)  and  bulbils 
and  bulblets  (see  page  47). 

Runners 
A  runner  is  a  more  or  less  horizontal  stem 
that  arises  from  a  crown  bud  and  creeps 
overground.  The  leaves  are  normally  scale(cid:173)
like,  and  rooting  may  occur at the  nodes.  The 
lateral  buds  develop  as  new  plants,  and 
eventually the  stem of the runner deteriorates, 
isolated  plant.  The  classic 
leaving  a  new 

example  of  this  kind  of  natural  vegetative 
reproduction  occurs  in  the  strawberry  plant. 
root  down  and 

New  plantlets  usually 

produce  new  plants  quite  successfully.  How(cid:173)
ever,  unless  controlled,  a  mat  of  new  plants 
tends  to  develop,  and  these  are  not  easily 
lifted  and  separated  without  damage,  so  thin 
out  the  runners  regularly. 

To  produce 

large,  well-established 

indi(cid:173)
vidual  plants,  dig  in  plenty  of  good  compost 
for  rooting;  in  early  summer,  thin  out  some 
of  the  runners,  and  pin  down  the  rest  into 
the  compost,  evenly  radiating  them  around 
the  plant.  This  method  will 
induce  early 
rooting,  but  the  rate  of  development  will 
not  be  quite  as  fast  as for  pot-grown  runners. 

These  are  obtained  by  placing  a  pot  under 
each  runner. 

Dig a hole in the ground beneath a develop(cid:173)

ing  plantlet.  Set  a  pot  containing  good 
compost  into  it and then  push  back the soil  to 
keep the  pot in  position.  Pin  down the  runner, 
using  wire  bent  in  the  shape  of  a  staple,  so 
that  the  plantlet  will  root  in  the  pot. 

The  propagation  of  plants  from  stems  is  one 
of  the  most  widely  practiced  techniques  of 
vegetative  propagation. 

The  technique  involves  initiating,  develop(cid:173)
ing  and  establishing  a  root  system  on  a  stem 
either  before  or  after  that  stem  has  been 
removed  from  the  parent  plant,  and  this  can 
be done  in two ways:  by  layering and  by stem 
cuttings. 

With  layering,  the  stem  is  encouraged  to 
produce  roots  before  it  is  severed  from  the 
parent  plant. The  main  problem  is to establish 
the  rooted  layer  after  it  has  been  removed 
from  the  parent. 

With  stem  cuttings,  the  stem  is  removed 
from  the  parent  plant  before  it  is  encouraged 

it  is 
to  develop  roots.  With  this  method, 
difficult  to  keep  the  cutting  alive  until 
its 
roots  have  grown  and  established.  Its  ad(cid:173)
vantage  is  that,  usually,  it takes  up  much  less 
space  than  propagating  by  layering. 

Always  propagate  from  stems  that  have  a 
high  capacity to  produce  roots.  The  gardener 
must  learn  to  judge  this  capacity  in  plants, 
as  it  has  a  significant  effect  on  the  eventual 
success  of  the  layer  or  cutting. 

The  age  of the  parent  plant,  as  well  as  that 
of  the  actual  stem  to  be  propagated,  both 
have  major  influences  on  the  capacity  of  a 
stem  to  produce  roots. 

A  seedling  that  has  recently  germinated 
flower  and  produce 

immediately 

cannot 

it  can 

reproduce 

is  asexually, 

seeds,  as  it  is  not  sexually  mature.  Therefore 
it  is  described  as  being juvenile,  and the only 
way 
from 
vegetative  parts.  Many  juvenile  plants  have 
a  very  high  capacity  to  regenerate  vegetat-
ively.  The  juvenile  stage  is  not  transient  but 
fixed 
in  some  ornamental  plants,  such  as 
some  varieties  of  ivy  {Hedera  helix)  and  the 
Lawson's  cypress  varieties 
'Ellwoodii'  and 
'Fletcheri,'  and  these  have  a  greater  capacity 
than  their  adult  varieties  to  produce  roots 
on  stems. 

Juvenile  plants,  however,  do  not  have 
much  value  in  the  garden  as  they  do  not 
flower  and  produce  seed.  Most  of  them  will 
eventually  mature  into  adult  plants,  when 
they  will  flower.  In  this  condition  a  plant  is 
sexually  mature,  capable  of  regenerating  by 
producing  seeds,  and  so  it  does  not  need  to 
reproduce  vegetatively. 

to 

regenerate 

A  plant's  capacity 

from 
vegetative  parts  declines  with  age.  Thus  the 
gardener  wishing  to  propagate  vegetatively 
from  a  mature  plant  encounters  a  problem. 
This  can  be  overcome  by  growing  a  mature 
plant  that  does  not  produce  flowers,  so  that 
its  capacity  to  regenerate  vegetatively  may 
be increased, and thus the rooting capacity of 
its  stems. 

To  prevent  the  plant,  or  at  least  the  stems 
used  for  propagation,  from  flowering,  prune 
them  rigorously  so  that  strong,  vegetative 
(that  is  nonflowering)  shoots  are  produced. 
The  harder  the  stems  are  pruned,  the  faster 
they will  grow  and  the  more they will  produce 
roots.  The  first  flush  of  growth  on  a  stem 
always  has  the  greatest  capacity  to  develop 
roots.  Really  fast  growth  is  achieved  by  a 
combination  of  hard  pruning  and  forcing  the 
plant  in  a  high  temperature,  at  least  16°C/ 
60"F.  Under  these  conditions,  roots  may  be 
induced  on  otherwise quite  intractable  stems. 
The  capacity  of  a  stem  to  root  will  also  be 
dependent  on  the  age  of  the  parent  plant. 
The  older  the  plant,  the  less  it  will  be  able  to 
produce  roots  on  stems,  even  if  the  stem  to 
be  propagated  has  been  severely  pruned.  If 
the  plant  has  been  grown  from  a  seed  by  the 
gardener,  then  he will  know  how  old  it  is,  and 
if  he  can  successfully  propagate  from  it. 

If  the  plant  to  be  propagated  has  been 
produced  by  a  vegetative  technique  quite 

recently 

recently,  it  should  root  from  its  stems  quite 
readily,  but this is not always so. Many plants, 
however 
they  were  vegetatively 
propagated,  may  in  fact  be  quite  old!  If  the 
original  plant  was  grown 
from  seed  and 
displayed  attractive  ornamental  character(cid:173)
istics,  it  would  always  have  been  propagated 
vegetatively 
its 
istics 
inherent  capacity  to  produce  roots  on  stems 
will  have  declined,  despite  a 
temporary 
resurgence  after  pruning. 

in  subsequent  generations,  but 

those  character(cid:173)

to  maintain 

to  propagate 

Thus  new  (that 

is,  young)  varieties  are 
from  stems 
generally  easier 
than  older  varieties.  This 
is  particularly 
evident  with  plants  such  as  deciduous 
azaleas,  in  which  the  old  Ghent  varieties  are 
over  140  years  old,  the  newer  Ham  varieties 
are  only  20  years  old,  and 
the  Exbury 
two 
varieties  are  40  years  old.  The 
groups  are 
to  propagate 
from  stems. 

relatively  easy 

last 

to  do  so 

Before  propagating  from  stems,  it  is  also 
necessary  to  consider whether  there  is  a  best 
time of year in which to propagate a  particular 
plant  by  a  particular technique,  as  it  is  point(cid:173)
less 
the  wrong  season.  The 
capacity  of  many  plants  to  produce  roots  on 
stems  varies  considerably during  the  different 
seasons, whereas  in  others there  is  no distinct 
seasonal  variation.  The  index  at  the  back  of 
this  book  will  tell  the  gardener  when,  where 
and  how  to  propagate  a  particular  plant. 

in 

in  plants 

right  angle.  However, 
that  are 
particularly  difficult  to  root,  the  stem  should 
first  be girdled  by  cutting  into the  stem  with  a 
knife  or  by  binding  the  stem  tightly  with  a 
piece  of  copper  wire  at  the  bend. 

Bend  the stem  at  right angles 9 in  behind  its 
tip  and  set  it  in  the trench  against the  straight 
side  with  its  tip  exposed  above  the  trench.  If 
the  stem  is  whippy,  peg  it  down  with  heavy 
wire  staples.  Bury  the  stem  with  soil,  firm  in 
and  water  well. 

Keep  the  soil  reasonably  moist,  especially 
in  dry  periods.  Rooting  will  normally  occur 
during  the  growing  season, 

that 

In  autumn,  sever the layered  stem from the 
parent  plant  so 
the  new  plant  can 
.accustom  itself  to  an  independent  existence. 
About  three  to  four  weeks  later,  cut  off  the 
to 
growing 
establish.  Pot  up  or  plant  out  the  layer  and 
label  it.  If  rooting  is  not  well  advanced  by 
autumn, 
leave  the  layer  to  establish  for  a 
further year  before  lifting  and  transplanting  it. 

to  encourage 

roots 

tip 

the 

Layering  is  one  of the  oldest  techniques  used 
by  gardeners  to  propagate  woody  plants.  A 
stem  is  encouraged  to  develop  roots  before 
it  is  removed  from  the  parent  plant.  This 
method  is  easy  as  it  avoids  any  complicated 
environmental  control  to  ensure  the  stem 
survives  while  the  root  system  is  developing. 
The  early  gardeners  had  probably  observed 
this  process when  it  occurred  naturally  under 
certain  conditions.  To  do  it  artificially  they 
just  repeated  the  conditions  and  modified 
the  technique. 

As  with  any  method  of  propagation,  it  is 
necessary  to  consider  both  the  stem  from 
which  the  layer  is  to  be  made  and  what  soil 
is  suitable  to  encourage  rooting. 

The  condition  of  the  stem  will  have  a 
significant  effect  on  the  eventual  success  of 
propagating  by  layering.  For greatest  success, 
the gardener should  develop  vigorous,  rapidly 
grown  stems  with 
their  high  capacity  -to 
produce  roots.  Certain  methods  of  layering, 
such  as  stooling,  encourage  this  capacity  in 
stems  as  part  of 
the  normal  system  of 
management,  but  in  others,  such  as  simple 
layering,  it  is  necessary  to  prepare  the  stems 
by  pruning 
the  parent  plant  well  before 
propagation  can  take  place.  When  pruning 
bear  in  mind  that,  with  most  methods  of 
layering,  the  branches  to  be  layered  will  have 
to  be  brought  down  to  ground  level. 

The  soil  around  the  parent  plant  will  also 
require  preparation  so  that  it  will  induce  the 
stem to form roots. Rooting will be encouraged 
primarily  by the  exclusion  of  light,  but  also  by 
the  availability  of  oxygen  and  the  presence 
of  sufficient  moisture  and  warmth. 

is 

the 

roots 

The  exclusion  of  light  from  the  stem,  that 
is  blanching  it,  is  extremely  important  when 
encouraging 
to  start  growing.  The 
sooner  light  is  excluded  from  the  stem,  the 
more  effective 
the 
earlier  a  stem  is  buried  or  earthed  up  the 
more  likely  it  is  to  root.  This  effect  cannot 
be  overemphasized,  as  lateness  in  earthing 
up  is  probably  the  commonest  reason  why 
a  stem  fails  to  produce  roots,  provided  that 
it  is  basically  vigorous  and  capable  of  pro(cid:173)
ducing  roots. 

response.  So, 

The  soil  for  layering  must  have  a  good 
water-holding  capacity,  good  aeration  and 
adequate  drainage.  Thus,  especially  if  plants 

Layering  is  normally  done  in  late  winter/ 
early spring, as soon as the soil can  be worked 
down  to  a  tilth. 

As  the  technique  is  likely to  be  carried  out 
in  the  garden  and  not  in  a  purpose-prepared 
nursery  bed,  it  is  important  to  prepare  the 
soil  both  thoroughly  and  effectively.  Dig  as 
deeply  as  possible.  Then  add  peat  and  grit  in 
sufficient  quantities  to  convert  the  existing 
soil  into  a  rooting  medium  with  good  water-
holding capacity, good aeration and adequate 
drainage. 

Trim  a  rapidly  grown  stem  of  side-shoots 
and  leaves  for  about  4-24 in  behind  the  tip. 
Pull  the  stem  to  ground  level  and  mark  its 
position  on  the  soil  9 in  behind  its  tip.  Dig  a 
trench  from  that  point,  with  one  straight  side 
about  4-6 in  deep  and  the  other  sloping  up 
to  ground  level  near  the  parent  plant. 

The  secret  of  inducing  root  formation  is  to 
restrict  movement  of  food  and  hormones  in 
the 
is  usually 
achieved  by  bending  the  stem  at  least  at  a 

the  stem: 

tissues  of 

this 

layered 

are  to  be 
in  an  ordinary  garden 
border  as  opposed  to  a  purpose-developed 
layer  bed,  the  soil  must  be  dug  deeply  to 
provide  good  drainage  and  so  reduce  the 
chances  of  waterlogging.  It  can  be  further 
lightened  and  improved  by  the  addition  of 
peat  and/or  grit,  depending  on  the  heaviness 
of  the  soil. 

Warmth will  improve rooting, so ensure the 
layered  stem  and  soil  are  placed  where  they 
will 
receive  adequate  sunlight.  However, 
warmth  will  only  be  effective  if  the  soil  is 
moist,  so  water  the  layered  stems  during  dry 
periods. 

In  most  methods of layering,  the soil  should 
be  carefully  forked  away  from  the  layer  once 
it  has  rooted,  so  it  can  be  lifted.  Do  not  allow 
the  roots  to  dry  out,  otherwise  they  will  die. 

Layers 

that  may  have  difficulty  rooting 
successfully should  be well  established  before 
they  are  lifted.  To  encourage  this,  sever  the 
newly  rooted  layers  from  the  parent  plant 
about  three  to  four  weeks  prior  to  lifting  and 
replanting. 

This  weaning  can  be  further  enhanced  by 
pruning  the  stems  so  that  there  is  a  greater 
balance  of  root  to  stem. 

Simple  layering 
Simple  layering  is  perhaps  the  easiest  and 
most  effective  method  of  layering  a  wide 
variety  of woody  plants,  and  it  is  a  technique 
that  can  be  carried  out  with  minimum  dis(cid:173)
turbance  to  the  parent  plant. 

A  stem  is  buried  in  the  soil  behind  its  tip 
so  that  roots  are  induced  in  this  area.  Once 
the  root  system  is  established,  the  stem  can 
be  severed  from  the  parent.  The  roots  are 
encouraged  to  develop  because  the  plant 
foods  and  hormones  are  restricted  where  the 
stem  is buried. To  be successful, the gardener 
must  use  stems  that  have  a  high  capacity  to 
produce  roots,  and  they  should  also  be  near 
ground  level. 

Twelve  or  more  months  before  layering, 
rigorously  prune  a  low  branch  or  branches 
on  the  parent  plant  so  that  young,  rapidly 
grown  shoots  are  produced.  These  will  be 
more  amenable  to  the  bending  and  manipu(cid:173)
lation  involved  in  the  actual  layering  oper(cid:173)
ation,  and  because  of  their  rapid  growth  will 
have  the  required  capacity  to  produce  roots. 

Air  layering 
is  one  of  the  oldest  artificial 
techniques  of  vegetative  propagation.  More 
than  4,000  years  ago,  it  was  tried  in  China 
and,  because  of  its  continued  use  in  that 
country, 
traditionally  been  called 
Chinese layering.  It is also sometimes  referred 
to  as  marcottage from  the great  era  of  French 
gardening 
late  seventeenth  and 
eighteenth  centuries. 

it  has 

in 

the 

An  unpruned  stem  on  a  normally  growing 
woody  plant  is  induced  to  develop  roots  by 
restricting  the  stem  about  6-9 in  behind  its 
growing  tip  and  then  excluding  light.  This 
combination  will  cause  the  initiation  of  roots, 
and,  if  the  roots  are  surrounded  by  moist, 
warm  soil,  then  they  will  develop.  The  stem 
is  then  severed  from  the  parent  and  estab(cid:173)
lished  as  a  new  plant. 

As a technique,  air layering can  be  used  on 
a  wide  range  of  plants  that  have  woody 
stems,  and  it  is  a  useful  way  of  producing 
plants  without  specialized  equipment  or 
disturbing them  unduly.  It is carried  out either 
in spring on the matured wood of the previous 
season,  in which  case layering is close behind 
the  growing  point,  or  in  the  late  summer  on 
the  hardening shoots  of that  season's growth. 
Select  a  stem  of the  current  year's  growth. 
Trim  any  side-shoots  off  the  stem  for  about 
6-12 in  behind  the  tip. 

Prune  back  any  new  growth  on  the  rooted 
layer  toward  the  end  of  the  dormant  season. 
Then  cut  off  the  stem  with  shears  just  below 
the  point  of  layering  and  remove  the  black 
polyethylene  square. 

The  most  critical  stage  when  air  layering 
is  to  establish  the  rooted  layer  successfully. 
Fill  a  pot  with  John  Innes  No.  1  compost  or 

similar  (see  page  12).  Slightly  loosen  the  moss 
ball  and  roots.  Place  the  rooted  layer  in  the 
pot.  Firm  so the  roots  are  in  contact with  the 
compost.  Do  not  firm  too  heavily  and  so 
compress  the  moss  ball  and  roots.  Label  and 
place 
in  a  protected  environment  until 
further  root  growth  develops  and  the  new 
plant  is  established. 

Then  girdle  the  stem  (see  page  54)  so  that 
food  and  hormones  build  up  in  the  region 
where  rooting  is  required—usually  about  9 in 
behind  the  tip.  Treat  the  stem  or  the  cut 
surfaces  with  hormone  powder  to  improve 
rooting. 

rooting  medium 

The  most  effective 

is 
sphagnum  moss  as  it  holds  water,  is  well 
aerated  and  is  readily  manipulated.  Soak  the 
moss  overnight  so  that  it  is  completely  moist. 
Take two  large  handfuls  of  moss  and  squeeze 
it,  then  work  it  into a  ball  so that  all  the fibers 
are interwoven. When it reaches about 21/2 in 
in  diameter,  split  it  in  half,  using  the  thumbs 
in  the  same  way  that  an  orange  is  divided. 
Place  the  two  halves  around  the  treated  area 
of  the  stem  and  knead  them  together  again 
so  that  the  moss  stays  firm. 

Hold  the  moss  in  place  with  a  square  of 
black  polyethylene,  and  secure  it  to  the  stem 
with  sticky  insulating  tape.  It  is  important  to 
ensure  that  moisture  cannot  run  down  into 
the  moss  and  so waterlog  it.  So,  turn the tape 
spirally  round  the  ends  of  the  polyethylene, 
overlapping  it  until  it  covers  part  of the  stem. 
The black  polyethylene will  retain  moisture, 
maintain  a  warm  environment,  exclude  light 
and  allow  gases  to  permeate  the  moss. 

The  layered  stem  will  usually  take  at  least 
a  growing  season  to  produce  adequate  roots. 

Tip  layering  is  a  specialized  technique  used 
for  the  various  members  of  the  genus  Rubus, 
such  as  blackberries  and  loganberries.  If  the 
growing  tip  of  such  a  plant  is  buried  in  the 
soil,  it  will  naturally  swell,  develop  roots  and 
establish  itself.  This  phenomenon  is  modified 
to  suit  the  gardener. 

Tip  layering  is  an  invaluable  technique  for 
propagating a few  plants,  as  it  can  be  carried 
out  in  the  garden  on  one  part  of  a  plant 
without  disturbing  the  flowering  or  fruiting 
ability  of  the  rest  of  it. 

The  members  of 

the  genus  Rubus,  es(cid:173)
pecially  the  fruiting  varieties,  are  prone  to 
virus  infections,  and  they  should  be  propa(cid:173)
gated  only  from  known  virus-free  stocks. 

Select  a  new  strong  stem  as  it  develops 
from  the  crown  of the  plant  during the spring. 
As soon  as  it  reaches 15-18 in  long,  pinch  out 
the  tip  to  encourage  branching.  The  growth 
of  these  stems  is  rapid  and  vigorous,  and 
soon  the  stems  can  be  pinched  out  again. 
Continue  to  do  this  until  midsummer,  when 
about  six 
tips  should  be  well 
developed. 

to  eight 

the  roots  of 

It  is  at  this  stage  that  the  stems  can  be 
layered.  However,  as 
these 
particular  plants  are  fine,  fibrous  and  easily 
damaged,  the  soil  for  layering  should  be  well 
prepared  so  that  once the  layers  have  rooted 
they  can  be  lifted  with  minimum  damage  to 
their  root  system. 

Dig  and  cultivate  the  soil  thoroughly,  if 
possible  dig  in  a  deep  layer  of  organic  matter 
to  conserve  moisture  and  prevent  the  roots 
drying.  Improve  the  top  6 in  by  adding  some 
peat  and  grit. 

Pull  down  a  stem  and  make  a  mark  where 
its  tip  touches  the  ground.  Start  digging  a 
trench  at  this  spot,  making  it  4 in  deep.  Give 
it  smoothed  vertical  sides  except  for  one 
which  should  be  sloped  toward  the  parent 
plant.  Smoothed  vertical  sides  will  help  any 
shoots  to  grow  vertically  and  so  produce  a 
manageable  plant. 

Place  the  tip  in  the  deepest  part  of  the 
trench  and  pin  it  down  with  a  heavy  wire 
staple.  Replace the  soil,  firm  and  water. 

In about three weeks, shoots should appear 

above  ground  level. 

In  September  cut  back  the  original  stem 
at  the  crown  of  the  parent  plant,  so  that  the 
layer  can  establish  as  an  independent  plant. 
Cut  off  the  rest  of  the  original  stem  and 
shorten 
the  growing  tip  before  lifting  the 
rooted  layer  in  autumn  after  leaf fall.  Replant 
the  layer  immediately  and  label  it. 

Protect any  layers that  cannot be  replanted 
straight  away  by  wrapping 
in 
damp  newspaper,  which  is  then  placed  in  a 
plastic  bag.  Close  the  bag  and  tie  the  neck 
tightly  so  the  roots  will,not  dry  out. 

their  roots 

Propagation  by  tip  layering  in  this  way  can 

be  repeated  each  year. 

Stooling 
is  an  entirely  artificial  system  of 
propagating  plants  by  layering,  because  a 
plant  is  grown  just  to  develop  new  plants, 
which  it  will  do  year  after  year. 

It  is  a  technique  that  is  principally  used  to 
produce  specialized  rootstocks  that  control 
the  vigor  and  size  of  a  tree,  especially  fruit 
trees.  However  it  can  be  employed  on  any 
plant 
to  severe  annual 
pruning. 

that  will 

respond 

Plant  a  rooted  layer,  cutting  or  seedling  in 
well-cultivated  ground  and  label  it.  Establish 
for  one  growing  season.  Never  use  a  plant 
that  has  been  grafted  as  it will  reproduce the 
rootstock  and  not  the  grafted  variety.  All 
clonal  fruit-tree  rootstocks  should  be  desig(cid:173)
nated  EMLA,  which  indicates  they  are  free 
from  virus  disease.  During  the  early  part  of 
the  dormant  season,  cut  back  the  rootstock, 
leaving about 1-2  in  of the stem  above ground 
level. 

In the following spring,  earth  up  any shoots 
as  soon  as  they  are  about  6 in  long,  so  that 
the  whole  plant  is  covered.  Work  the  soil 
down  between  the  shoots so that  each  shoot 
is  completely  surrounded  by  soil.  Do  not 
delay  earthing  up  as  one  of  the  most  critical 
factors  in  stooling  is  excluding  light  from  the 
plant  at  an  early  stage. 

As the shoots grow,  continue to earth them 
up  until  each  shoot  is  buried  to  about  9 in. 
No  further  action  will  now  be  necessary, 
unless  the  summer  is  particularly  dry,  when 
the  soil  should  be  watered  to  encourage  the 
roots  to  develop.  Just  keep  the  soil  around 
the  stems  warm  and  moist.  Too  much  water 
will  depress  temperatures. 

In  early  winter,  after  the  leaves  have  fallen 
and  the  shoots  are  fully  dormant,  gently  fork 
away  the  soil  back  down  to  the  original  level, 
so exposing the stool  and  its  shoots. The  base 
of  each  shoot  should  have  produced  roots. 
the 
parent  stool.  With  a  pair  of  shears  cut 
them  flush  with  the  stool,  so  that  no  stub 
remains.  Replant them  immediately  and  label 
them  clearly. 

Remove 

rooted 

these 

layers 

from 

After  removing  and  replanting  the  rooted 
layers,  cultivate the  soil  around  the  stool  and 
clean  off  any  residual  earth  on  the  stool 
itself so that it is fully exposed to the elements. 
This  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  buds 
receive  adequate  winter  chilling  and  will 
therefore  break  evenly  the  following  spring, 
when  the  whole  process  is  repeated,  except 
that  a  general  fertilizer  is  added  at  about 
4 oz to the square yard. Successful  production 
will  depend  on  looking  after  the  stool. 

French  layering  is  an  extension  of  stooling 
and, as such,  it also requires a specially grown 
plant  from  which  new  plants  can  develop. 
Like  stooling,  it  produces  an  annual  crop  of 
rooted  layers,  but  initially  it  takes  longer  for 
the  sequence  to  become  established. 

Cultivate  some  ground  by  digging  deeply 
and  adding  some  organic  matter,  peat  and 
grit.  Plant  a  rooted  layer  and  label  it.  Allow 
it  to  establish  for  a  growing  season.  During 
the  early  part  of  the  dormant  season,  cut  it 
back  to  1-2  in  above  ground  level. 

Leave the  plant to grow  undisturbed  during 

the  following  growing  season. 

After  the  leaves  have  dropped,  reduce  any 
shoots  to  a  manageable  number—say,  at  the 
most,  eight  strong  shoots.  Cut  back  their  tips 
so  that  each  stem  is  the  same  length;  then 
peg them  down  horizontally  over the ground. 
By  positioning  the  stems  horizontally  early  in 
the  winter,  the  buds  will  break  evenly  along 
the  entire  length  of  the  shoots  in  spring. 

In  spring,  unpeg  the  stems  when 

their 
shoots  are  about  2-3 in  long.  Cultivate  the 

ground.  Space  out  the  stems  evenly  in  a  star 
arrangement  around  the  stool,  and  make  a 
trench  2 in  deep  under each  stem.  Drop  each 
stem  into  its trench  and  cover  it  until  only the 
tips  of  the  new  shoots  are  exposed. 

Earth  up  the  new  shoots  as  they  grow, 
always  keeping  the  tips  exposed,  until  the 
mound is about 6 in above ground level. Water 
the  layers  only  if  the  weather  is  particularly 
dry.  Do  not  overwater. 

The  central  stool  meanwhile  will  be  pro(cid:173)

ducing  a  fresh  crop  of  shoots,  and  it  is  these 

that  will  provide  the  next  year's  stems  for 
pegging  down. 

Gently  fork  away  the  soil  mounds,  after 
leaf fall.  Cut  away the  rooted  stems flush  with 
the  stool,  avoiding  the  current  year's  growth. 
Divide  each  stem  into  individual  plants  with 
their  own 
root  systems.  Plant 
these  out 
immediately;  label  and  water  in. 

Reduce  the  current  year's  growth  on  the 
stool  to,  say,  eight  strong  shoots,  and  prune 
to  an  equal  length.  Peg  these  down  on  the 
ground  so  that  the  sequence  can  continue. 

This technique is used to propagate numerous 
heaths  and  heathers,  dwarf  rhododendrons 
and  other  related  plants,  and  any  shrub  of 
suitable  habit  that  is  not  readily  propagated 
by  other  methods. 

A  plant that is already  mature,  and  possibly 
even  straggly,  is  dug  up  with  a  reasonably 
sized  root ball.  It  is then  completely  buried  so 
only  the  tips  of  the  branches  show.  These 
branches  will  root,  and  they  are  then  lifted, 
separated,  and  planted  out  to  establish  as 
new  plants. 
Dropping 

the  most 
desirable  method  of  propagating  plants  as 
often the  resulting layers  are  less shapely than 
those  produced  by  cuttings,  but  it  is  easy and 
simple  to  follow. 

is  not  necessarily 

it 

rigorously 

Prepare  a  plant  in  the  dormant  season  by 
to  encourage  new, 
pruning 
strong-growing  stems  with  a  high  capacity  to 
produce  roots.  Older,  nonpruned  stems  will 
respond  less  satisfactorily  to  propagation  but 
will  nevertheless  usually  regenerate. 

Dropping  is  normally  done  in  spring  before 
growth  begins,  but  once  the  ground  is  no 
longer frozen,  so the soil  can  be broken  down 
to  a  tilth. 

WAYS  TO  BURY  A  PLANT 
Compress  the  branches  into  a  single  row 
towards  the  middle  of  the  plant 
if  the 
branching  is  sparse.  This  pattern  saves 
space  and  makes  weeding  easy.  It  should 
not  be  done  if  the  plant  produces  a  thick 
mass  of  stems  as 
rooting  will  not  be 
satisfactory  if  there  is  insufficient  room  for 
the  roots  to  develop. 

In  those  plants  with  brittle  branches, 
work  the  soil  down  among  them  so  that 
each  stem  is  surrounded.  This  pattern  is 
more  difficult  to  keep  weed  free. 

The  traditional  pattern  is  to  excavate  a 
bowl-shaped  hole  and  to  push  out  all  the 
branches  to  the  perimeter,  and  fill  in  the 
middle  of  the  hole  with  soil.  This  pattern 
is  easy  to  weed  but  is  wasteful  of  space. 

Cultivate  some  soil  and  incorporate  peat 
and  grit  if  the  soil 
is  heavy  and  likely  to 
become  waterlogged.  This  will  lighten  it  and 
improve  aeration. 

Excavate  a  hole  large  enough  for the whole 
plant to  be  "dropped"  into  it,  leaving only the 
tips  of  the  stems  visible.  Dig  the  base  of  the 
hole  well  to  allow  efficient  drainage,  other(cid:173)
wise  waterlogging  will  discourage  successful 
rooting. 

Lift  the  plant  with  as  complete  a  root  ball 
as  possible.  Place  it  in  the  hole  and  arrange 
its  branches  in  any  of three  different  patterns 
within  the  hole;  the  choice  will  depend  upon 
the  habit  of  the  plant  under  consideration. 

Whichever  pattern  of  dropping  is  used, 
ensure that  only 1 in  or so  of the stem  tips  are 
exposed:  greater  exposure  of  stem  will  cause 
the  new  growth  to  be  leggy.  Cover  the  plant 
with  soil,  firm  in  and  label. 

Water  during  the  growing  season  if the  soil 

dries. 
Lift 

the  whole  plant 

in  autumn.  The 
fairly 
branches  will  have 
close  to  the  soil  surface.  Cut  away  each 
division  and  plant  it  out  or  pot  it  up.  Label 
clearly.  Discard  the  old  stool. 

rooted,  usually 

Growing  plants  from  stem  cuttings  is  by  far 
the  most  popular  method  of  vegetative 
propagation.  However,  only  in  the  last  150 
years,  since the  availability  of cheap  materials 
and  the  development  of  greenhouses,  cold 
frames,  etc.,  has  it  played  a  significant  part  in 
vegetative  propagation. 

The  main  difficulty  about 

taking  stem 
cuttings  is  that  a  stem,  separated  from  its 
parent  plant,  has  to  survive  while  it  initiates 
and  develops  roots  and  establishes  itself  as  a 
new  plant.  This  distinguishes  the  technique 
from  layering (see  page 54),  in which  the stem 
is  not  separated  from  the  parent  plant  until 
after  a  new  root  system  is  produced. 

Because  a  stem  cutting  has  no  support 
system  from  the  parent  plant,  it  is  necessary 
for  the  gardener  to  supply  this  himself.  He 
should  ensure  that  the  propagating  environ(cid:173)
ment will  not  only  enhance  root  development 
but  also  maintain 
is 
self-supporting. 

the  cutting  until 

it 

Selecting  a  suitable  stem 
The  ability  of  a  stem  to  produce  roots  will  be 
dependent  on  the  age  of the  parent  plant  and 
its  particular  variety,  and  on  the  stem  to  be 
propagated 
(see  page  53).  The  gardener 
should  try  to  propagate  from  a  plant  that 
has  recently  matured  and  is  a  relatively  new 
variety  rather  than  an  old  plant  or  old  variety 
of  plant. 

The  parent  plant  should  be  pruned  rigor(cid:173)

ously to  encourage  it to  produce fast-growing 
vegetative  shoots  from  which  stem  cuttings 
will  be  made,  as  these  shoots  are  most  likely 
to  produce  roots.  The  harder  the  plant  is 
pruned,  the  faster  will  be  the  new  growth. 
The  whole  success  of  propagation  by  stem 
cuttings  depends  on  the  ability  of  the  stem 
to  produce  roots—and  if  this  is  absent  or  at 
a  very  low  level,  then  the  stem  should  be 
discarded. 

A  stem's  ability  to  produce  roots  may  have 
seasonal fluctuations,  but this depends  on the 
condition  of  the  stem,  that  is  whether  it  is 
soft  wood,  hard  wood,  etc.  A  softwood 
cutting  is  taken  soon  after  the  buds  have 
started  growing  in  spring,  and  it  has a greater 
ability  to  produce  roots  than  a  hardwood 
cutting,  which  is  taken  at  the  end  of  the 
growing  season.  However,  because  the  soft(cid:173)

is  still 

immature, 

wood  stem 
is  more 
susceptible to water loss,  rot and  disease,  and 
it 
requires  a  highly  controlled 
environment  in  which  to  develop. 

therefore 

it 

A  stem  cutting's  food  reserve  is  used  not 
only  to  initiate  roots  but  also  to  maintain  the 
cutting  until  it  is  fully  established  as  a  new 
plant.  The  size  of the  reserve  depends  on  the 
condition  of  the  stem:  a  cutting  from  a 
mature  (hardwood)  stem  will  be  able 
to 
survive  much  longer  than  an  immature  (soft(cid:173)
wood)  cutting.  A  cutting  should  therefore  be 
encouraged  to  develop  roots  as  quickly  as 
possible  to  avoid  exhausting  its  food  reserve. 
It  should  also  be  exposed  as  little  as  possible 
to  variable  weather  conditions  to  prevent  it 
drying  out—leafy  cuttings  being  particularly 
prone  to  water  loss. 

(for  example,  green  wood 

A  cutting  should  be  taken  from  a  fast-
growing  stem  from  the  current  year's  growth 
at  the  correct  season  for  the  condition  of  the 
in  early 
stem 
summer,  hard  wood  during 
the  dormant 
season).  It  should  then  produce  roots  quite 
readily,  without  the  artificial  aid  of  rooting 
hormones;  if  it  is  dipped  in  hormone,  the 
treatment  is  likely  to  have  little  or  no  effect. 
However  for  plants  that  are  difficult  to  root, 
dip  stem  cuttings  into  a  rooting  hormone,  or 
wound  them,  to  stimulate  the  roots. 

the 

faster 

temperature 

Environmental  control 
The  rate  at  which  a  stem  cutting  develops 
its  roots  is  dependent  on  the  temperature 
around 
it.  The  processes  controlling  root 
initiation  are  essentially  chemical;  the  higher 
the 
the  chemical 
reaction  and  thus  root  production.  However, 
if  a  whole  cutting  is  kept  warm,  its  tip  will 
grow  and  food  will  be  diverted  from 
the 
important  function  of  forming  roots.  Its  food 
reserves  may  then  be  used  up  before  the 
cutting  has  become  self-supporting.  There(cid:173)
fore,  a  cutting  requires  two  temperatures:  a 
cool,  aerial  environment  to  keep  tip  growth 
to  a  minimum,  and  warmth  below  to  en(cid:173)
courage  root  production. 

The  exact 

temperatures  vary  with 

the 
condition  of  the  stem  and  how  susceptible  it 
is  to  water  loss.  Softwood  cuttings  require 
bottom  heat  of  about  21°C/70°F  and  as  cool 
an  aerial  temperature  as  practical—a  mist 

the  cuttings  and  compost 

unit  is  ideal  Hardwood  cuttings,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  propagated  outdoors where the soil 
is  quite warm  enough  and  the  air,  even  when 
frosty,  is  not  too  cool.  Greenwood,  semiripe 
and  evergreen  cuttings  need  a  warm,  humid 
environment.  This  can  be  supplied  by  placing 
a  small  pot  filled  with  water  inside  a  pot  that 
has 
it  and 
putting them  under a  polyethylene tent,  or  by 
placing  the  pot  that  has  the  cuttings  and 
compost  in  it  inside  a  larger  pot  filled  with 
moist  peat  and  putting  them  under  a  poly(cid:173)
ethylene  tent.  However,  the  main  disadvant(cid:173)
age of these two environments is that it is easy 
for  the  gardener  to  overwater  and  so  kill  the 
cuttings  through  rotting  and  fungal  diseases 
unless  extreme  care  is  taken.  Cold  frames, 
closed  cases  and  polyethylene  tunnels  are 
therefore  preferable. 

in 

Different  stem  conditions 
A  stem  cutting  can  be  divided  into  five  wood 
conditions  for  the  purposes  of  propagation. 
leaves  and  are 
made  from  the  first  flush  of  growth  in  spring. 
Their  stems  are  normally  very  soft  because 

Softwood  cuttings  have 

they  have  grown  extremely  rapidly;  and  they 
require  sophisticated  environmental  con(cid:173)
trols  to  minimize  water  loss  and  so  ensure 
their  survival  until  they  become  established. 
Greenwood  cuttings  are  made  from  the 

tips  of  the  leafy  stems  during  early  to  mid(cid:173)
summer.  Their  stems  are  soft,  although 
harder 
they 
should  be  propagated  in  a  controlled  en(cid:173)
vironment,  such  as  a  closed  case. 

than  softwood  cuttings,  and 

Semiripe  cuttings  are  made  in  late  summer 
that  has  slowed  and 

from  stem  growth 
hardened  but  is  still  actively  growing.  Al(cid:173)
though  these  leafy  stems  are  subject to  water 
loss,  they  can  survive  under  less  rigorous 
environmental  controls 
than  softer  wood 
cuttings. 

Ripewood  cuttings  are  stems  taken  from 
evergreen  plants  during  winter.  They  have 
almost hardwood stems but,  because they are 
leafy,  they  are  not  entirely  dormant  and  will 
require some degree of environmental control. 
Hardwood  cuttings  are  made  from  leafless 
dormant  stems  of  deciduous  plants.  They 
require  minimal  environmental  control  for 
survival. 

It 

is 

WHERE  TO  CUT  A  STEM 
A  nodal  cutting  has 
its 
basal  cut  just  (-1/8in)  below  a 
bud,  or  node. 
the 
traditional  place to  cut soft, 
immature  stems  as  a  stem 
just  below  a  node  is  harder 
and  more 
to 
resistant 
fungal 
than  a  stem 
rots 
cut  further  away  from  the 
nodes.  This 
is 
known  as  an 
internodal 
cut,  and  it  is  used  mainly 
for  more  mature,  woodier 
stems. 

latter  cut 

cuttings 

Other  methods  of  taking 
a  cutting  are  leaf  bud,  heel 
or  mallet 
(see 
pages  62-3)  or  vine  eye 
cuttings  (see  page  73).  The 
index  at  the  back  of  the 
book  will 
these 
methods when appropriate. 

refer 

to 

the  re(cid:173)

to  support 

the  cutting  and 

Leaf  bud  cuttings 
Leaf  bud  cuttings  can  be  taken  from  any  type 
of  stem—soft  wood,  green  wood,  semiripe 
wood,  hard  wood  or  evergreen.  Each  cutting 
consists  of  a  leaf,  a  bud  in  its  leaf  axil  and  a 
very  short  piece  of  stem.  The  leaf  supplies 
food 
generative  processes;  the  bud  provides  the 
basis  for the  new  stem  system;  and  the  piece 
of  stem  is  where the  first  roots  are  produced. 
To  be  successful,  the  gardener  must  use 
stems  that  have  a  high  capacity  to  produce 
roots.  Therefore,  prune 
the  parent  plant 
rigorously  should  it  be  a  woody  plant.  This 
will  encourage  new  stems,  which  will  grow 
rapidly  and  so  have  a  high  rooting  potential. 
For  leaf  bud  cuttings,  select  one  of  these 
new  stems  with  an  undamaged  leaf  that  is 
fully  expanded  and  mature, 
if  the  leaf  is 
immature, 
leaf 
growth  before  it  starts  producing  roots,  and 
this 
the  chances  of  peripheral 
problems,  such  as  rotting.  Also,  ensure  that 
there  is  a  viable  bud  in  the  leaf  axil.  (For 
example,  some  Virginia  creepers  do  not  have 
a  bud  in  every  leaf  axil.) 

the  cutting  will  complete 

increases 

Make the  cuttings with  a  razor  blade,  knife 
or  shears,  depending  on 
the  hardness  of 
the  stem.  Cut  close  above the  bud  so that  as 
small  a  snag as  possible  is  left. This  minimizes 
the  likelihood  of  rotting  and  die-back,  which 
might  endanger  the  bud. 

Make the basal cut about 1-11/2 in below the 
top  cut  so  that  sufficient  stem  is  available  to 
anchor 
the  cuttings 
compost.  This  is  especially  important  with 
plants  that  have  big  leaves  and  are  liable 
to  rot. 

the  cutting 

firmly 

in 

Plants  with  big  leaves  are  also  difficult  to 
plant  at  a  realistic  spacing,  so  reduce  their 
leaf  area  either  by  removing  some  of the  leaf 
or  by  rolling  the  leaf  and  placing  a  rubber 
band  round  it  so  that  it  takes  up  less  room. 
Dip  the  cutting  in  a  rooting  hormone. 

In  a  pot  filled  with  cuttings  compost  make 
a  hole  with  a  dibble.  Plant  the  cutting  with  its 
bud  about  level  with  the  compost  surface. 
Firm  sufficiently to  prevent  rocking.  Label  and 
fungicide.  Place  hardy 
water 
cuttings 
less  hardy 
cuttings  in  a well-lit,  more  protected  environ(cid:173)
ment,  such  as  a  mist  unit  or  closed  case. 

in  with  a 

frame  and 

in  a  cold 

Heel  cuttings 
The  taking  of  heel  cuttings  is  a  traditional 
way  to  propagate  plants  from  stem  cuttings. 
It  is a widely used  method of removing a stem 
cutting  from  a  plant,  and  it  is  quite  possible 
to  make  heel  cuttings  of  softwood,  green(cid:173)
wood,  semiripe,  hardwood  or  evergreen 
stems. 

A  young  side-shoot  is  stripped  away  from 
its  parent  stem  so  that  a  heel,  that  is  a  thin 
sliver  of  bark  and  wood  from  the  old  stem, 
also  comes  away  at  the  base  of  the  cutting. 
The  reason  for  taking  a  stem  cutting  with 
a  heel  is  to  give  the  cutting  a  firm  base  so 
that  it  is  well  protected  against  possible  rots. 
It  also  exposes 
the 
current  season's  growth,  which  has  a  very 
high  capacity  to  produce  roots. 

the  swollen  base  of 

Heel  cuttings  are  often  used 

cuttings 

that 

take  some 

time 

for  stem 
to  develop 

roots,  for  example  those  that  are  planted  in 
autumn  and  have  to  survive  through  the 
winter  before  rooting,  or  those  hardwood 
cuttings  that  are  planted  in  a  cold  frame. 
Heel  cuttings  are  also  made  from  softwood 
and  greenwood  stems that  are  left to  develop 
in partially controlled environments, such as a 
propagator.  Heel  cuttings  can  be  taken  at 
any  time  of  year. 

Hold  the  bottom  of the  side-shoot  between 
forefinger  and  pull  down 

the 
sharply  so  it  comes  away  with  a  long  tail. 

thumb  and 

If  the  side-shoot  does  not  pull  off  readily,  , 

place  a  knife  blade  in  the  angle  close  against 
the  parent  stem  and  cut  away  the  side-shoot 
with  a  heel. 

Trim the tail on the heel and any leaves near 
it.  Remove  some  of  the  tip  on  semiripe  and 
hardwood  cuttings.  Dip 
in  a 
rooting  hormone. 

the  cutting 

Plant  hardwood  cuttings  straight  into  the 
ground;  semiripe  and  subshrub  cuttings  in 
a  cold  frame;  and  less  hardy  cuttings  in  the 
protected  environment  of  a  propagator. 
Label  and  water  them  in  with  a  fungicide. 

Mallet  cuttings 
Mallet  cuttings  have  a  hardwood  plug  at  the 
base  of  each  cutting  to  guard  against  rotting 
organisms.  Their  use  is  restricted  to  semiripe 
and  hardwood  cuttings,  and  they  are  es(cid:173)
pecially  successful  for  many  Berberis  when 
propagated  in  the  autumn  and  planted  in 
cold  frames. 

Mallet  cuttings  are  most  successfully  made 
from  stems  with  a  feathered  habit,  that  is 
from  a  stem  with  small  side-shoots. 

Prune  back  the  parent  plant  in  winter  to 
encourage  vigorous  stem  growth,  which  has 
a  high  capacity  to  produce  roots. 

the 

later  part  of 

Take  mallet  cuttings  from  these  new  stems 
in 
the  growing  season. 
Cut  horizontally  with  scissor-type  shears 
across  the  parent  stem  immediately  above  a 
suitable  side-shoot.  It  is  important  to  make 
this  top  cut  as  close  to  the  side-shoot  as 
possible  because  the  longer  the  snag  the 
greater  the  likelihood  of  die-back  and  hence 
potential  rotting. 

Make  a  further  horizontal  cut  about  3/4  in 
below  the  top  cut  so  that  the  side-shoot  is 
isolated  with  a  small  "mallet"  of  parent  stem. 
Split  this  piece  of  mallet  with  a  knife  if  it  is 
thick.  Trim  any  leaves  at  the  bottom. 

Dip  the  base  of  the  mallet  stem  in  a  root(cid:173)

ing  hormone.  Make  a  hole  large  enough  to 
take  all  the  mallet  and  part  of  the  side-shoot 
with a dibble.  Plant semiripe cuttings  in a cold 
frame  and  hardwood  cuttings  in  the  open 
ground.  Label  and  water  with  a fungicide. 

Soft  wood  is  the  most  immature  part  of  a 
stem,  and,  when  propagating,  it  is  the  most 
difficult  kind  of  cutting  to  keep  alive.  How(cid:173)
ever,  soft  wood  does  have 
the  highest 
capacity  of  all  kinds  of  stems  to  produce 
roots:  the  younger  and  the  more  immature 
the  cutting,  the  greater  will  be  its  ability  to 
develop  roots,  and  so  propagate successfully. 
Soft stem  growth  is  produced  continuously 
at  the  tip  of  any  stem  during  the  growing 
season.  As  it  matures,  the  stem  gradually 
hardens  and  becomes  woody.  The  faster  the 
growth  at  the  tip,  the  more  stem  without 
wood  will  be  present. 
Softwood  cuttings, 

in 
spring  from  the  fast-growing  tips  of  plants. 
Growth  when  the  buds  first  break  is  remark(cid:173)
ably  rapid,  and,  if  cuttings  are  made  as  soon 

then,  are 

taken 

there 

taken  slightly 

is  sufficient  growth, 

as 
the  highest 
rooting  potential  will  be  available.  Tips  of 
plants 
the  season, 
around  the  beginning  of  June,  will  be  slower 
growing,  more  mature  and  have  a 
lower 
capacity  to  root,  and  they  are  referred  to  as 
greenwood  cuttings. 

later 

in 

It  is  possible  to  obtain  softwood  cuttings 
later  in  the  season  by  forcing  the  plant,  that 
is  by  increasing  temperatures  well  above  the 
norm,  which  will  accelerate  growth.  This  can 
be  done,  for  example,  by  placing  deciduous 
outdoor  plants  in  the  warmth  of  a  green(cid:173)
house,  or  by  placing  houseplants 
in  a 
temperature  of  about  29°C/85°F.  The  very 
highest  capacity  to  produce  roots  can  be 
achieved  by  pruning  the  parent  plant  vigor(cid:173)
ously  in  winter,  which  will  encourage  rapid 

increasing 

temperature 
growth;  by 
around 
in  spring;  and  by  then 
taking  the  cutting  as  soon  as  sufficient  tip 
growth  is  available. 

the  plant 

the 

Softwood  cuttings  are  extremely  suscep(cid:173)
tible to water  loss.  Their  immature  leaves  have 
not  fully  expanded  and  so  have  not  com(cid:173)
pletely  developed  their  own  mechanisms  for 
reducing  water  loss.  Even  a  relatively  minor 
water  loss  will  hinder  the  roots  developing. 
By  the  time  a  cutting 
root 
development  will  have  ceased. 

is  wilting  all 

The  secret  of  success 

is  to  collect  the 
cuttings  in  small  batches  and  to  maintain 
them 
turgid  condition  before 
planting  them. 

in  a 

fully 

Fill  a  container  with  cuttings  compost  and 

firm  to  within  f in  of  the  rim. 

Take  a  cutting  in  early  morning  when  the 
stem  is  fully  turgid.  By  midafternoon  normal 
water  loss  from  the  plant  will  exceed  uptake, 
and  the  plant  will  be  under  water  stress. 

If  the  stem  has  grown  less  than  4 in  since 
bud-break,  remove  it  with  a  heel,  that  is with 
the  swollen  portion  at  the  base  of  the  stem 
that  had  the  very  fastest  growth  when  the 
new  stem  started  to  develop  at  bud-break. 
Place the cutting in a  polyethylene bag or a 

bucket  of  water  immediately.  Keep  the  poly(cid:173)
ethylene  bag  shaded  to  avoid  "cooking"  the 
cutting—a  major  cause  of  failure. 

Plant  the  cutting  as  soon  as  possible.  If  it 
cannot  be  dealt  with  quickly,  keep  it  cool  in 
the  vegetable  compartment  of  a  domestic 
refrigerator,  where  the  low  temperature  will 
prevent  excessive  water  loss. 

If  there  is  more  than  4 in  between  the  tip 
and  the  base  of the  cutting,  place  the  cutting 
on  a  sheet  of  glass  and  make  a  nodal  c u t— 
that  is  a  cut  at  the  base  of  the  stem  just 
(1/8 in) below a  bud  or leaf joint. This  provides 
as  hard  and  solid  a  surface  as  possible  and 
will  help  prevent  rotting. 

If the  cutting was taken  with a  heel,  neaten 
the  tail  that  will  also  have  come  away  with 
the  stem. 

Remove  the  leaves  on  the  bottom  third  of 
the  cutting,  which  will  be  reliant  on 
the 
remaining  leaves to  produce  sufficient food  to 
keep it alive until  its roots are fully established. 
Dip  the  base  of  the  cutting  in  a  powder 
fungicide  such  as  Captan 
it 
against  rotting.  Softwood  cuttings  do  not 
need  to  be  treated  with  a  rooting  hormone. 

to  protect 

the  "softwood"  strength  (0.2  percent 

but 
IBA)  can  be  mixed  in  with  the  powder fungi(cid:173)
cide  if  desired. 

Make  a  hole  with  a  dibble  and  plant  the 
cutting  up to  its  leaves  in the compost,  taking 
care .not  to  damage  the  base  of  the  cutting. 
Plant  cuttings  so  their  leaves  do  not  touch. 
Label  and  firm  them 
in  by  watering  from 
above the compost,  using a watering can with 
a fine  rose;  pressing by  hand  may damage the 
cuttings. 

Place  the  cuttings  as  quickly  as  possible  in 
a  well-lit  propagating  environment  such  as  a 
mist unit,  a closed case  or a  polyethylene tent 
that  will 
the 
cuttings. 

conserve  moisture  within 

The  advantage  of  a  mist  unit  is  that  it 
keeps the top  of the cuttings  cool,  whereas  air 

temperatures  .are  high  in  a  closed  case  or 
polyethylene  tent.  A  high  aerial  temperature 
will  force  the  cuttings  to  grow  upward,  and 
food  will  be  diverted 
important 
function  of  root  initiation.  If  the  cuttings  are 
shaded 
temperature, 
then  the  light  intensity  penetrating  to  the 
leaves  of  the  cuttings  is  decreased,  and  this 
reduces  food  production  and  hence  the  rate 
of  regeneration. 

to  reduce  the  aerial 

from 

the 

The  problem  then  becomes  a vicious  circle 
that  is  not  easy  to  resolve  without  a  mist 
unit,  which  maintains  both  a  cool,  aerial 
environment  and  high  water  status  within 
the  cuttings. 

Softwood  cuttings,  because  they  are  the 
immature  part  of  a  plant,  are  susceptible  to 
all  the  vagaries  of  their  environment:  so  the 

longer  they  take  to  root,  the  greater  are  the 
chances of them  succumbing to some outside 
influence.  Thus  the  speed  with  which  they 
regenerate is vital. The rate of root production 
will  be  dependent  on  the  temperature  sur(cid:173)
rounding the  base  of the  cuttings;  in  general, 
the  higher  the  temperature,  the  faster  the 
roots  are  produced.  Best  rooting  will  occur 
with  a  temperature  around  the  base  of  the 
cuttings  of  21-24°C/70-75°F. 

Spray  softwood  cuttings  with  a 

liquid 
fungicide  at  least  once  a  week  to  protect 
them  against  rotting  and  disease. 

Harden  off  the  cuttings  once  they  have 
rooted  successfully,  gradually  weaning  them 
from 
finally 
pot  them  up  in  John  Innes  No.  1  compost  or 
similar  (see  page 12)  and  label. 

their  controlled  environment; 

The  essential  but  subtle  distinction  between 
softwood  cuttings  and  greenwood  cuttings  is 
their  speed  of  growth.  Externally  they  may 
appear  to  be  very  similar,  but  greenwood 
cuttings  are  taken  from  the  soft  tip  of  the 
stem  after  the  spring  flush  of  growth  has 
slowed down. The stem is, then, slightly harder 
and  woodier 
for  softwood  cuttings 
because the  tip  is  not  growing  away  from  the 
hardening stem  so fast  as  it was  in  the  spring. 
In  fact,  as  the  season  progresses  greenwood 
cuttings  become  harder  and  harder.  How(cid:173)
ever,  it should  be emphasized that greenwood 
cuttings  require  just  as  much  environmental 
control  as  softwood  cuttings. 

than 

Use  greenwood  cuttings  to  propagate  a 
wide  range  of  trees  and  shrubs,  such  as 
gooseberries,  that  will  root  easily,  and  the 
majority  of  herbaceous  plants,  such  as 
chrysanthemums.  However,  plants  that  are 
difficult  to  root  should  be  propagated  from 
softwood  cuttings  and  not  from  greenwood 
cuttings,  which  have a  slightly  reduced  ability 
to  develop  roots. 

Prune  back  woody  plants 

in 
winter 
to  encourage  rapidly  grown  stems 
with  a  high  capacity  to  root,  which  can  be 
used  for  propagation  in  the  growing  season. 

rigorously 

needed for root production, as the cutting has 
little  or  no  food  reserves. 

Rooting  should  take  between  three  and 
eight  weeks.  Take  the  rooted  cutting  out  of 

the  propagating  environment  but  keep  it  well 
protected,  gradually  hardening  it  off.  Then 
repot  in  John  Innes  No.  1  compost  or  similar 
(see  page  12),  and  label  clearly. 

Take  cuttings  from  these  stems  once  their 
growth  rate  has  begun  to  decline,  which  will 
usually  be  about  the  beginning  of  June  for 
most  outdoor  plants. 

Fill  a  container  with  cuttings  compost  and 

firm to within 3/8 in of the rim. 

Take a  cutting from  a fully turgid  stem  with 
all  its  current  season's  growth,  early  in  the 
morning.  Place  the  cutting  immediately  in  a 
bucket  of  water  or  a  polyethylene  bag  in  a 
shaded position, because it is vitally important 
to  maintain 
the  turgidity  of  a  greenwood 
cutting.  If  it  suffers  water  loss,  its  rooting  will 
be  hindered. 

Place  the  cutting  on  a  pane  of  glass  and 
with  a  knife  reduce  the  cutting  to  about  3-4 
in. The cutting's length will very much depend 
on 
the  amount  of  soft  growth  available. 
Discard  the  leaves  from  the  bottom  half  of 
the  cutting.  Dip  the  base  of  the  cutting  in  a 
rooting  hormone  powder  of 
"softwood" 
strength (0.2  percent  IBA). 

Make  a  hole  in  the  compost  and  plant  the 
cutting  up  to  the  leaves.  Label  it  and  water 
with  a  fungicide.  Place  in  a  closed  case,  mist 
unit  or  polyethylene tent, to prevent excessive 
water  loss  and  wilting.  Ensure  the  cutting 
receives  adequate  light  to  make  the  food 

During  the  late  summer,  annual  stem  growth 
slows  down  and  plant  stems  become  harder. 
Cuttings  taken  at  this  time  are  called  semi-
ripe  cuttings.  As  they  are  thicker  and, harder 
than  softwood  cuttings, 
they  are  more 
capable  of  survival.  However  they  are  still 
susceptible  to  the  same  problems  of  water 
loss  because  the  cuttings  carry  leaves. 

Semiripe  cuttings  have 

relatively  high 
therefore 

levels  of  stored 
survive  and  produce  roots  in  poor  light. 

food  and  can 

Many  deciduous  plants,  such  as  deutzias, 
that  root  fairly  easily  are  propagated  from 
semiripe  cuttings,  and  some  evergreen  plants 
can  also  be  increased  in  this  way. 

for  propagation 

Prune  the  parent  plant  at  the  start  of  the 
dormant  season,  so  that  strong,  fast-grown 
stems  are  available 
the 
following  season.  These  will  have  a  greater 
ability to  produce  roots than  unpruned  stems. 
Prepare the soil  in the cold frame  by digging 
deeply.  Add  peat and  grit to  improve drainage 
and 
its  water-holding  capacity.  Cover  the 
surface with a 1 in  layer  of fine (builder's)  sand 
to  make  a  better  rooting  medium.  If  only  a 
few  cuttings  are  to  be  taken,  fill  a  container 
with  cuttings  compost  and  cover  with  a  1  in 
layer  of fine  sand. 

Take  semiripe  cuttings  from  a  main  stem 
with  all  the  current  season's  growth  or  from 
side-shoots  if  the  main  stem  has  feathered 

Insulate  the  frame  with  matting  once  the 
leaves  have  fallen 
to  protect  the  cuttings 
against  frost  in  winter.  Once  the  cuttings 
have  no  leaves,  light  is  not  necessary  for  the 
plants 
the 
food  and  so 
matting  can  be  left  in  place  all  the  time. 
if 

the 
weather  is  mild;  otherwise  it will  occur during 
the  late  winter  or  spring. 

Rooting  may  start 

to  manufacture 

fairly  quickly 

Leave  the  rooted  cuttings  in  situ  during the 
following  growing  season.  Feed  them  regu(cid:173)
larly  with  a  liquid  fertilizer  and  water  when 
dry.  Remove  insulation  and  air the  cold frame 
by  raising  its  lid  during the  day as soon  as the 
danger  of  frost  is  over.  Eventually  remove  it 
altogether.  Lift  the  new  plants  and  transplant 
them  after  leaf  fall  in  the  autumn.  Label  the 
new  plants  clearly. 

growth,  that  is  a  series  of  small  side-shoots 
growing  on  the  main  stem. 

Remove  the  tip  of  the  stem  if  it  is  soft,  but 
leave  it  if  the  apical  bud  has  set  and  growth 
has  ceased  for  the  year.  Shorten  the  cutting 
with  shears  to  4-6 in  long,  depending  on  the 
vigor  of  the  particular  plant. 

Cut  off the  lower  leaves flush  with  the  stem 
so that  about  2 in  of stem  is  clear  at the  base. 
Treat  the  basal  cut  surface  with  a  rooting 
hormone  powder.  The  strength  for  semiripe 
cuttings is  0.4 percent IBA. 

Make  a  hole  with  a  dibble  in  the  soil  in  a 
frame.  Plant  the  cutting  about l1/2 in 
cold 
deep,  so  its  base just enters the soil  below the 
sand  layer.  Space  the  cuttings  as  close  as  is 
feasible,  but  this  is  not  likely  to  be  much  less 
than  3-4 in  apart.  Label  them  clearly. 

Water  in  the  cuttings  using  a  dilute  fungi(cid:173)

the 

frame 

cidal  solution;  this  also firms the  sand  around 
the  cutting.  Close 
tightly  and 
shade  it to  prevent the  leaves from  scorching. 
Air  the  cold  frame  from  the  lower  end  if  the 
temperature  rises  above  27°C/80°F.  Water 
sufficiently 
rewet  and  develop  high 
humidity  should  conditions  become  dry. 

to 

As  semiripe  cuttings  are  usually  deciduous, 
they  will  drop  their  leaves  in  autumn.  At  this 
stage  remove  all  the  fallen  leaves  from  the 
frame  so  that  they  do  not  rot  and  cause 
disease. 

The  propagation  of  evergreen 
trees  and 
shrubs from  stem  cuttings  is a traditional  and 
valuable  method.  Evergreen  cuttings  are 
taken  from  stems  of  very  ripe  wood,  that  is, 
almost  hard  wood.  They  cannot  be  regarded 
as  hardwood  cuttings  as  they  are  not  leafless 
and  are  not  fully  dormant  because  of  their 
evergreen  habit.  Because  they  have  leaves, 
they  need  sufficient  environmental  control 
to  prevent  excessive  water  loss. 

In  winter,  prune  the  parent  plant  from 
which  the  cuttings  are  to  be  made.  This  will 
encourage 
strong, 
vigorous,  fast-grown  shoots  that  have  the 
required  high  capacity  to  produce  roots. 

the  development  of 

Propagate  evergreen  cuttings  during  late 

summer  to  early  a u t u m n;  rooting  will  nor(cid:173)
mally 
take  place  during  winter.  However, 
evergreen  plants  can  be  propagated  from 
softer  wood  earlier  in  the  growing  season. 
Treat  these  cuttings  according  to  the  con(cid:173)
dition  (soft  wood,  green  wood  or  semiripe 
wood)  of  their  stems. 

Prepare  the  soil  in  a  cold  frame  by  digging 
thoroughly  and  mixing  in  grit,  peat  and  sand. 
Evergreen  cuttings  taken  in  late  summer 
should  be  4-6 in  long,  although  their  length 
must  be  related  to  the  normal  size  of  the 
plant  and 
the  amount  of  annual  growth. 
Cuttings  from  dwarf  Hebe,  for  example,  may 
be  only  11/2  in  long.  Take  a  heel  with  the 
cutting  (see  page  63)  if  it  is  to  be  propagated 
in  unsterilized  soil  in  a  cold  frame  or  poly(cid:173)
ethylene  tunnel.  Neaten  any  tail  on  the  heel. 
Leave  on  the  cutting  any  terminal  bud  that 
may  have  set.  If,  however,  growth  is  con(cid:173)
tinuing,  cut  out  the  soft  tip  with  a  knife. 

Strip  any  leaves  off the  bottom  third  to  half 
of the  cutting.  Make a shallow vertical  wound 
about  1 in  long  in  the  bottom  of  the  stem  of 
plants,  such  as  Daphne,  Elaeagnus  and 
Magnolia  grandiflora,  that  are  difficult  to  root. 
Dip  the  base  of  the  cutting  in  a  rooting 
hormone  powder  of  ripewood  strength  (0.8 
percent  IBA).  Ensure  the  wound  is  covered 
with  the  powder. 

To  make  more  economical  use  of  space, 
reduce  the  size  of  large  leaves  by  cutting  off 
up  to  half  of  each  leaf  blade  with  a  sharp  pair 
of  scissor-type  shears. 

Make  a  hole  with  a  dibble  in  the  prepared 
soil  in  the  cold  frame  and  plant  the  cutting 

up  to  its  leaves.  Allow  the  leaves  of  cuttings 
to  touch  but  not  to  overlap.  If  leaves  overlap 
excessively  they  tend  to  stick  together  with 
a  water  film,  and  this  provides  an  ideal  place 
for  rot  to  develop. 

Label  the  cuttings  and  water  them  with  a 
dilute  solution  of  fungicide.  Close  the  lid  of 
the  cold  frame  as  tightly  as  possible.  Shade 
the  frame  by  painting  it  with  a  proprietary 
lime-wash  or  by  covering  it  with  mesh,  in 
order 
fluctuation 
during  the  day  and  so  prevent  scorching. 
Remove  the  shading  once  light  intensity  and 
day  length  decreases  during  the  autumn.  If 
watering is necessary,  incorporate a fungicide 
to  help  control  rots. 

temperature 

to 

reduce 

Inspect the frame  regularly and  remove any 
fallen  leaves  and  dead  cuttings.  Cover  the 
frame  with  matting  as  insulation  as  long  as 
there  is  any  danger  from  frost. 

Leave  the  cuttings  in  situ  for  the  whole 
growing season. Transplant in  autumn, taking 
considerable  care when  lifting the  cuttings  as 
many  evergreen  plants  produce  fairly  thick, 
fleshy  and  brittle  roots.  Label  the  new  plants 
clearly. 

EVERGREEN  CUTTINGS  IN  A  MIST  UNIT 
Prune  the  parent  plant  in  winter.  In  late 
summer, fill  a container with  cuttings com(cid:173)
post.  Then  take  a  cutting  about  4-6 in 
long  from  the  current  season's  growth. 
Pinch  out  any  soft  growing  tip.  At  the 
bottom,  make  a  nodal  cut. 

Strip  any  leaves  off  the  bottom  third  of 
the  cutting  and  make  a  shallow  vertical 
wound  on  plants  that  are  difficult  to  root. 
Dip  the  cutting  in  a  rooting  hormone. 

Cut  down  the  size  of  large  leaves.  Make 
a  hole  with  a  dibble  in  the  compost  and 
insert the  cutting.  Plant any  more  cuttings, 
allowing  the  leaves  just  to  touch.  Label 
and  water with  a fungicide.  Place  in  a  mist 
unit  or  closed  case. 

Ensure  the  cuttings  do  not  become  too 
wet  as  over  the  winter  poor  light  and  low 
temperatures  do  not  dry  out  composts 
quickly.  Harden  them  off  gradually  once 
the  cuttings  have  rooted.  Pot  on  very 
carefully  in  spring  and  label. 

One  of  the  easiest  techniques  of  vegetative 
propagation 
from 
hardwood  cuttings. 

to  propagate  plants 

is 

A  hardwood  cutting  is  made  during  the 
dormant season from the fully  mature stem  of 
a  deciduous 
the 
cutting  has  no  leaves,  the  degree  of  environ(cid:173)
mental  control  required  for  successful  propa(cid:173)
gation  is  minimal. 

tree  or  shrub.  Because 

it 

is 

the  preparation  of 

As  with  virtually  all  methods  of  vegetative 
propagation, 
the 
parent  plant,  by  pruning  rigorously,a  year 
before  the  cutting  is  to  be  taken,  that  is 
possibly  the  single  most  important  factor  in 
the  ultimate  success  of  rooting  a  hardwood 
cutting. Hard, rigorous pruning will encourage 
stems  with  a  high  capability  of  producing 
roots. 

Where  and  when  to take  a  cutting 
A  stem  grows  at  different  speeds  throughout 
the  season.  It  develops  fastest  in  spring,  its 

rate  slowly  declining  until  autumn,  when 
growth  ceases  altogether.  Even  by  the  end 
of  the  growing  season,  the  base  of  a  stem 
that  was  produced 
in  spring  still  has  the 
greatest ability to develop  roots,  and  it should 
be  used  for  most  hardwood  cuttings. 

Plants,  such  as  willows,  poplars  and  cur(cid:173)
rants,  that  root  easily  show  very  little  decline 
in  their  ability  to  produce  roots  anywhere 
along  the  stem  and  so  virtually  any  part  of 
the  stem  can  be  made  into  cuttings. 

With  plants,  such  as  colored-leaf  plums, 
that  are  difficult  to  root  include  the  swollen 
base  in  the  cutting,  which  should  be  cut flush 
with  the  stem  (see  page  9). 

Hardwood  cuttings  can  be  taken  any  time 
during  the  dormant  season,  but  they  will  be 
most  successful  at  "leaf  fall"  and  just  before 
the  leaf  buds  break;  their  lowest  capacity  to 
root  is  in  the  early  new  year. 

Cuttings  made 

just  before  the  dormant 
buds  break  will  need  a  protected  environ(cid:173)

ment,  such  as  a  cold  frame,  or  very  careful 
timing to  avoid  leaves  being  produced  before 
roots,  so  causing the cutting to  lose water too 
quickly and  die. Thus  it  is more satisfactory to 
take  cuttings  at  "leaf  fall,"  when  they  can  be 
planted  in  the  open  ground. 

Conventional  "leaf  fall"  occurs  when  the 
stem,  having  produced  a  corky  abscission 
layer  to  isolate  each  leaf,  has  its  leaves  re(cid:173)
moved  by  rain,  frost  or wind.  However,  as far 
as the  plant  is concerned,  a leaf is  isolated  as 
soon  as  the  corky  abscission  layer  is  com(cid:173)
plete,  and  this  in  effect  is  "leaf fall." 

Run  a  hand  down  the stem  of a  plant.  If the 
leaves  fall  off,  the  corky  abscission  layer  is 
complete,  and  the  time,  therefore,  is  right  to 
take  hardwood  cuttings. 

Size  of  a  hardwood  cutting 
Although  traditionally  hardwood  cuttings  are 
made  between  10-14 in  long,  a  shorter  length 
is  much  more  successful. 

it 

is  vital 

Hardwood  cuttings,  although  leafless,  will 
still 
lose  some  water  by  evaporation  from 
their  surface.  The  commonest  reason  why 
these  cuttings  may  fail  to  develop  roots  is 
because they  are allowed  to  dry out. To  avoid 
water  loss,  expose  as  little  of  the  cutting  as 
possible  above  the  ground.  However,  if  the 
cutting  is  planted  too  deep,  the  buds  will  not 
grow  properly.  Thus 
to  expose 
sufficient  of  the  cutting  above  ground  for 
about  three  buds  to  develop.  In  practice  the 
third  bud  can  be  planted  just  below  ground 
level  as  at  that  depth  its  growth  will  not  be 
inhibited.  Therefore,  for  most  plants,  only 
1 in or so of the cutting need be above ground. 
A cutting initially develops  roots  both along 
the  stem  and  from  the  cut  area  at  its  base. 
Gradually,  the  roots  along the  stem  disappear 
and the root system  of the  new plant develops 
from  the  basal  roots  alone.  Therefore  these 
basal  roots should  be encouraged  by applying 
a  rooting  hormone  to  the  cutting  and  by 

maintaining  good  aeration  around 
it.  The 
surface  layers  of the soil,  that  is  about  the top 
2 in,  have  most  air  in  them.  Thus  ideally  a 
cutting should  be  planted  within  these  layers. 
However,  a  cutting  planted  2 in  deep  with 
about  1 in  exposed  above  ground  will  be  too 
short  for  survival:  the  cutting  will  dry  out  too 
easily;  it  will  be  too  short  to  anchor  rigidly; 
and  it  will  be  too  small  to  contain  sufficient 
food 
the 
dormant  season.  Thus  the  length  must  be 
increased  to  take  account  of  these  factors, 
and  6 in  is  a  satisfactory  compromise  for  a 
hardwood  cutting. 

to  support 

reserves 

it 

through 

Propagating  a  hardwood  cutting 
Prune  the  parent  plant  rigorously  during  the 
dormant  season  to  encourage  fast-growing 
stems. 

At  "leaf  fall"  cut  a  hardwood  stem  with  all 
the  current  year's  growth,  using  a  pair  of 
shears.  Cut 
it  flush  with  the  parent  stem 

to  avoid  snags.  Make  a  sloping  cut  as  close 
as  possible  above  the  proposed  top  bud, 
remembering  that  the  bottom  part  of  the 
cutting  has  the  greatest  rooting  capacity. 
Make  a  horizontal  cut  exactly  6 in  below  the 
top  cut  ignoring  the  position  of  any  buds. 

Treat  only  the  cut  base  of  the  cutting,  and 
not the stem, with a rooting hormone powder. 
The  hardwood  strength  is  0.8  percent  IBA. 
If suitable stems  are  made  into cuttings  at the 
correct  season  then  the  rooting  hormone  will 
have  little  affect  except  with  plants  that  are 
difficult  to  root. 

Bundle  the  cuttings  made  at  "leaf  fall"  into 
quantities  of ten  or twelve and  heel  them  into 
a  sandbox,  almost  to  their  full  depth;  label, 
and  leave  for  the  rest  of  the  winter.  Alter(cid:173)
natively,  they  can  be  planted  directly  into 
well-cultivated  soil. 

Easily  rooted  plants  will  readily  survive  in 
the  open  ground,  whereas  less  easily  rooted 
plants  will  benefit  from  the  increased  tem(cid:173)

perature  and  less  fluctuating  environment  of 
a  cold  frame. 

Just  before  the  dormant  buds  break 

in 
spring,  dig  the  propagation  bed  thoroughly. 
Make a furrow  5 in  deep with  a spade.  Lift the 
cuttings  from  the  sandbox  and  plant  them 
vertically  in  the  furrow.  Allow  4 -6  in  between 
cuttings;  leave  12-15 in  between  rows  in  the 
open  ground  and  only 4 in  between  rows  in  a 
cold  frame.  Firm  back  the  soil,  leaving  about 
1 in  of  the  cuttings  exposed.  Label  each  row. 
Open-ground  cuttings  may  need  refirming 
if  lifted  by  frost.  Leave  the  cuttings  in  situ  for 
the growing season.  In  autumn,  lift the  rooted 
cuttings,  each  of  which  will  have  produced 
several  stems,  and  transplant  them  to  their 
final  situations  in  the  garden. 

Protect  cuttings  planted  in  a  cold  frame 
only  until  they  have  developed  some  roots 
and  then  harden  off.  It  becomes  increasingly 
difficult  to  harden  them  off  as  the  growing 
season  progresses. 

Disbudding 
A  plant  is  sometimes  needed  that  has a single 
stem, or "leg," at the bottom  and  many stems, 
or  branches,  farther  up  the  plant.  To  grow  a 
plant  with  this  characteristic,  a  hardwood 
cutting  needs  to  be  longer  than  the  normal 
6 in  and  have  more  than  1 in  exposed  above 
the  ground.  However;  a  longer  cutting  may 
encourage 
lower 
down  the  stem,  so  losing  the  desired  single 
stem. 

further  buds 

to  develop 

To  prevent  any  branching  down  the  stem, 
cut  out  all  but  the  top  three  buds  at  "leaf 
fall."  Cut  out  the  buds  shallowly  but  com(cid:173)
pletely  with  a  sharp  knife;  ensure  no  latent 
buds  or  part-buds  remain.  It  is  simpler  to 
disbud  in  this  way  than  to  cut  out  stems  at 
a  later  date. 

Gooseberry  and  red  currant  bushes  are 
normally  propagated from 10-14 in  hardwood 
cuttings that  have  been  disbudded.  The  bush 
will  then  have  a  single  stem  at  the  bottom, 
which  will  allow  free  air  circulation  around 
the  bush,  thus  reducing  the  possibility  of 
mildew  attacks. 

To  produce  rose  rootstocks  take  an  Sin 
hardwood  cutting  and  remove  all  but  the 
top  two  buds  from  plants  such  as  Rosa  laxa 
and  Rosa  multiflora 
'Simplex.'  This  method 
will  avoid  rootstock  suckers. 

Seal  the  areas  that  have  been  disbudded 
to  prevent  rotting  and  disease.  It  is  possible 
to  leave  them  to  callus  over  naturally,  but 
unless  this  is  done  under  fairly  humid  con(cid:173)
ditions  there  is  always  the  danger  that  the 
cuttings  may  desiccate. 

It  is  better,  therefore,  to  paint  the  dis(cid:173)

budded  areas  with  paraffin  wax  or  more 
satisfactorily  with  a  proprietary  pruning  paint 
such  as  Arbrex. 

Treat  the  cuttings  with  rooting  hormone. 
Plant  the  rootstock  and  label  it.  For  roses, 
leave the two top  buds  exposed  and  sufficient 
stem  above  the  soil  level  for  any  buds  to  be 
grafted  on  later  in  the  season. 

and 

red-currant 

Gooseberry 

cuttings 
should  be  planted  with  their  third  top  bud 
within  2 in  of  the  soil  surface.  At  the  end  of 
the  growing  season 
the  cuttings  and 
replant with  much  more  of the stem  exposed. 

lift 

Soft-  or  hollow-pith  stems 
For  many  woody  plants,  such  as  forsythia,  it 
is  not  possible 
to  propagate  hardwood 
cuttings  by  the  method  described  on  pages 
70-1  because they  have  a  soft  or  hollow  pith. 
If this  is  exposed,  it  very  often  provides  a  site 
for  rots  and  diseases,  which  will  then  kill  the 
cuttings. 

There  are  two  ways  of  overcoming  this 
problem:  either  make  the  hardwood  cutting 
exactly 6 in  long  and  then  seal  the  base  of the 
cutting  with  paraffin  wax,  or  make  the  basal 
cut  below  a  leaf  bud  joint.  Cuttings  treated 
by  either  of  these  methods  should  root  just 
as  prolifically  as  cuttings  with  a  solid  pith. 

Melt  some  paraffin  wax  until  it  is  liquid. 
Touch  the  base  of  a  6 in  cutting  in  the  wax 
so.  that  a  drop  of  wax  attaches,  cools  and 
sets  quickly,  so  sealing  the  cut.  Do  not  over(cid:173)
heat  the  wax  and  so  damage  the  plant. 

This  is a very satisfactory  method  of sealing 
these  cuttings,  but  take  care  not  to  damage 
the  wax  seal  when  the  cuttings  are  bundled, 
heeled  in  and  planted. 

The  alternative  method 

is  to  make'  the 
basal  cut at a node, that  is immediately  below 
a  leaf  joint,  where  the  pith  is  generally  solid. 
Make the  basal  cut at the  node  nearest to the 
normal  6 in  cutting  length.  Plants  such  as 
kerria  very  often  have  long  spaces  between 
nodes,  and  cuttings  may  then  become  as 
much  as  8 -9 in  long. 

to  cause 

It  is  often  recommended  that  plants  with 
a  soft  pith  should  be  cut  with  a  knife,  as  this 
tends 
less  damage  than  shears, 
which  may  crush  the  cutting.  Provided,  how(cid:173)
that  a  sharp  pair  of  scissor-type 
ever, 
shears  is  used,  it  is  rare for extensive damage 
to  occur  and  shears  are, 
therefore,  quite 
satisfactory. 

technique 

is  normally  used  only 

Vine  eyes 
This 
for 
vines,  although  it  is  quite  possible  to  adopt  it 
for  any  plant with  a  reasonably  solid  pith  that 
can  be  propagated  by  hardwood  cuttings. 
Vine  eye  cuttings  are  the  hardwood  equiv(cid:173)
alent  of  leaf  bud  cuttings. 

Prune  back  the  plant  during  the  dormant 

season  to  encourage  vigorous  growth. 

Fill  a  small  pot  with  cuttings  compost  and 
firm  to  within  3/8  in  of  the  rim,  using  a  presser 
board. 

leaf  bud 

At  "leaf fall"  cut  a  stem  with  all  the  current 
season's  growth  from  the  parent  plant.  Make 
a  sloping  cut  with  a  pair  of  shears  just  above 
a 
left 
that  could  die  back  and  possibly  kill  the  bud. 
Make  the  basal  cut  horizontally  across  the 
stem  about  11/2  in  below  the  top  cut.  W o u nd 
the  cutting  if  the  plant  is  difficult  to  root. 

that  no  snag 

joint,  so 

is 

Place  a  sharp  knife  half-way  down  the  stem 
on  the  opposite  side  to  the  bud.  Make  a 
shallow  cut  down  to  the  base. 

Dip  the  basal  cut  surface  and  the  wound 
into  hormone  powder  of  a  suitable  strength 
for  hardwood  cuttings 
IBA). 
Make  a  hole  in  the  prepared  compost  with  a 
dibble.  Plant  the  cutting  vertically  so  that  the 
bud 
the  compost 
surface.  Insert  only  one  cutting  per  pot. 

(0.8  percent 

lies  about 

level  with 

Label  the  pot  and  stand  it  on  a greenhouse 
bench  or  in  a  closed  case—the  higher  the 
temperature,  the  faster  will  be  the  rate  of 
regeneration. 

Water  the  cutting  to  prevent  it  drying  out. 
Do  not  overwater  during the  winter when  the 
cutting 
the  compost  will 
readily  waterlog,  causing  the  cutting  to  rot 
and  die.  Harden  off  the  cutting  once  it  has 
rooted,  and  transplant  in  spring.  Label  it. 

is  dormant,  as 

Conifers  are  predominantly  evergreen  trees 
and shrubs, some of which can be propagated 
from  softwood,  greenwood,  semiripe  and 
ripewood  cuttings.  In  general,  spruces,  firs 
and  pines  do  not  respond  to  propagation 
from  cuttings,  and they should  be  propagated 
from  seed  or,  if special  varieties  are  required, 
by  grafting. 

Whether  conifer  cuttings  are  to  be  propa(cid:173)

gated  in  a  warm  environment,  such  as  a 
closed case,  or in a colder one, such as a cold 
frame,  does  not  affect  the  season  that  they 
are  taken. 

Take  cypress  cuttings  in  autumn  or  winter, 
and  yew  and  juniper  cuttings  in  the  new  year 
after  the  parent  plants  have  been  subjected 
to  a  period  of  frost. 

Select  cuttings  from  young,  actively  grow(cid:173)

ing  plants  such  as  hedges  that  are  clipped 
regularly,  and  so  produce  strong,  vigorous 
shoots. 

Preferably 
than 

take  cuttings 
top 
rather 
the  bottom  of  the  plant,  as 
cuttings  from  low  down  often  develop  into 
plants  of  atypical  habit 
that  they  may 
continue  to  grow  horizontally. 

in 

from 

the 

Conifers  vary  considerably  in  their  pattern 
of growth.  There  are  leader  shoots,  which  are 
the growing  points  of the  branches;  lateral  or 
subterminal  shoots,  which  also  increase  in 
size;  and  feather  shoots,  which  do  not  grow 
larger. 

For  propagation  by  cuttings  it  is  important 
to  choose  shoots  with  a  distinct  growing 
point,  and  this 
is  why  feather  shoots  are 
unsatisfactory. 
is  not 
If  a  growing  point 
present,  bun-shaped  forms  will  be  produced, 
particularly  with  yellow  foliage  forms. 

Conifer  propagation  in  a warm  environment 
Conifer cuttings to  be  propagated  in the warm 
environment  of  a  closed  case  or  mist  unit 

should  have  a  softer  base  than  those  to  be 
propagated  in  a  cold  frame;  they  should  also 
become  established  more  quickly. 

Fill  a  container  with  cuttings  compost  and 

firm  to  within  f in  of  the  rim. 

The  tip  of  a  conifer  shoot 

it 
gradually turns  yellow farther  down  the  stem, 
and  then  brown. 

is  green; 

Remove  a  vigorously  growing 

leader  or 
lateral  shoot  from  the  parent  stem.  Make  a 
clean  cut  about  1/4  in  into  the  brown-barked 
wood  so  that  the  cutting  is  predominantly 
green  but  has  a  small  protective  "plug"  of 
hard  wood  at  its  base. 

Trim  the  leaves  off  the  bottom  1-11/2  in  of 
the  cutting.  Do  not  remove  the  growing 
point.  After  trimming,  dip  the  cutting  in  a 
rooting  hormone  powder  of  ripewood  (0.8 
percent IBA) strength. 

Make  a 1  in  hole with  a  dibble  in  the com(cid:173)

post  and  insert  the  cutting  and  firm.  Leave 

about  11/2-2  in  between  cuttings.  Label  the 
container;  then  water  with  a  fine  rose.  Place 
in  a  closed  case  or  mist  unit. 

The  cuttings  will  root  within  three  to  four 

months.  Harden  off  and  pot  on  in  spring. 

Conifers  propagated  in  a  cold  frame 
It  is  easier,  but  slower,  to  propagate  conifer 
cuttings  in  a  cold  frame. 

Prepare  the  soil  in  the  propagation  bed 
before  taking  the  cuttings.  Raise  the  level  of 
the  soil  in  the  cold  frame  to  within  6-8 in  of 
the lid. This will  maintain an equable humidity 
and  temperature  for  the  cuttings. 

Pull  a  stem  backward  down  the  parent 
stem  to  obtain  a  cutting  with  a  heel,  which 
can  then  be  propagated  in  a  cold  frame. 

Trim  the  heel  of  the  cutting  with  a  sharp 
knife.  Remove the  leaves  on  the  bottom  third 
of  the  cutting  either  with  a  knife  or  by  hand 
provided  only  a  small  scar  is  caused  which 
may  actually  encourage  the  cutting  to  root. 
Do  not  remove  the  growing  point. 

Dip  the  base  of  the  cutting  in  a  rooting 
hormone  powder  of  ripewood  strength  (0.8 
percent  IBA).  Make  a  1 in  hole  with  a  dibble 
in  the  cold  frame  soil  and  plant  a  cutting. 
Firm  the  soil  back  round  the  stem.  Space  any 
other  cuttings  2 in  apart  and 
them. 
Water  with  a  dilute  fungicidal  solution  and 
close  down  the  lid  of  the  cold  frame. 

label 

Ensure  the  environment 

is  always  kept 
absolutely  clean  and  hygienic  as  the  cuttings 
have  to  survive  for  nearly  a  year  in  the  cold 
frame.  Place  matting  on  the  lid  to  insulate the 
cuttings  during  any  cold  weather.  Remove  it 
as  soon  as  the  danger  of  frosts  has  passed. 

Leave  the  cuttings  undisturbed  until  sum(cid:173)
mer,  when  the  frame  should  be  aired  and 
shaded to prevent scorching. This can be done 
either  by  painting  its  lid  with  a  proprietary 
brand  of  lime-wash  or  by  covering  it  with 
mesh.  Water  the  cuttings  as  necessary  to 
prevent  them  drying  out. 

Lift  the  cuttings 

in  autumn.  Pot  on  or 
transplant to their final  position  in  the garden. 

Some  woody,  low-growing  plants,  such  as 
Salvia,  that  are  often  treated  as  herbaceous 
plants  are  called  subshrubs.  Most  of  them 
root  readily  and  can  easily  be  propagated 
from  stem  cuttings  taken  in  late  summer. 

Prune  the  parent  plant  during  the  dormant 
season  to  encourage  strong,  vigorous  shoots 
to  develop. 

Prepare  the  soil  in  a  cold  frame  by  digging 
deeply.  Add  grit  if  necessary  to  ensure  it  is 
free  draining. 

Cut  off  some  shoots  with  all  their  current 
season's  growth  in  late  summer  (usually  early 

September).  Select  nonflowering  shoots 
if 
possible,  although  with  many  plants,  such  as 
lavender,  these  may  be  difficult  to  find.  If 
flowering  shoots  have  to  be  used  then  cut 
back  the flower  and  its  stem  to  the  leafy  part. 
Cut  out  any  soft  growing  tip  with  a  sharp 
knife  or  pinch  it  out  between  the  thumb  and 
forefinger.  Make  the  basal  cut  with  shears 
about  4 in  below  the  top  of  the  cutting.  A 
quick  and  easy  way  to  measure  4 in  is  to 
hold  the  stem  in  the  palm  of an  adult's  hand. 
The  stem  will  be  approximately  4 in 
long 
where  it  reaches  the  butt  of  the  hand. 

Strip  the  leaves from  the  bottom  half  of the 
cutting,  either  by  pulling  very  carefully  or  by 
cutting  with  a  sharp  knife. 

Dip  the  base  of  the  cutting  into  a  rooting 
hormone  powder,  preferably  of  a  semi-
ripewood  strength  (0.4-0.5  percent  IBA). 

With  a  dibble  make  a  hole  in  the  prepared 
soil  about  half  the  length  of  the  cutting,  that 
is  about  2 in  deep.  Firm  the  soil  around  the 
cutting.  Leave  about  4 in  between  each 
cutting  and  about  4 in  between  each  row. 

Label  the  cuttings  clearly.  Using  a  watering 

can  with  a  coarse  rose,  apply  a  dilute  fungi(cid:173)

cidal  solution  of  Captan  or  Benlate  over  the 
cuttings  to  protect  them  against  disease. 

the  cuttings 

Seal  the  cold  frame  and  shade  it  to  avoid 
scorching.  Check 
regularly; 
water when  necessary to  prevent them  drying 
out.  Remove  the  shading  on  the  cold  frame 
and  reduce watering as soon  as light intensity 
decreases.  Insulate  the  cuttings  against  frost 
by  laying  some  matting  over  the  cold  frame. 
Remove  this  during the  day,  if  possible. 

Harden  off  the  rooted  cuttings  gradually  in 
spring.  Then  lift  and  transplant  to  their  final 
position  in  the  garden.  Label  them  clearly. 

The  genus  rhododendron 
is  an  extremely 
large  and  varied  group  of  plants  that  have 
differing  abilities  to  root  from  cuttings.  The 
large-flowering  hardy  hybrids  and  the  small-
leafed  dwarf  rhododendrons  are  the  most 
worth  while  to  propagate  from  stem  cuttings. 

Large-flowered  hardy  hybrids 
Prepare 
taking  any 
the  compost  before 
to  avoid  unnecessary  delay,  and 
cuttings 
water loss,  before planting. Mix together equal 
parts 
lime-free  grit  and  sifted  peat.  Fill  a 
container with  the  compost and firm to within 
3/8 in of the rim. 

Take  cuttings  from  the  second  flush  of 
growth  at  the  end  of  the  summer,  usually  in 
September.  The  second  flush  of  growth  can 
be  recognized  by  the  umbrella  of  shoots  that 
does  not  occur  on  the  first  flush  of  growth. 
Remove  all  the  leaves  except  the  terminal 
whorl  (the  group  of  leaves  nearest  the  tip). 
Snap  out 
regardless  of 
whether  it  is  a flower  or  vegetative  bud. 

terminal  bud 

the 

hand.  Cut  the  stem  at  the  butt  of  the  hand 
with  a  sharp  pair  of  shears.  This  will  give  a 
cutting  of  about  4 in  long.  Cut  part  of  the 
remaining  leaves to  reduce their  leaf area and 
so  make  planting  easier. 

W o u nd  the  bottom  3/8  in  of  the  cutting  by 
making a shallow score with a sharp  knife. Dip 
the  cut  surfaces  in  a  strong  rooting  hormone 
(0.8 percent IBA). This is particularly important 
for  varieties  with  'Britannia'  in  their  pedigree, 
as  they  are  generally  difficult  to  root. 

Make  a  hole  with  a  dibble  in  the  prepared 
compost  and  insert  the  cutting.  Plant  any 
further  cuttings  as  close  together  as  possible. 
Label  the  container and  place  it in  a well-lit 
environment  with  bottom  heat  of  21°C/70°F. 
Control  water  loss  by  covering  the  container 
with  a  very  thin,  clear  polyethylene  sheet  or 
by  leaving  the  container  in  a  mist  unit. 

Prevent  rots  by  applying  a  dilute  fungicidal 

solution  at  regular  weekly  intervals. 

Rooting  should  not  be  expected  until  well 

into  the  new  year. 

Place  the  cutting  in  the  palm  of  a  hand  so 

that  the  top  is  just  about  level  with  the  fore(cid:173)
finger  and  the  stem  is  across  the  palm  of  the 

Harden  off  the  rooted  cuttings  and  trans(cid:173)

plant  in  late  winter/early  spring  and  label. 
Place  them  in  a  cold  frame  to  grow  on. 

Make  a  1/2  in  hole  with  a  dibble  in  the 
prepared  compost.  Plant  the  cutting  and 
water  with  a  fungicide.  Label;  then  place 
in  a  well-lit  humid  environment  with 
bottom heat; a mist unit is ideal to produce 
these  conditions.  Once  the  cutting  has 
rooted,  harden  off gradually  in  spring.  Pot 
up  and  label. 

DWARF  RHODODENDRONS 
These  are  the  easiest  group  from  which  to 
take cuttings,  although  some varieties,  de(cid:173)
pending  on 
difficult  than  others  to  root  successfully. 

their  parentage,  are  more 

Mix 

thoroughly  equal  parts 

lime-free 

grit  and  sifted  peat.  Fill  a  container of  suit(cid:173)
able  size  with  compost—allow  about  11/2 
sq. in  per  cutting—and  firm  gently. 

Select  a  stem  of 

the  current  year's 
growth that  has set its terminal  bud, which 
is  usually  in  late August to  September.  Cut 
back  the  stem  with  a  sharp  pair  of  shears 
to  about  11/2  in  from  the  tip.  Pick  or  cut 
off  any  leaves  on  the  bottom  half  of  the 
cutting. 

W o u nd  the  cutting  by  making  a  very 
shallow  slice  on  the  bottom  1/2  in  of  the 
cutting. This wounding is not always neces(cid:173)
sary,  but  many  varieties  do  benefit,  and  it 
is advisable to adopt a standard  procedure. 
Treat  the  cut  surfaces  with  rooting  hor(cid:173)
mone  powder, 
strength  of 0.8  percent  IBA. 

the  hardwood 

using 

An  extremely  prolific  and  relatively  easy  way 
to  propagate  heathers  is  from  cuttings. 

t he  season  to  do  this  is  summer,  although 

the  exact  timing  depends  upon  the  avail(cid:173)
ability  of  nonflowering  shoots  from  which  to 
make  the  cuttings. 

Do  not 

take  cuttings 

from  shoots  with 
flower  buds  that  have  set  because  rooting 
may  well  be  slow  and  poor,  especially  for 
winter-flowering  heathers.  However  summer-
flowering  heathers  can  be  propagated  from 
shoots  that  have  already  flowered,  should 
nonflowering  shoots  be  scarce. 

Prune  a  plant  during  the  dormant  season 

to  encourage  strong,  vigorous  shoots. 

Make  up  some  cuttings  compost  of  equal 
volumes  lime-free  grit  and  sifted  sphagnum 
moss  peat.  It  is  imperative  that  the  peat  is 
sifted  and  all  lumps  removed,  otherwise  later 
on  the  rooted  cuttings  will  be  difficult  to 
separate  without  damage. 

Choose  a  container  appropriate 

the 
number of cuttings to be taken, allowing 3/4 in 
between  cuttings.  A  separate  container 
should  be  used  for  each  variety  as  varieties 
will  root  at  different  rates. 

to 

Fill  the  container  with  the  compost  and 
firm  with  a  presser  board  to  within  f in  of the 
container  rim. 

Cut  off  a  1-11/2  in  vegetative  shoot  with  a 
pair  of  sharp  scissors.  Remove  the  leaves  on 
the  lower  part  of  the  cutting.  The  cutting  is 
then  ready  to  be  planted  as  there  is  no  need 
to  apply  a  rooting  hormone. 

Make  a  hole  with  a  thin  dibble  to  half  the 
depth  of  the  cutting,  which  is  then  inserted. 
Plant any remaining cuttings 3/4 in apart. Label; 
then  water  with  a  dilute  fungicidal  solution, 
using  a  fine  rose.  Do  not firm  by  hand. 

Place  the  container  of  cuttings  in  a  pro(cid:173)

if 

there 

tected  environment.  Quickest  rooting  will 
occur 
is  bottom  heat  and  high 
humidity,  for  example  in  a  mist  unit.  A  well-
sealed  cold frame,  shaded  in  the  summer and 
insulated  with  matting  in  the  winter,  will  suit 
just  as  well,  although  rooting  of  late-season 
cuttings  may  not  occur  until  the  spring. 

Harden  off  the  rooted  cuttings  and  pot  on 
in  spring.  Take  special  care  when  knocking 
out  the  cuttings  and  teasing  them  apart,  so 
that  minimal  damage  is  done  to  the  roots. 
Label  the  new  plants  clearly. 

houseplants 

plants—mostly 
that 
Some 
belong 
to  Begonlaceae,  Crassulaceae  and 
Gesneriaceae—have  the  capacity  to  develop 
plantlets  on  their  leaves.  This  is  a  simple  and 
efficient  means  of  propagation,  and  it  can 
occur  in  either  of  two  ways:  by  naturally 

growing 
induced  plantlets  from  leaf  cuttings. 

foliar  embryos,  or  by  artificially 

Foliar  embryos  are  the  result  of  a  highly 
in  certain 
specialized  process  that  occurs 
plants,  such  as  the  strawberry  geranium  and 
piggyback  plant.  In  this  process  the  plant 
isolates  simple  plant  cells  in  small  areas  of  its 
leaves  during  the  course  of  its  growth;  these 
cells  are  subsequently  capable  of  developing 
into  new  plants. 

factors 

that  are 

The  range  of plants that can  be  propagated 
from  leaf  cuttings  is  relatively  small,  and  the 
success  of this  technique  is  subject to  various 
environmental 
to  some 
extent  open  to  manipulation  by the gardener. 
Leaf  cuttings  should  be  made  only  from 
leaves  that  have  recently  expanded  fully.  If 
the leaf is still  less than full  size and  immature, 
all  its  energy  will  first  go  toward  developing 
and  maturing.  This  will  delay  the  generation 
of  new  plant  life  and,  since  a  leaf  cut  off from 
its  parent 
the  longer  the 
propagation  process  takes  the  more  likely  it 
is  that  problems,  such  as  rotting, will  arise. 

is  unsupported, 

it 

leaf  area 

is  efficient 

When  a  leaf  has  recently  expanded  to  its 
maximum 
in  food 
production  and  still  has  a  full  life  expectancy 
in  case  regeneration  should  be  slow.  At  this 
time  the  leaf  is  still  young  enough  to  have 
a  high  capacity  to  propagate—a  capacity 
that  will  lessen  as  the  leaf  ages. 

The  selected 

leaf  should  be  complete, 
normal  and  undamaged  so  that  it  will  not  be 

propagated  from  leaf  bud  cuttings  (see  page 
62).  Other  specialized  kinds  of  leaf  cuttings 
are  bulb  scaling  (see  page  48),  and  scooping 
and  scoring  bulbs  (see  page  49). 

to 

rots  and  will  produce 

subject 
typical 
offspring.  It should  also be free from  pests and 
diseases. 

Since  most  plants  suitable  for  propagation 
by  leaf  cuttings  are  grown  indoors  or  under 
glass,  it  is  possible  to  take  cuttings  all  year 
round,  as  long  as  there  is  a  fresh,  fully  ex(cid:173)
panded  leaf  available.  All  that will  alter  is  the 
speed  at  which 
in 
winter,  temperatures  and  light  intensity  will 
be  lower  and,  as  a  consequence,  food  pro(cid:173)
duction  and  the  rate  of  propagation  will  be 
slower. 

the  plantlets  develop; 

it 

is  necessary 

The  leaf,  when  separated  from  its  parent 
plant,  will  be  highly susceptible to  desiccation 
this  by 
and 
controlling 
Therefore 
always  propagate  leaf  cuttings  in  a  closed 
case,  propagator,  or  under  a  glass  sheet  or 
polyethylene  tent. 

environment. 

to  minimize 

the 

The  most  common  cause  of  failure  in  leaf 
propagation  is  the  leaf  rotting  before  it  has  a 
chance  to  produce  a  self-supporting  plant. 
Thus  it  is  important  that  all  materials,  con(cid:173)
tainers,  composts  and  leaves  should  be  clean 
and  undamaged. 

Although  many  plants  have  leaves  that  are 
capable  of  rooting,  they  do  not  all  have  the 
capacity 
leaf  cuttings. 
Those  that  do  not  can  only  be  successfully 

to  propagate 

from 

The  simplest  and  most  reliable  way  to  pro(cid:173)
duce  new  plants  from  leaf  cuttings  is  to  use 
a  complete  leaf  with  its  stalk.  The  disadvan(cid:173)
tage  of  this  method  is  that  it  develops  only 
a  few  new  plants  from  each  leaf. 

Rotting  and  disease  are the  main  causes  of 
failure  so  always  use  clean  tools,  containers 
and  composts. 

Leaf  petiole  cuttings  can  be  taken  at  any 
time  of  year  provided  a  new,  fully  expanded 
leaf  is  available. 

Make  up  a  cuttings  compost  of equal  parts 
sifted  peat  and  grit.  Fill  a  container  that  is 
large  enough  to  take  the  leaf  petiole  cuttings. 
Firm  the  compost  to  within  3/4  in  of  the  rim  of 
the  container. 

Slice  a  suitable  leaf  cleanly  through  the 
leaf stalk,  using a sharp knife or a single-edged 
razor  blade  to  ensure  the  least  possible  dam(cid:173)
age.  Leave about 2 in  of the leaf stalk attached 
to  the  leaf  blade. 

Make  a  small  hole  with  a  dibble  in  the 
compost  to  a  depth  just  sufficient  to  hold  the 
cutting.  Plant  at  a  shallow  angle  so  that  the 
leaf  blade  is  almost  flat  on  the  compost.  The 
shallower the  base  of the  stalk  is  planted  into 

the  compost  the  more  the  air  can  circulate 
around 
it,  which  will  encourage  a  quick 
response.  Then  firm  the  compost  around  the 
stalk.  When  the  cuttings are  all  planted,  label 
them  and  water  in  a  dilute  fungicide  such  as 
Captan  or  Benlate,  using  a fine  rose. 

Place  the  cuttings  in  an  environment  that 
maintains  a  steady  high  humidity,  so  that  the 
cuttings  do  not  dry  out.  The  temperature, 
especially 
to  be 
relatively  high,  and  this  is  best  provided  by 
using  a  propagator  that 
is  heated  at  the 
bottom—ideally  at  about  20°C/68°F. 

for  houseplants,  needs 

Expose  the  cuttings  to  sufficient  light  for 
them  to  manufacture  food  and  develop  the 
new  plantlets.  Too  much  sunlight  may  scorch 
the cuttings. In general, light shade is the best 
compromise. 

The  new  plantlets  will  develop  on  the  cut 
surface  of  the  leaf  stalk  within  five  to  six 
weeks,  and  several  may  appear  at  this  point. 
Leave  them  until  they  can  be  handled  and 
separated  into  individual  plants,  potted  on 
and  hardened  off.  If  it  is  likely  to  be  some 
time  before  they  are 
large  enough  to  be 
potted  on,  then  liquid  feed  the  plantlets. 

it 

A  leaf  midrib  is  the  extension  of  a  leaf  stalk, 
and 
leaf 
midrib  cuttings  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  from 
leaf  stalk  (petiole)  cuttings. 

is  possible  to  propagate  from 

Leaf  midrib  cuttings  can  be  used  for  any 
leaves  that  have  a  single  central  vein,  and  it 
is  a  particularly  successful 
technique  with 
Streptocarpus. 

Before  taking  cuttings,  ensure  all  tools  and 
equipment  are  scrupulously  clean.  Disease 
can  be  a  major  problem  if  care  is  not  taken 
when  propagating. 

Leaf  midrib  cuttings  can  be  taken  at  any 
time  of  the  year  provided  the  plant  has  a 
suitable  leaf,  that  is  one  that  is  undamaged 
and  has  recently  expanded  fully. 

Fill  a  plastic  container  with  cuttings  com(cid:173)
post.  Water  thoroughly  and  allow  to  drain. 

Cut  a  suitable  undamaged 

leaf  cleanly 
from  the  parent  plant  and  place  it  upside 
down  on  a  clean  sheet  of glass.  Cut  off a  strip 
that is  not more than 2 in wide,  using a single-
edged  razor  blade  at  right  angles  to  the  mid(cid:173)
rib.  Cut  further  strips  in  the  same  way,  each 
strip  having  a  central  rib  and  two  wings. 

Make  a  shallow  trench  in  the  compost  and 
just  deep 
insert  the  bottom  of  a  cutting 
enough  to  hold  it  erect.  Firm  gently.  Plant the 
remaining  cuttings  about  1 in  apart. 

food.  Avoid  direct sunlight, which  may scorch 
the  cuttings.  A  propagator  or  a  closed  case 
with  bottom  heat  is  ideal,  although  a  poly(cid:173)
ethylene  tent  supported  with  a  cane  or  loop 
of  wire  is  quite  adequate  protection. 

Stand  the  container  in  a  water  bath  to 
rewet  compost  that  is  beginning  to  dry  out. 
Young  plantlets  should  appear  in  five  to 
eight  weeks,  but  they  will  not  be  big  enough 
for  transplanting  for  several  more  weeks. 

Spray 

the  completed  container  with  a 
to 

fungicide  such  as  Captan  or  Benlate 
protect  the  cuttings  against  fungal  rots. 

Label  the  container  and  place  it  in  a  warm 
(21°C/70°F),  humid  environment to encourage 
the  cuttings  to  root.  However,  ensure there  is 
sufficient  light  for  the  leaves  to  manufacture 

LEAF  CUTTINGS  ON  LATERAL  VEINS 
Lay  a  leaf  upside  down  on  a clean  sheet  of 
glass.  Remove  the  midrib  with  a  razor 
blade  so  that  the  two  halves  of  the  leaf-
blade  are  isolated  and  all  the  lateral  veins 
have  an  exposed  cut  surface. 

Make  a  shallow  trench  in  a  container 
filled  with  moist  cuttings  compost.  Plant 

the  leaf  cuttings  vertically  in  the  trench 
with  the  cut  surfaces  of  the  lateral  veins 
just  in  the  compost.  Firm  gently;  label  and 
place  in  a  propagator  or  closed  case. 

Plantlets  will  develop  on  the  cut  sur(cid:173)
faces  of  the  lateral  veins  within  five  to 
eight  weeks.  Separate,  pot  on  and  label 
when  they  are  large  enough  to  handle. 

Plants  that  do  not  have  a  leaf  with  a  central 
midrib  and  lateral  veins  but  possess  a  more 
netted  veining  are  not  easy  to  propagate 
from  leaf  cuttings.  Certain  plants,  however, 
have  leaf  veins  that  are  capable  of generating 
a  new  plant,  and  these  can  be  propagated  by 
cutting  through  the  veins  of  the  leaf  so  that 
plantlet  development  is  induced  but  the  leaf 
itself  remains  entire.  Because  of  the  size  of 
their 
is  particularly 
suitable  for  varieties  of  Begonia  rex. 

technique 

leaves 

this 

Clean  all  tools  and  equipment  thoroughly. 
Fill  a  seed  tray  with  cuttings  compost;  then 
press  it  down  to  about  3/8  in  below  the  rim. 
Water  the  seed  tray  thoroughly  and  allow  to 
drain. 

leaf 

Remove  a 

fully  expanded 

is 
undamaged  from  the  parent  plant.  Place  the 
leaf  upside  down  on  a  clean  sheet  of  glass. 
Cut  off  the  leaf  stalk  flush  with  the  leaf  blade, 
using  a  single-edged  razor  blade.  Make  a f in 
cut across a  major vein,  using the  razor blade. 

that 

Repeat this  until  there is  one  cut every square 
inch  all  over  the  leaf. 

Place  the  cut  (or  slashed)  leaf,  with  its  top 

side  upward,  flat  on  the  surface  of  the  cut(cid:173)
tings  compost  in  a  seed  tray.  Pin  the  leaf 
down  with  a  thin  wire  staple  if  it  does  not  lay 
flat  on  the  compost.  Label  the  leaf  cuttings 
clearly.  Spray  the  seed  tray  with  a  fungicide 
to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  rots,  and  cover 
with  a  sheet  of  glass. 

Place in the light, which  is essential for food 
production  and  so  for  plantlet  development. 
Avoid  direct  sunlight,  which  may  scorch  the 
leaf. A  closed  case with  bottom  heat  provides 
the  best  environment  for  a  slashed  leaf  to 
propagate. 

The  rate  at  which  plantlets  develop  will  be 
dependent  on  the  surrounding  temperature: 
at 21°C/70°F,  plantlets  should  appear  in  three 
to  four  weeks.  Separate  the  new  plants  once 
they  can  be  handled  easily  and  pot  on. 
Label  and  harden  off  gradually. 

leaves  and  especially 

Any  leaf  that  will  regenerate  vegetatively  can 
be  propagated  from 
leaf  squares,  but  this 
method  is  normally  used  only  for  plants  with 
big 
for  Begonia  rex 
varieties.  Its  main  advantage  is  that  it  pro(cid:173)
duces  numerous  plantlets  from  a  single  leaf. 
This  method  of  propagation  produces 
small  pieces  of  cut  leaf  that  are  prone  to 
rotting.  Therefore  clean,  sterile 
tools  and 
equipment  should  be  used  at  all  times  and 
scrupulous,  hygienic  measures  should  be 
observed. 

Fill  a  clean  plastic  seed  tray  with  cuttings 
compost  and  press  the  compost to  give  a flat 
surface  about  f in  below  the  rim.  Water  the 
compost  thoroughly  and  allow  to  drain. 

Remove  a  fully  expanded,  undamaged  leaf 
from  the  parent  plant  and  place  it  face  down 
on  a clean  sheet  of glass.  Take a single-edged 
razor  blade  and  ruler  and  cut  this  leaf  into  a 
series of 3/4 in squares, placing the ruler gently 
on  the  leaf  to  avoid  crushing.  Any  damaged 
squares  must  be  discarded. 

Lay  the  cuttings  flat  on  the  compost  with 
the  top  side  facing  upward.  Place  in  rows 

about  1/2  in  apart.  Label  the  seed  tray  clearly. 
Spray  the  cuttings  with  a  fungicide  such  as 
Captan  or  Benlate. 

Cover  the  seed  tray  with  a  clean  sheet  of 
glass  to  maintain  humidity.  Place  in  a  warm 
(18-21°C/65-70°F)  environment  out  of  direct 
sunlight,  but  make  sure  there  is  sufficient 
light  available  to  allow  the  leaves  to  manu(cid:173)
facture food.  A  closed  case  is  ideal,  although 
a  window  sill  in  a  warm  room  facing  east  or 
west  is  also  suitable. 

If  the  compost  was  thoroughly  watered 
initially  and  the  seed  tray  is  covered,  little  or 
no  more watering  will  be  needed.  Should  the 
compost  dry  out,  rewet  by  standing the  seed 
tray  in  a water  bath. 

Plantlets  should  appear  on  the  cut  surfaces 
of  the  larger  leaf  veins  nearest  to  the  leaf 
stalk.  At  a  temperature  of  21°C/70"F,  this 
should  occur  after  about five  or six weeks,  but 
the  new  plants  will  not  be  big  enough  to  pot 
on  for  several  more  weeks.  When  the  first 
leaves  have  opened,  gradually  harden  off  by 
airing  the  seed  tray.  Pot  up  when  the  plants 
are a sufficient size to  handle without damage. 

Monocotyledonous  plants,  such  as  snow(cid:173)
drops  and  mother-in-law's  tongues,  have  a 
series  of  parallel  veins  running  the  length  of 
each  leaf.  Some  of these  plants  can  be  propa(cid:173)
gated  at  any  time  of  year  from  leaf  cuttings, 
providing  they  have  an  inherent  capacity  to 
produce  a  plantlet  on  the  cut  surface  of  a 
vein  and  suitable  leaves  are  available. 

Cuttings  from  normal  leaves  such  as  Cape 
cowslips  {Lachenalia),  snowdrops  (Calanthus) 
and  snowflakes 
to  wilt 
quickly,  so  keep  them  turgid  by  planting  as 
soon  as  possible.  W i th  succulents,  such  as 
mother-in-law's  tongues  (Sansevieria),  water 
loss  is  not  so  critical. 

{Leucojum) 

tend 

Leaf  cuttings  from  bulbous  plants,  such  as 
Hyacinthus,  that  have  tender  leaves  may  well 
rot  and  die  unless  they  are  handled  as  little 
as  possible,  planted  carefully  and  sprayed 
regularly  with  fungicide. 

Ensure  all  tools  and  equipment  are  absol(cid:173)

utely  clean  before  taking  leaf  cuttings.  Fill  a 
container  with  cuttings  compost,  press  down 
to  within  3/8  in  of  the  container  rim,  using  a 
presser board.  Water the  compost thoroughly 
and  allow  to  drain. 

Cut  off  a  fully  expanded,  undamaged  leaf 
from  the  parent  plant.  Lay  it  face  down  on  a 
clean  sheet  of  glass  and  cut  with  a  single-
edged  razor  blade  at  right  angles  to  the  veins. 
Make a series of slices 1-11/4 in wide. 

Make  a  shallow  trench  with  a  dibble  and 
plant  the  cutting  vertically  with  its  basal  cut 
held  firmly  in  the  compost.  Place  the  other 
cuttings 1 in apart in rows. Label the container 
clearly.  Spray  the  cuttings  with  a  fungicide 
such  as  Captan  or  Benlate  as  protection 
against  rot  and  disease. 

Place  the  container  in  a  warm  (21°C/70°F), 
humid  environment  so  the  leaves  do  not  dry 

out  and  wilt.  Ensure  the  cuttings  have  ade(cid:173)
quate  light  to  produce  food,  although  direct 
sunlight  should  be  avoided  otherwise  scorch(cid:173)
ing  may  occur.  A  polyethylene  tent  will  pro(cid:173)
vide  these  conditions  quite  adequately,  al(cid:173)
though  a  closed  case  in  a  greenhouse  will  be 
the  most  satisfactory  provided  that  it  is  kept 
scrupulously  clean. 

Rewet drying  compost  by standing the  base 

of  the  container  in  a  water  bath. 

The 

time 

taken 

for  young  plantlets 

to 
appear  will  vary  with 
the  different  plants. 
Mother-in-law's  tongues  will  usually  regener(cid:173)
ate  in  six  to  eight  weeks  during  the  summer. 
Cape cowslips,  snowdrops and  hyacinths that 
have  been  propagated  in  spring  just  as  their 
leaves  mature  will  regenerate  in  four  to  six 
weeks.  Repot  the  new  plants  once  they  are 
large  enough 
them 
clearly;  then  harden  them  off. 

to  handle  and 

label 

Leaf  cuttings  of  Heloniopsis  will  regen(cid:173)
erate  from  both  ends.  Reduce  the  leaf  to 
11/2-2  in  by  cutting  off 
top  and 
bottom.  Plant  the  cutting  in  a  loop,  with 
both  ends  in  the  compost. 

the 

A 
few  plants  are  capable  of  developing 
isolated groups of simple cells  in  certain  areas 
of their  leaves.  As  a  result these  cells,  or foliar 
embryos,  are  capable  of developing  into  new 
plantlets.  Given  certain  growing  conditions 
some  of  these  plants,  such  as  Mitella,  have 
foliar  embryos  that  develop  naturally 
into 
plantlets.  Other  plants  such  as  Cardamlne will 
only  respond  in  this  way  if  the  leaves  are 
separated  from  the  parent  plant. 

The  position  on  the  leaf  of  these  embryos 
is  fixed  according  to  each  plant's  charac(cid:173)
teristic  and  it  is  not  influenced  by  the  way 
the  actual  plantlets  develop.  The  plantlets 
in  Kalanchoe  leaves,  for  example,  arise  be(cid:173)
tween  the  jagged  edges  of  the  leaves; 
in 
Mitella  and  Cardamine,  the  plantlets  appear 
at  the  junction  of  the 
leaf 
blade.  Sedum,  however,  produces  only  one 
plantlet  and  this  is  at  the  base  of  each  sessile 
leaf. 

leaf  stalk  and 

Collect  the  plantlets  from  those  plants  that 
produce  them  naturally.  With  some  of  these 
plants,,  such  as  Kalanchoe,  the  plantlets  fall 
off  once  the  roots  begin  to  develop.  Plant 
them  in  cuttings  compost  in  a  labeled  seed 
tray.  Repot  them  separately  once  they  have 
established  properly. 

develop 

foliar 

to  allow 

the  plantlets 

Although  other  plants  such  as  Asplenium 
and  Cystoperis 
embryos 
naturally,  it  is  best to  remove the leaf together 
with 
them  slightly 
longer  to  become  established  before  separ(cid:173)
ating  them  from  the  parent  leaf.  Place  the 
leaf  flat  on  some  cuttings  compost  in  a  seed 
tray.  Pin  it  in  position  with  a  light  wire  staple 
if it does not sit flat on the compost.  Label and 
leave  on  a shaded  greenhouse  bench.  Ensure 
that 
leaf  does  not  become 
desiccated.  Separate the  plantlets  and  pot  on 
once  they  have  rooted  and  established.  This 
should  take  seven  to  eight  weeks. 

the  parent 

into  developing  plantlets 

Some  plants,  such  as  Tiarella,  will  only  be 
stimulated 
from 
foliar  embryos  if their  leaves  are  severed.  Cut 
off  a  leaf  as  soon  as  it  has  expanded  fully. 
Set  it  on  some  cuttings  compost  in  a  seed 
tray.  Label;  then  place  in  a warm  (21°C/70°F), 
humid,  shady  environment  such  as  a  poly(cid:173)
ethylene  tent  until  the  plantlets  develop  and 
establish  (five  to  seven  weeks);  then  separate 
and  pot  on.  Succulents,  such  as  Sedum  and 
Kalanchoe,  can  be  left  on  an  open  bench  in  a 
greenhouse  to  develop  their  plantlets.  Cer(cid:173)
tain  Kalanchoe  respond  best  if  the  leaves  are 
stimulated  in  spring  to  produce  plantlets. 

Grafting  is  a  technique  of  joining  two  parts 
of  different  plants  together  in  such  a  way that 
they  will  unite  and  continue  their  growth  as 
one  plant. 

One part,  called the scion,  is usually a stem 
is 
from  the  plant  to  be  propagated.  This 
grafted  onto  a  root  system 
from  another 
plant,  which  is  called  the  rootstock  (also,  the 
stock  or  understock).  All  the  various  tech(cid:173)
niques  of  joining  plants  are  called  grafting, 
although,  when  buds  only  are  joined  to  the 
rootstock,  it  is  sometimes  called  budding. 

There  are 

two  basic  grafting  positions: 

apical  grafting,  in  which  the  top  of  the  root(cid:173)
stock  is  removed  and  is  replaced  with  the 
scion;  and  side  grafting,  in  which  the  scion 
is  grafted  on  to  the  side  of the  rootstock  and 
the  rootstock  above  the  graft  is  not  removed 
until  after  a  union  is  achieved. 

Because time-consuming  preparation  work 
is  necessary  before two  plants  can  be joined, 
grafting  is  superficially  a  less  attractive  tech(cid:173)
nique  than  other  relatively  easy  methods  of 
vegetative  propagation,  such  as  taking  stem 

cuttings  or  layering.  However,  some  plants 
such  as witch  hazel  are  not  easily  propagated 
by  any  other  vegetative  method  if  selected 
forms  are  required,  and  so  they  are  grafted 
onto  rootstocks. 

rootstocks, 

to  control  both 

Perhaps  the  most  useful  reason  for grafting 
is 
to 
transfer  the  benefits  of  a  particular 
rootstock  on  to  another  plant.  Various  fruit-
tree 
for  example,  have  been 
developed 
the  size  and 
fruiting  vigor  of  other  varieties  of  fruit  tree. 
Other  advantages 
that  a  rootstock  might 
possess  are  resistance  to  pests  and  diseases; 
toleration  of  high  soil-moisture 
levels  and 
salt  concentrations;  and  toleration  of  high 
alkalinity levels in the soil. The more rootstock 
incorporated 
into  a  new  plant, 
the  more 
influence  the  rootstock  will  have. 

Another  advantage  of grafting  is  that  more 
than  one  scion  can  be  joined  onto  a  plant. 
This  is  particularly  useful  with  fruit  trees  as  a 
suitable  pollinator  variety  can  be  grafted  into 
a  tree  or  bush  already  grafted  with  another 
variety,  or  it  may  allow  a  decorative  stem  to 
be  grafted  on  and  then  be  top  worked  with 
another  variety. 

There  are  a  number  of  problems associated 
with  grafting.  The  main  one  is  ensuring  two 
plants  are  compatible.  This  limitation  deter(cid:173)
mines  which  variety and  species  of  plants  can 
be grafted  onto which  rootstocks;  in general, 
it  is  normal  to  graft  varieties  onto  their  own 
species  or  very  closely  related  ones. 

To  graft  successfully,  it  is  vitally  important 
to  position  the  various  tissues  of  the  stem 
correctly  so  that  the  stem  can  make  a  quick 
and  continuous  union.  The  cambium  is  the 
actively growing  part of the stem  that lies just 
under  the  bark.  This  cambium  layer  on  both 
the  scion  and  the  rootstpck  must  be  pos(cid:173)
itioned  so  they  are  absolutely  adjacent  to 
each  other,  or  at  least  in  as  much  contact  as 
possible. 

The  successful  formation  of  a  graft  also 
depends  on  making  and  matching  cuts 
quickly  and  cleanly:  the  cut  surfaces  must  be 
placed  in  contact with the  minimum  of delay. 
Should  the  surfaces  dry  out,  the  tissues  will 
die  and  so  make  an  effective  barrier  to  the 
development  of  a  successful  union. 

The  making  of  a  graft  union  is  only  partly 
to  successful  carpentry.  Much  also 

due 

depends  on  providing  suitable  conditions  for 
the  tissues  to  develop  and  grow  to  form  a 
successful  union.  In  effect,  this  means  that 
water  loss  must  be  prevented  and  warmth 
must  be  provided  round  the  grafted  parts  by 
carefully  covering 
they  have 
joined  together. 

them  until 

Traditionally,  the  grafted  parts  have  been 
covered  and  tied  together  with  raffia,  but 
most  grafts  are  now  enclosed  by  1/2  in  wide 
clear  polyethylene  strip.  This  has  the  advant(cid:173)
age  of  completely  surrounding  and  sealing 
the cut areas, so  reducing water loss to a mini(cid:173)
indoor  grafted 
mum.  The  graft  union  on 
plants  is  taped  with  rubberized  strip  before 
being  placed 
to 
develop. 

in  a  humid  atmosphere 

Once  the  grafted  parts  have  successfully 
united,  the  development  of  the  new  plant 
depends  on  preventing  any 
further  com(cid:173)
petition from the  rootstock. Therefore,  always 
remove  all  subsequent  growths  from  any(cid:173)
where  on  the  rootstock. 

Although  it  is  theoretically  possible to  graft 
at  almost  any  time  of  the  year,  the  best 
season  for  most  grafting 
in  the  spring. 

is 

Shield-budding,  however,  must  normally wait 
until  midsummer  when  the  bark  lifts  easily 
from  the  wood  on  the  rootstock. 

Whip-and-tongue  grafting 
Whip-and-tongue  grafting  is  commonly  used 
to  propagate  fruit  trees,  although  the  tech(cid:173)
nique  can  be  employed  successfully  for  trees 
and  shrubs  with  tissues  that  will  also  readily 
unite  at  relatively  low  temperatures. 

Select  a  plant  that  will  be  suitable  as  root(cid:173)
stock and  plant  it outdoors.  Label  it and  leave 
it  to  establish  for  one  growing  season. 

In  midwinter,  select  a  plant  that  is  suitable 

as  scion  material.  From  it  take  some  hard(cid:173)
wood  stems  with  all  their  previous  season's 
growth.  Bundle  these  scions  together  and 
heel them  into 6 in of soil in a well-drained cool 
position.  Firm  back  the  soil  and  label  them. 
W h en  the  scions  are  eventually  grafted  in 
spring,  they  will  be  less  developed  than  the 
growth  on  the  rootstock. 

Prepare  the  rootstock  once  its  sap  has 
started  to  rise;  this  is  usually  just  before  the 
leaf  buds  break.  Trim  to  make  a  single  stem 
with  no  branches. 

Fruit  trees  (-especially  apples)  are  grafted  at 
9-10 in  above  soil  level  to  avoid  problems 
such  as  collar  rot.  Ornamental  plants,  on  the 
other  hand,  are grafted  as close to the ground 
as  feasible,  to  avoid  unsightly  bulges  that 
may  occur  with  certain 
rootstock/scion 
combinations. 

Cut  back  the  rootstock  to  the  appropriate 
height  with  a  pair  of  sharp  shears.  Then 
make a 11/2 in sloping cut across the top, using 
a  sharp  knife. 

Lift  the  scions  from  the  ground.  Select  one 
that  has  a  similar diameter  at  its  base  to  that 
of  the  rootstock  top.  Take  a  sharp  knife  and 
make  a  top  cut  close  above  a  bud  about four 
to  five  buds  from  the  scion  base.  Then  make 
a  sloping  11/2  in  cut  across  the  base  of  the 
scion,  ending  it  just  below  a  bud;  ensure  the 
cut  is  at  the  same  angle  as  the  rootstock  cut. 
This  is  a  splice  or  whip  graft.  To  provide 

rigidity,  add  a  tongue  to  the  cuts. 

The  tongue  is  made  from  single  cuts  on 
both  the  scion  and  rootstock.  From  one-
third  of  the  way  down  the  sloping  cut  on  top 
of  the  rootstock,  make  a  shallow,  single  1/2  in 
slice  down  into  the  rootstock. 

Make the scion tongue by cutting for 1/2 in 
from  one-third  of the way up the scion sloping 
cut,  keeping  the  knife  blade  at  the  same 
angle  as  the  tongue  on  the  rootstock. 

Slip  the  scion  into  the  rootstock  so  they 
interlock.  If  the  rootstock  is  thicker  than  the 
scion,  move  it  to  one  side  until  there  is  good 
contact  between 
layers. 
Bind  with  clear  polyethylene  grafting  tape  to 
hold  the  join  firmly.  Seal  the  top  of  the  scion 
with  tree  paint  and  label. 

two  cambial 

the 

For  a  wide  range  of  trees  and  shrubs,  in(cid:173)

cluding  apple  and  pear  trees,  the  grafted 
parts  can  then  be  left  to  unite.  Cherry  trees, 
however,  should  have their  scion  and  grafted 
area  covered  with  a  polyethylene  bag,  which 
is  then  tied  just  below  the  union—the  in(cid:173)
creased  temperature  hastening development. 
Remove the grafting tape and  polyethylene 
bag as soon as the cut surfaces start callusing, 
which  means 
two  grafted  parts  are 
beginning  to  join. 

the 

Cut  off  any  growth  that  the  rootstock  may 
produce  and,  if  required,  reduce  the  scion 
shoots 
to  promote  a  single-
stemmed  tree  or  shrub. 

just  one 

to 

depending  on 
in 
indelible  ink  and  attach  it  to  the  new  plant. 
Cut  out  any  competing  growths  from  the 

its  vigor.  Write  a 

label 

rootstock,  although 
these  are  unlikely  to 
occur with  a  rootstock that was  cut  back  into 
the  hypocotyl  or  a  root. 

Wedge  or  cleft  grafting  is  perhaps  the  easiest 
way  to  join  two  plants  as  only  simple  carpen(cid:173)
try  is  required,  and  it  is  used  to  propagate  a 
wide  variety  of  shrubs  and  ornamental  trees. 
In  midwinter,  collect  some  stems  with  all 
their  previous  season's  growth  from  a  plant 
with  suitable  scion  material.  Bundle  these 
together  and  then  heel  them  6 in  deep  into 
the ground. This will  prevent the scions drying 
out,  and  will  keep  them  cool  and  retard  their 
development.  Label  them  clearly. 

In  late  winter/early  spring,  select  a  suitable 
rootstock:  either a  one-year-old  seedling  or a 
substantial  piece  of  root 
is  growing 
vigorously.  Lift  the  rootstock  and  wash  it. 

that 

Crafting  is  carried  out  on  the  top  of  the 
root  or  in  the  hypocotyl  of  the  seedling.  Cut 
the  top  of  the  rootstock  horizontally,  using  a 
sharp  knife.  Then  make  a  single  11/4  in  cut 
vertically  down  the  middle  of  the  rootstock. 
Lift the scions;  choose one that  has  plump, 
healthy  buds  and  is  of  similar  diameter to  the 
top  of  the  rootstock.  Make  a  sloping  cut  just 
above  a  bud  at  the  top,  using  a  sharp  knife. 
Then  make a  horizontal  cut  about  6 in  below. 
To  form  a  wedge,  make  a  sloping  11/2  in  cut, 
starting  near  a  bud  and  cutting  toward  the 

middle  of  the  scion  base.  Make  a  similar  cut 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  scion. 

Push  the  scion  gently  but  firmly  down  into 
the  rootstock  cut.  Leave  a  small  portion  of 
the  cut scion  surface exposed  above the  root(cid:173)
stock.  This  will  encourage  the  development 
of  callus  tissues,  and 
it 
is  known  as  the 
"church  window"  effect. 
joined  area 

tightly  with  clear 
polyethylene grafting tape.  Seal  the top  ot the 
scion  with  a  suitable  tree  paint  to  reduce 
water  loss. 

Bind 

the 

Place the grafted  parts  in  a box  of  peat and 
grit  and  heel  them  in  to  just  above  the  graft 
union. Label and place in a protected environ(cid:173)
ment  such  as  a  cold  frame  or closed  case,  or 
on  a  greenhouse  bench.  The  higher 
the 
temperature  the  faster  the  union  will  occur, 
providing  the  grafted  parts  do  not  dry  out. 
As  the  grafted  parts  unite,  the  exposed  cut 
surfaces  will  start  callusing.  This  can  be  seen 
in  the  "church  window"  just  above  the  cut 
surface  of  the  rootstock,  where  the  callus 
tissues  interlock  and  provide  rigidity. 

When  a  fairly  firm  union  has  formed,  cut 
and  remove the  polyethylene tape.  Pot  up the 
resulting 
it  out. 

tree  or  shrub,  or  plant 

The side-wedge graft  is the simplest and  most 
effective  method  of  side  grafting,  and  it  is 
widely  used to  propagate both  deciduous  and 
evergreen  plants. 

the  rootstock 

is  available  and 

The  usual  season for side-wedge grafting  is 
in  late winter/early  spring,  just  before the  leaf 
buds  break.  However,  with  evergreen  plants 
is  feasible  whenever  a  mature  flush  of 
it 
growth 
is 
growing  actively.  For  very  sappy  plants,  that 
is  those  plants  that  "bleed"  when  cut,  it  is 
advisable  to  graft  early  in  the  growing  season 
and  dry  the  rootstocks  off  before  doing  so. 
Establish  a  one-year-old  labeled  seedling 
in  a  pot  and  grow  it  for  a  year.  Ensure  this 
seedling,  which  will  form  the  rootstock,  is 
related  to  and  therefore  compatible  with  the 
plant  to  be  grafted  onto  it. 

About  three  weeks  before  grafting,  place 
the  potted  rootstock  in  a  frost-free  area  to 
encourage  it  to  grow.  Dry  off  the  rootstock, 
especially  deciduous  rootstock,  by  keeping 
watering to  a  bare  minimum  or  indeed  by  not 
watering  at  all.  Trim  the  leaves  off the  bottom 
3-4 in  of  the  rootstock  stem. 

Select  a  plant 

that  has  suitable  scion 
material,  and  remove  some  stems  with  all 
their  previous  season's  growth. 
If  at  all 

later,  cut  back 

Two  weeks 
the  remaining 
rootstock  above  the  grafted  area  so  that  the 
scion  becomes  the  leader  shoot  of  the  plant. 
Dab  the  cut  surface  with  a  suitable  tree  paint 
if  the final  cut  surface  is  extensive. 

Watering 

is  probably  the  most  difficult 
aspect  of  graft  management.  Water  little  and 
often  rather  than  in  large  doses  at  infrequent 
intervals,  so  that  the  plant  is  kept  on  the  dry 
side  in  a  humid  environment. 

possible,  collect  these  stems  with  their  apical 
buds  intact. 

Select  a  stem,  or  scion,  of  comparable 
thickness  to  the  rootstock.  Make  two  sloping 
11/2  in  cuts  on  the  scion  base,  opposite  each 
other,  so  that  a  wedge  shape  is  produced. 

Starting  about  2 in  above  soil  level,  cut 
downward  into  the  rootstock  for  1  1/2  in  and 
inward  to  about  a  third  of the  stem  thickness. 
Gently  bend  the  rootstock  away  from  this 
cut  so  that  it  opens  sufficiently  to  insert  the 
scion.  If  the  scion  is  narrower  than  the  root(cid:173)
stock,  match  up  the  cambial  layers  on  one 
side.  Release  the  tension  on  the  rootstock. 

Bind  with  clear  polyethylene  tape,  over(cid:173)
lapping  it to  seal  the entire  cut  area  and  label. 

Stand  the  grafted  rootstock  in  a  green(cid:173)
house,  and  the two  parts should  join  in  about 
six  to  eight  weeks,  depending  on  the  species. 
This  environment  is  preferable  to  a  warm, 
humid  one,  such  as  a  closed  case,  where the 
buds  would  be  encouraged  to  develop  and, 
once  the  two  parts  have  joined,  the  grafted 
rootstock  would  need  hardening  off,  which 
can  be  extremely  difficult  to  do  satisfactorily. 
Remove  the  polyethylene  tape  and  cut 
back  half  the  rootstock  above  the  grafted 
area  as  soon  as  the  two  parts  have  joined. 

Label  the  grafted  rootstock  and  keep  it 
warm  and  humid  to  encourage  the  plant  to 
grow  and  the  grafted  parts  to  join  up.  A 
closed  case  with  or  without  heat  from  below 
is  a  suitable  environment. 

Water  the  pot  sparingly,  keeping  the  plant 

on  the  dry  side  until  callusing  occurs. 

Conifers,  if  grown  close  together  in  pots 
under  warm,  humid  conditions,  are  subject 
to  various  leaf  diseases  and  rots,  and  to  red 

spider  mite  infestations,  so  spray  regularly 
with  fungicides  and  pesticides. 

Take the grafted  rootstock out of the closed 
case  and  harden  off  on 
the  greenhouse 
bench,  once  the  parts  have  united.  This 
should  be  within  six  to  ten  weeks.  Remove 
the  polyethylene  tape  and  reduce  the  top  of 
the  rootstock  by  one-third  immediately.  After 
a fortnight,  remove a further third.  After  mid(cid:173)
summer,  head  back any  remaining  rootstock. 

Traditionally,  side-veneer  grafts  have  been 
used  to  propagate  conifers,  but they  are  now 
often carried  out on  any  plant suitable for side 
grafting.  The  join  resulting  from  this  method 
of  grafting  is  slightly  more  upright  than  one 
from  a  side-wedge  graft  (see  page  89). 

Conifers,  when  cut,  exude 

resin  and, 
although  this  can  be  reduced  by  drying  off 
the  rootstocks  before  grafting,  the  resin  will 
still  adhere  to  a  knife  blade  and  so  impair  its 
efficiency  and  cutting  edge.  Therefore,  keep 
the  knife  blade  clean  by  wiping  it  regularly 
with  some  absorbent  material  soaked  in  an 
organic  solvent  such  as  acetone.  It  is  im(cid:173)
portant  to  wipe  the  solvent  off  the  blade 
with  a  clean  cloth  otherwise  it  could  pollute 
the  tissues  of  any  plant  through  which  the 
knife  blade  subsequently  cuts. 

Rootstocks for side-veneer grafts are almost 
invariably  pot grown,  as the fine, fibrous  roots 
of  the  conifer  are  prone  to  drying  out. 

Graft  conifers  either  in 

late  winter/early 
spring  or  during  late  summer,  although  the 
latter  period  causes  problems  as  the  trees 
have to  be  kept alive  over the winter  and  then 
need  to  be  hardened  off  in  spring. 

In  late  winter/early  spring,  dry  off  the  pot-
grown  conifer  that  will  form  the  rootstock  by 
watering  less  than  usual.  Because  it  is  ever(cid:173)
green,  this  drying  off  should  not  be  as  drastic 
as  for  deciduous  plants. 

After 

the 

three  weeks,  once 

rootstock 
shows  signs  of growth,  grafting  is  carried  out. 
Select  a  conifer  that  has  suitable  scion 
material  and  cut  off  a  leader  shoot  of  one 
season's  growth.  The  length  of  the  shoot,  or 
scion,  will  very  much  depend  on  the  vigor 
of  growth,  but  it  must  include  some  mature 
brown-barked  wood.  Strip  off the  leaves  from 
the  bottom  third  of  the  scion.  Make  a  11/4  in 
sloping  cut  down  to  the  scion  base,  using  a 
sharp  knife.  Then  turn  the  scion  over  and 
make  a  very  small  wedge  cut. 

Trim  any  leaves  off  the  bottom  6 in  of  the 
rootstock  stem.  About 21/2-3 in  above  soil 
level,  make  a 11/4in sloping  cut  downward 
and  inward  to  give  a  shallow  cut  about  1/8  in 
deep  at  the  bottom.  Then  make  a  slightly 
downward  and  inward  nick  lower  down  the 
rootstock  to  join  the  first  cut.  Remove  the 
sliver  of  wood  from  the  rootstock.  Place  the 
rootstock  and  scion  together.  If  their  sizes 
match  they  will  be  easier  to  manipulate.  If 
the  scion  is  narrower  than  the  rootstock,  set 
to  one  side  to  match  up  the  cambial  layers. 
The  interlocking  bases  of  the  two  grafted 
parts  will  provide  some  rigidity,  but 
they 
should  also  be  tied  together firmly. 

It  is  possible  to  use  a  rubberized  strip  as  a 

tie, but clear polyethylene tape is just as effec(cid:173)
tive  and  has 
the  added  advantage  of 
preventing  water  loss  from  around  the  cuts. 

Shield-budding,  or  T-budding,  is  a  traditional 
way  to  propagate  rosaceous  plants  by  graft(cid:173)
ing.  A  bud  from  the  plant to  be  propagated  is 
placed  behind  the  bark  of  the  rootstock  so 
that  the  back  of  the  bud  and  the  exposed 
surface  of the  rootstock  wood  are  in  contact. 
However,  this  technique  can  only  be  carried 
out when  the  bark  of the  rootstock  lifts  easily; 
this  is  normally  between  May  and  August. 

Select  a  suitable  rootstock,  either  a  seed(cid:173)

ling  or  a  one-year-old  layer.  Plant  it  in  some 
open  ground  during  the  winter.  Label  it  and 
allow  to  establish. 

As  soon  as  the  bark  lifts  easily  from  the 
wood  underneath,  prepare  the  rootstock  for 

shield-budding.  Insert  a  rose  bud 
into  the 
hypocotyl of a seedling rose (see page 92) and 
a  tree  bud  into  a  stem  of  a  compatible  root(cid:173)
stock  at  the  required  height. 

Cut  off  any  leaves  and  branches  on  the 
bottom  12 in  of  the  rootstock.  Make  a  T-
shaped  incision  through  the  bark  by  cutting 
a  horizontal  slit and then a vertical  downward 
incision  sufficiently  large  to  take  a  suitable 
bud.  The  taut  bark  will  begin  to  spring  away 
from  the  wood  underneath.  Loosen  the  two 
flaps  slightly  to  receive  the  bud. 

Select  a  plant  that  has  suitable  budding 
material.  Cut  off  a  stem  with  all  the  current 
year's  growth  and  with  plump,  healthy  buds. 

Remove  the  leaves,  but  leave  about  1/2  in  of 
each  leaf  stalk  attached  to  the  stem. 

When  shield-budding,  always  select  buds 
from  the  middle  of a  stem  where the  buds are 
mature.  Do  not  take  them  from  the  bottom 
of  the  stem  because  they  may  be  latent,  nor 
from  the  top  where  they  will  be  immature. 

Cut  shallowly  into  the  stem,  or  bud  stick, 
about  1/4  in  below  a  mature  bud;  then  cut 
shallowly  underneath  the  b u d;  when  past  it, 
lift  off  the  bud  together  with  a  tail  of  bark. 
Ensure 
to  avoid 
damaging  the  "eye"  of  the  bud. 

is  deep  enough 

the  cut 

Remove  any  wood  from  under  the  bark  by 
bending  the  bark  outward  and  flicking  the 

wood  out.  If  the  bud  trace  comes  out  with 
the  wood,  the  bud  is  not  mature  and  should 
be  discarded. 

Using the leaf stalk as a handle, slip the bud 
into  the  T-cut  on  the  rootstock,  and  trim  off 
the  tail  flush  with  the  horizontal  cut. 

Tie  the  budded  rootstock  with  clear  poly(cid:173)
ethylene  tape,  leaving  the  bud  and  leaf  stalk 
exposed,  and  label  it. 

After  three  to  four  weeks  the  bud  will  have 
united  with  the  rootstock  and  the  tape  can 
be  removed. 

In  late winter/early  spring,  cut  back the top 
of the  rootstock  to  just  above  the  bud,  which 
will  then grow out  during the following spring. 

Hybrid  Tea  and  Floribunda  roses  should  be 
propagated  by  inserting  buds  into  seedling 
rootstocks  rather  than  by  taking  stem  cut(cid:173)
tings.  The  advantage  of  rose  budding  is  that 
the  seedling 
the  vigor 
of  the  weaker  varieties,  which  on  their  own 
roots  may grow only 9 in or so, while reducing 
the  potential  of  the  more  vigorous  ones, 
which  might  otherwise  reach  14-16 ft  tall. 

rootstocks  boost 

The  selection  of a suitable  rootstock  is  one 

of the  most  important  decisions  when  propa(cid:173)
gating  roses.  Although  it  is  possible  to  collect 
a  seedling  of the  wild  rose from  the  hedgerow 
and  use  this  as  rootstock, 
this  not  only 
denudes  the  natural  flora  of  the  countryside 
but  in fact  is  not  really  desirable as  rootstock. 
rootstock  should  not  produce 
suckers  once  the  bush  is  eventually  planted 
in  its  permanent  position.  It  should  ideally  be 
of  a  variety  that  grows  few  thorns,  and  the 
actual  process  of  budding will  be  easier  if the 
neck  of  the  rootstock  is  relatively  long.  All 
these  advantages  are found  in  Rosa  laxa. 

rose 

A 

In  winter,  plant  a  seedling  rootstock  of 
5-8 mm  grade  up  to  its  neck  in  the  ground. 
Space further  plants  about 9 in  apart  in  a  row, 
and  earth  them  all  up  to  cover  their  necks; 
then  label  them. 

Budding  is  carried  out  once  the  bark  of the 
rootstock  lifts easily,  usually after midsummer. 

Pull  away  the  earth  from  the  rootstock 
in  the  neck. 

neck.  Make  a  T-shaped  cut 
Loosen  the  two  flaps  of  bark  a  little. 

Select  a  plant  that  has  suitable  budding 
material.  From  it  choose  a  stem  in  which  the 
flowers  have  just  "blown,"  that  is,  gone  over, 
and  remove  this  stem  with  all  its  current 
season's  growth.  At  this  stage  virtually  all  the 
buds  on  the  stem  will  be  suitable  for  propa(cid:173)
gation.  Remove the  leaves  from  the  stem. 

Standard  roses 
Standard  roses  are  propagated  on  to  root(cid:173)
stocks  of  Rosa  rugosa,  which  has  single  stems 
usually  6-8ft  tall.  Plant  in  winter  in  a  row  and 
support  on  wire  attached  to  posts.  Budding 
takes  place  during 
following  summer 
when  the  bark  lifts.  Two  or  sometimes  three 

the 

buds  in  a  close  spiral  are  worked  on  the 
rootstock  in  order  to  produce  a  more  even 
and  regular  head.  The  height  at  which  the 
leaf  buds  are  inserted  will  depend  on  the 
length  of  stem  required.  A  standard  rose  is 
usually budded at about 31/2 ft; a half-standard 
at about 21/2 ft. 

Hold  a  sharp  knife  just  below  a  bud.  Cut 
shallowly  toward  the  tip  of  the  stem  around 
the  bud.  Lift  off the  bud  together  with  its  tail. 
Insert  the  bud,  tail  upward,  between  the 
flaps  of  bark  on  the  rootstock.  Trim  the  tail 
flush  with  the  horizontal  cut.  Cover  the  bud 
with  a  rubber  budding  patch  and  pin  it  in 
position.  This  patch,  which  is  made  of  non-
vulcanized  rubber,  will  perish  at  about  the 
same  rate  as  the  bud  unites  with  the  root(cid:173)
stock—in  about 
five  weeks.  This 
means  that  the  rubber  patch  does  not  need 
cutting  as  it  will  not  constrict  the  rapidly 
expanding  neck  of  the  plant. 

four 

to 

The  bud  will  develop  before  the  end  of the 

season  or  during  the  following  season. 

In  late  winter,  cut  off  the  top  of  the  root(cid:173)

just  above 

stock, 
the  bud.  This  prevents 
possible  stem  suckers. The following  autumn, 
replant  the  bush  in  its  final  place. 

Chip-budding  is  perhaps  the  easiest  way  to 
bud  a  plant  as 
few 
actions  and,  more  importantly,  it  provides 
greater  cambial  contact  between  rootstock 
and  scion  than  does  shield-budding. 

involves  relatively 

it 

A  "chip"  of  bark  and  wood  is  removed 
from the  rootstock and  replaced with a "chip" 
of  similar  dimensions  carrying  a  bud  from  the 
plant  to  be  propagated. 

Chip-budding  can  be  used  to  propagate 
any  rosaceous  plant,  provided  that  the  wood 
is  sufficiently  hard  and  mature.  For  the  tech(cid:173)
nique  to  be  successful, 
is  necessary  to 
prevent  any  water  loss  by  sealing  the  cut 
edges  extremely  well. 

it 

Chip-budding  can  be  carried  out  at  any 
time  of year  provided  that  well-matured  buds 
are  available  and 
temperatures  are  high 
least  10°C/50°F)  to  produce  a 
enough  (at 
union  quickly. 

Although  this  technique  could  be  used  on 
rootstocks  such  as  Magnolia 

pot-grown 
grandiflora,  it  is  usually  carried  out  on  root(cid:173)
stocks  that  have  been  planted  in  winter  in 
the  open  ground. 

In  midsummer,  remove  all  branches  and 

leaves  from  the  bottom  12-15  in  of  the  root(cid:173)
stock  stem. 

Select  a  plant  that  is  suitable  for  budding. 
Cut  off  some  vegetative  shoots  with  all  their 
current  year's  growth  and  with  well-matured 
buds,  at  least  toward  their  base.  Discard  the 
softer  top  growth  and  carefully  remove  all 
the  leaves flush  with  the  stem. 

Make  a 1/4in cut  down  into  the  rootstock 
stem,  at  an  angle of about 45  degrees.  Start  a 
top cut 11/4" in above the lower cut and angle it 
down  to  join  the  basal  cut;  remove  the  chip. 
Select  a  stem,  or  bud  stick,  that  has  a 
similar  diameter  to  the  rootstock  so  that  it  is 
easy  to  match  the  cuts. 

Make  exactly  similar  cuts  on  the  bud  stick 
as  on  the  rootstock,  ensuring  that  a  bud  is 
included  midway  down  the  chip. 

Tuck  the  bud  chip  into  position  on  the 
rootstock  and 
tie  with  polyethylene  tape, 
overlapping  the  tape  so  that  it  seals  the  chip 
completely.  Then  label. 

After  three  to  four  weeks  the  bud  will  have 
united  with  the  rootstock  and  the  tape  can 
be  removed,  so  allowing the  bud  to  swell. 

In  winter,  cut  the  rootstock  right  back, 
close  above the  bud  but without  damaging  it. 
The  bud  will  grow  out  the  following  season. 
If  budding  is  done  early,  the  bud  may  grow 
out  before  the  end  of the  season. 

