PRUNING FOR 
CONTAINMENT 

HEADING 

Trees are pruned to provide clearance for overhead utili(cid:173)
ty  lines.  Heading,  the removal  of all  the  branches at one 
level, promotes dense regrowth. 

Regrovi/th  after  heading  results  in  a  tangle  of  branches 
even  harder  to  control  and  can  seriously  damage  over(cid:173)
head utility lines. 

THINNING 

Careful  selective  thinning  of  uppermost  branches  cre(cid:173)
ates an easily maintained opening for utility lines. 

Regrowth  after  thinning  is controlled  and  directed  away 
from lines, preventing damage to lines and tree. 

From  the  day  any  plant  begins  life  as  a  seedling,  its 
growth  is  influenced  by climatic and biological condi(cid:173)
tions.  Climates vary considerably over large and small 
geographic  regions.  Differences  in  climates  are  deter(cid:173)
mined  by  amounts  of  rainfall,  sunshine,  mountain 
ranges,  longitude  and  latitude,  elevations  and  bodies 
of water. 

The ability of plants to grow and survive in any par(cid:173)
ticular climate is called  hardiness. Growth of all plants 
is influenced by the following conditions: 

•  Sunlight, Day Length and Temperature. 
•  Air, Wind, Soil and Water. 
•  Wildlife  and Diseases. 
•  Genetic Heritage. 

Scientists  have  been  studying  these  influences  for 
centuries.  In many cases, their effect on the way some 
plants function is still not completely understood. For(cid:173)
tunately,  the gardener only needs to understand a few 
basic  facts  about  how  plants  grow  and  the  influences 
that affect them. 
Sunlight and Day Length—All plants are phototropic. 
This  means  they  respond  to  light  in  a  positive  way. 
Shrubs, trees and vines all grow toward light. 

Sunlight,  or  solar  energy,  is  essential  for  plants  to 

live.  Leaves  are  solar  collectors.  Leaves  orient them(cid:173)
selves  towards  the  sun.  Through  a process  known  as 
photosynthesis,  leaves  manufacture  food  for  the  tree. 

Photosynthesis  converts  energy  from  the  sun  into 
starches and sugars,  or food. This food is a basic sugar. 
When  leaves  don't  receive  enough  sunlight to  manu(cid:173)
facture food, they drop from the plant. 

Shaded  areas  of  plants  tend  to  become  bare  of 
foliage.  Shaded  parts  may  fail  to  bloom,  or  if  they 
bloom,  only a few blooms will set fruit.  Pruning helps 
trees or shrubs arrange foliage to intercept the sunlight. 
Day  Length,  or  more correctly  the  length  of night, 
is the determining factor that tells  deciduous perennial 
plants when to develop flowers or drop leaves. Decidu(cid:173)
ous  plants  lose  all  their  leaves  each  year.  Perennial 
plants  live  from  year  to  year.  Studies  have  produced 
little knowledge about how day length initiates flower(cid:173)
ing  or  leaf-drop.  Evergreen  tropical  and  subtropical 
plants are not affected by day length.  Evergreen plants 
don't lose all their leaves each year. 
Temperature—Daily  and  seasonal  temperatures  have 
a pronounced  effect  on  plants.  Each  climate  differs  in 
amount  and  intensity  of  sunlight,  temperature  ex(cid:173)
tremes and many other variables. All the factors above 
have  various  effects  on  plants  depending  upon  the 
season of the year. 

Day length and temperature initiate a series of physi(cid:173)

cal  and  chemical  changes  in  plants  each  year.  These 
changes are called acclimation. The acclimation process 
helps  plants  acquire  resistance  to  cold.  Acclimation 
enables plants to survive winter months. 

The  initial  phases  of acclimation  are  started  by  de(cid:173)

creasing  day  length.  Latter  phases  of  acclimation 
depend  on  the  occurrence  of  colder  temperatures. 

Left:  The  side  of  a  tree  that  faces  a  larger  tree  is  dwarfed  because  the  smaller  tree  is  shaded  from  the  sunlight. 
Center:  A tree growing  in  an open field  is  more symmetrical  because  light evenly  illuminates all sides.  Right:  Leaves 
on  plants will always orient themselves toward the dominant light source. 

Pruning  in  late  summer  can  delay  acclimation  by 
plants and result in winter-damaged trees and shrubs. 
Air  and  Wind—Atmospheric  quality and wind move(cid:173)
ment  have  a  significant  effect  on  plant  growth.  If air 
quality is poor or contains large amounts of pollutants, 
trees and shrubs may suffer. 

Movement  of  trees  by  wind  stimulates  trunks  of 
woody  trees  to  become  thicker  and  more  resistant  to 
movement.  Constant  wind  along  coastlines  produces 
trees and shrubs that lean away from the wind. 
Soil  and  Water—Water  has  a  profound  effect  on  all 
plants.  Periods  of  drought  can  cause  trees  to  lose 
leaves.  The sun can burn exposed limbs and trees can 
die.  Pruning  of  selected  limbs  can  reduce  water  re(cid:173)
quirements.  Leaf  loss  and  pruning  enables  plants  to 
survive periods of drought. 

Soil  condition  is  an  important  influence  on  plant 
growth. The texture of the soil can allow roots to grow 
easily or work harder to anchor plants.  Soil quality,  or 

existence of organic matter, nutrients and moisture, is 
important to trees, shrubs and other plants. 
Wildlife and Diseases—Insects,  birds and animals are 
a natural  part  of a tree's environment.  Normal activi(cid:173)
ties of these creatures can both help and damage trees. 
Insects  or  decay  fungi  may enter wounds caused by 
deer  rubbing  against  tree  trunks.  Insects  will  eat  the 
inside of the tree.  Birds, searching for a meal, may eat 
the insects. Decay fungi can spread inside trees. Decay 
weakens  trees  and  may  leave  small  cavities.  Cavities 
can provide a nesting place for birds or animals. 

Pruning  broken  branches  and  repairing  damaged 
bark  can  prevent  entrance  of  insects  or  disease. 
Removing infested parts of trees can prevent spread of 
insects  or  disease.  Filling  cavities  closes  entrance 
points for animals and insects. 
Genetic  Heritage—Every  species  and  variety  of plant 
responds  to  the  environment  according  to  genetic 
heritage. 

This genetic  commitment  of plants tells them to do 
many  different  things.  For  pruning  purposes,  genetic 
programming tells plants to do the following: 
•  Produce wood for trunks and large limbs. 
•  Produce and extend shoots with little wood. 
•  Develop flowers and fruits. 

All  these  commitments  can  influence  plants  during 
different  stages  of growth.  Young  trees  normally  pro(cid:173)
duce lots of wood and shoots. After two or three years, 
they begin to produce more flowers and small amounts 
of fruit,  while  still  producing  wood.  As  trees  mature, 
they  consistently  produce  fruit,  with  little  growth  of 
trunk or limbs. 

Pruning  can  sometimes  change  genetic  commit(cid:173)
ments,  but  it  almost  never  eliminates  these  commit(cid:173)
ments completely. 

Growth Habit of a tree refers to the shape in which 
the  tree  grows.  A  tree  may  grow  low  to  the  ground 
with wide, spreading branches.  A tree may be tall and 
stiff,  flexible  and  willowy,  or  even  weeping.  Shape  is 
determined by genetic code. 

Growing patterns are controlled to a large extent by 
the growing shoot tip or leader of plants.  The growing 
shoot tip is sometimes called the terminal ox apical bud. 
The  growing  shoot  tip  plays  an  important  role  in  the 
growth of parts of the plant below the tip.  In this phe(cid:173)
nomenon, called apical dominance, the growing shoot 
tip produces a hormone, called auxin. Auxin is a growth 
hormone  that  moves  through  the  tree  down  toward 
the  earth.  Auxin  tells  shoots  to  grow  up  and roots  to 
grow down. 

In  a  way  not  completely  understood  by  scientists, 
auxin inhibits or slows growth of most buds formed in 
axils of leaves on the same shoot. The axil is the upper 
angle  formed  by  a  leaf  and  the  branch.  Auxin  also 
causes  lower  shoots  to  form  at  wide  angles  with  the 
main stem or trunk. 

Apical  dominance  refers  to  the  influence  exerted  by 
growing  shoot  tips  on  buds  and  the  shoots  below them. 
The hormone that originates in the tips of shoots, section 
A,  migrates  toward  the  ground.  The  hormone  causes 
shoots  in  section  B to form wide angles with  the  central 
axis.  Growth  of  shoots  in  section  C  is  also suppressed. 
Knowledge  of  apical  dominance  is  basic  to  an  under(cid:173)
standing of pruning. 

Genetic  heritage  commits  some  plants 
to production of wood. 

Other  plants  are  committed  to  the  ex(cid:173)
tension of stems with little wood. 

Other  plants  produce  more  blossoms 
and seeds than wood and stems. 

Removing  the  growing  shoot  tip  by  pruning,  or 
bending a shoot toward a horizontal position,  changes 
the  hormone's  response  and  growth  pattern  of  the 
branch. 

Gravitational  Pull  influences  apical  dominance  in 
plants. Gravitational pull can also change the direction 
branches grow because of the weight of leaves or fruit. 
Other  environmental  factors  can  influence  plant 
growth.  Wind  caused  by  passage  of automobile  traffic 

can force trees to grow in a different direction. Foreign 
chemicals  may  be  toxic  to  young  plants,  stunting 
growth. 

Flowering  Habit refers  to  age  and position of wood 

that bears flowers. Flowers may appear on current sea(cid:173)
son's  growth  of wood,  on  last  season's  growth  or  on 
long-lived spurs several years old. Flowers may also be 
born terminally at the end of growing wood, or laterally 
on the sides of growing wood. 

For  a  better  understanding  of why  and  how  to  prune 
plants,  it is  important to know the name and function 
of each plant part.  Refer to the illustration on page  14. 
This  illustration  provides  the  basis for  information  in 
this section. 

PARTS AND FUNCTIONS 
All plants contain the following parts: 
•  Roots 
•  Trunk or Stem 
•  Branches, Limbs and Twigs 
•  Leaves 
Roots—They  form  the  basic  anchoring  system  for  all 
plants.  Roots  hold  plants  firmly  in  place  in  the  soil. 
Roots  obtain  all  essential  inorganic  nutrients,  miner(cid:173)
als, and water from soil. 

Roots  accomplish  their  tasks  through  a  complex 
system  of  lateral and feeder roots.  Roots  are  covered 
with tiny root hairs. As roots grow, they force their way 
through  soil  in  search  of  water  and  minerals.  This 
strong network of growing roots helps anchor plants to 
the ground. 
Trunk—The trunk or stem provides the main support 
system of the trees. The internal structure is composed 
of xylem, phloem and cambium. The xylem, phloem and 
cambium form a complex vascular system. This vascu(cid:173)
lar system is  made up  of conducting cells. These cells 
transport water, minerals and food throughout trees. 
Branches—There  are  two  types  of branches  in  trees: 
scaffold branches and lateral branches. 

Scaffold branches are large, forming the basic shape 

of trees and providing support. 

Lateral branches are smaller. They tend to fill in the 
outline  of  trees.  Lateral  branches  support  growing 
twigs, leaves and fruit. 
Twigs—These  small  structures  are  commonly  called 
the growing shoots. They contain the growing shoot tip 
or  terminal  bud.  This  is  sometimes  called  the  apical 
bud. Twigs contain many lateral buds along the side of 

Flower  buds  are  easy  to  distinguish  from  leaf  buds. 
Flower buds are rounder and  plumper. 

the twig.  Basic materials for development of the leaves 
and flowers are inside these buds. 
Buds—Buds  are  formed  in  axils  of leaves  during  the 
growing season.  Buds are covered by layers of protec(cid:173)
tive scales. Basic primordia, or partially formed parts of 
leaves  or  flowers,  are  found  under  these  layers  of 
scales. 

Buds  may  contain  only  leaf primordia,  only  flower 

primordia, or a combination of both leaf and flower pri(cid:173)
mordia.  Flower  buds  are  usually  larger  and  rounder 
than leaf buds. 

The Flowering Habit of trees refers to age and posi(cid:173)
tion  of  twigs  that  contain  flower  buds.  Buds  may  be 
positioned terminally at the end of twigs or laterally on 
the side of twigs.  Buds can appear on current season's 
growth, last season's growth or on long-lived spurs. 
Leaves—Food  for  plants  is  produced  by  leaves. 
Leaves  are  food factories.  Leaves  collect  energy  from 
the  sun  and  change  energy  into  starches  and  sugars 
—carbohydrates—for plants.  During  this food produc(cid:173)
tion  process,  called  photosynthesis,  leaves  absorb 
carbon  dioxide  and  release  water  and  oxygen  into  the 
atmosphere. 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
AND FUNCTION 
It  is  important  to  remember  that  different  parts  of a 
tree are interconnected and dependent on each other. 

Let's take a closer look at the internal structure of a 

typical plant and see how it actually works. 
Xylem—The  innermost  part  of a  tree  is  called  xylem. 
This  inner  cylinder  of wood  contains  old  heartwood 
and young sapwood.  Heartwood is  the non-living part 
of the  tree.  Heartwood provides  structural  support for 
the  tree.  Sapwood is  the  living  part  of the  tree.  Sap-
wood  conducts  water  and  mineral  nutrients  from  the 
roots to all branches and leaves. 

The  young  xylem,  or  sapwood,  is  interconnected 
throughout  the  tree.  If  you  prune  off  a  small  limb, 
water going to that limb is sent to the remaining limbs. 
If you cut off a root from one side of a tree, roots from 
the  tree's  other  side  will  supply  the  entire  tree  with 
water. 

This interconnection allows water to bypass a wound 
on one side of the trunk. You can supply water to only 
25%  of a tree's root system without causing any other 
part  of  the  tree  to  suffer  stress—if  enough  water  is 
provided.  This  interconnectedness  is  one  reason  why 
pruning  helps  prevent 
stress  during  drought 
conditions. 

Because  heartwood  in  xylem  is  not  alive,  it  can't 
heal  itself.  Bacteria  and  wood-rotting  fungi  can  live 
and thrive in heartwood. 

Although  an  old,  hollow-centered  tree  can  be 
healthy,  it  usually  is  not  as  strong  as  a  young  tree. 
Once  old  xylem  or  heartwood  has  lost  the  ability  to 
conduct nutrients,  its main purpose is to help support 
the tree. Heartwood also stores food and plant waste. 

Large  pruning  wounds  expose  heartwood.  This 
exposure can allow entrance of wood-rotting fungi and 
bacteria.  These  organisms  weaken  tree  structure.  Be(cid:173)
cause  spores  of wood-rotting  fungi  are  present  every(cid:173)
where, a fresh wound is immediately infected by them. 
With  good  training  and  regular  pruning,  trees  should 
not need large pruning cuts. 

Cambium—The  cambium  is  the  layer  of  wood  be(cid:173)
tween the xylem and the phloem or inner bark. Cambi(cid:173)
um  is  one  cell  thick.  The  cambium  is a living  part of 
the  tree.  The  cambium  produces  new  xylem  cells  on 
the  inside  and  new  phloem  cells  on  the  outside. 
Annual  production  of  new  cells  by  the  cambium  to 
form  xylem  and  phloem  increases  the  trunk  diameter 
in plants. 
Phloem—The phloem or inner bark is a living part of 
the tree. It is an important part of the vascular system. 
The  phloem  moves  food  to  growing  shoot  tips  and 
fruit. It also moves food into the starch-storage cells in 
the bark, xylem and growing roots. 
Bark—The bark is the outer protective covering of the 
tree.  Bark  prevents  the  tree  from drying out and pro(cid:173)
tects  the  tree  from  attacks  by  insects  and  disease.  If 
bark is damaged, it may give off large amounts of gum 
or resin. Resin production is the tree's way of trying to 
reject or kill intruders. 

the  lower  buds,  sending  shoots  upward,  sometimes 
even  overtaking  and  passing  terminal  buds.  This  can 
result in undesirable water sprouts on the upper side of 
branches.  Water  sprouts  are  vigorous,  vertical  shoots 
that are usually undesirable. 

PLANT GROWTH STIMULATED 
Pruning in any form stimulates new growth near cuts. 
Usually several lateral buds form new shoots, or water 
sprouts,  just  below  pruning  cuts.  These  new  shoots 
result  in  considerable new growth.  Rapid new growth 
occurs because top growth has been reduced in relation 
to the size of roots, trunk and main branches. The new 
growth  receives  water,  minerals  and  other  nutrients 
stored during the previous season. 

Even with new growth, pruned plants always end up 
smaller.  This  is  called  the  dwarfing  effect.  Dwarfing 
occurs  because  total amount of regrowth after pruning 
is  not  enough  to  replace  the amount of plant material 
removed,  plus the growth that would have grown from 
the original plant material. 

Dwarfing is often one  of the  gardener's main objec(cid:173)

tives.  The  dwarfing  effect  allows  gardeners  to  shape 
plants. A good example is the popular Japanese  bonsai 
plants  that  are  shaped  by selective  pruning.  Bonsai  is 
the art of dwarfing and shaping trees and shrubs. 

Bark  contains  latent buds that grow only  enough to 
remain  near  the  outer  surface.  If  a  large  branch  is 
broken or cut off, latent buds located below the wound 
will grow and form new branches. 

All  parts  of trees  or  shrubs  are  interconnected  and 
dependent  on  each  other.  If you  remove  a  section  of 
bark from around a grape vine,  called girdling, sugars 
can't  move  down  to  the  roots.  Instead,  the  sugars 
move to the fruit, making the fruit larger and sweeter. 
By  limiting  root  growth,  a heavy fruit  crop  can  re(cid:173)

quire  more  water.  The  need  for  more  water  increases 
drought  stress.  Heavy  cropping  or  summer  pruning 
competes  with  bark  for  sugars.  Reserves  of  starch 
don't  accumulate  in  xylem  layers  and  the  tree  is 
devitalized during the next growing season. 

Now  that  you  have  a  basic  understanding  of  how 
plants  grow  and  develop,  take  a  walk  through  your 
garden and  observe the  perennial  plants.  Can you see 
how they are responding to sunlight or wind? 

Examine  plants  closely  to  see  how genetic  heritage 
influences  growth  and  development.  Look at  growing 
shoot tips and find terminal buds. See if you can distin(cid:173)
guish  between flower buds  and  leaf buds.  You should 
also  look  for  evidence  of old  or  new  wounds,  insect 
damage and broken limbs. 

Plant Response to Pruning 
How  different  plants  respond  to  pruning  depends  on 
apical  dominance,  type  of  pruning  cuts  and  growth 
habits of the plant. 

APICAL DOMINANCE RELEASED 
Whenever  a  plant  is  pruned,  you  interfere  with  the 
process of apical dominance in terminal buds.  Pruning 
terminal buds removes the source of the lateral bud  in(cid:173)
hibitor,  a  chemical  substance  that  slows  or  prevents 
growth.  Pruning  allows  the  topmost  lateral  buds  to 
exert  apical  dominance  over  other  lateral  buds  lower 
on  the  branch.  The  upper  buds  will  grow faster  than 

Pole  pruners  are  useful  tor  reaching  the  tops  of  trees. 
Here  pole  pruners  are  used  to  remove  apical  tips  of 
branches to control the growth and size of this tree. 

A  favorite  saying  about  pruning  is,  "Prune  when  the 
shears are sharp." Like most maxims, it oversimplifies 
and distorts a subject that can be quite complex. 

The best time to prune varies with the type of plant, 

the time of year and the objective of pruning. 

First  decide  what  you  want  to  achieve  by  pruning. 
Then  you  can  decide  when  to  prune  a  tree  or  shrub. 
The  effect  of  pruning  can  be  different  depending  on 
the time of year and the climate. 

In general,  use the following statements as a guide. 
For  information  on  specific  plants,  consult  the  Ency(cid:173)
clopedia  section  for  details  on  results  of pruning  and 
when to prune. 
Dormant  Season,  Late  Winter—This  occurs  during 
cold  winter  months  in  most  parts  of  the  country, 
regardless of the region's climate. Little internal activi(cid:173)
ty is  taking  place in  plants  and  insects  are not active. 
Pruning during  the  dormant  season  usually stimulates 
extensive  regrowth  during  the  active  growing  season. 
Prune when temperatures are above 20F (7C). 

Late  Spring,  Early  Summer—This  period  is  one  of 
heavy activity for most plants.  As days become longer 
and  temperatures  rise,  food  begins  to  move  through(cid:173)
out plants.  This growth period puts energy into devel(cid:173)
opment of new shoots, buds and leaves. Early summer 
pruning  may  stimulate  branching  with little  devitaliz(cid:173)
ing effect on plants. 
Summer—Pruning  during  summer  has  a  devitalizing 
effect on plants and may cause permanent injury. Prun(cid:173)
ing wounds  cause  stress.  Energy needed for growth is 
expended  on  healing  wounds.  Wounds  are  more  sus(cid:173)
ceptible  to  invasion  by  wood-rot fungi  and  insects  in 
summer. 
Late  Summer,  Early  Fall—Pruning  in  this  season 
makes  plants  more  sensitive  to  injury  during  early 
freezes.  Pruning delays acclimation and reduces starch 
reserves for next season's growth. 
Fall,  Early  Winter—Pruning  in  late  fall  or  early 
winter  before  plants  become  dormant increases  sensi(cid:173)
tivity  to  freezing for at least  2  weeks  afterwards.  This 
could  result  in  serious  injury  and  possible  death  to 
plants. 

A  deciduous  tree's  response  to  pruning  varies  with  the  season.  The  most  regrowth  will  occur  in  spring  if  pruning  is 
done  during  the  dormant  season.  Pruning  during  spring will  result  in  a  lot of thin,  narrow-angled  regrowth  the  same 
season.  Pruning  during  mid-  to  late-summer  will  result  in  the  most  dwarfing  and  little  regrowth.  Pruning  during  fall 
months will  produce results similar to pruning during dormant months. 

TYPES OF PRUNING CUTS 
All  pruning cuts can be classified as either  heading or 
thinning.  Heading and thinning have opposite  effects, 
but both are beneficial to plants. 
Heading—This  procedure  removes  part  of a shoot  or 
branch, but not at a  branch point. The branch point is 
the  point  of  attachment  of  a  branch  to  the  trunk  or 
another  limb.  Heading  increases  the  number  of new 
shoots  formed  from  lateral  buds.  Heading  stimulates 
branching and makes  plants  shorter and denser.  Other 
forms of heading are pinching, snipping and shearing. 
Pinching  involves  removal  of  part  of current  sea(cid:173)

son's growing shoot, usually with the fingertips. 

Snipping  removes  the  part of a  shoot that grew the 

previous season. 

Shearing refers to many heading cuts made  along a 
single  plane,  either  during  the  growing  season  or 
during dormancy. 
Thinning—This  procedure  removes  an  entire  shoot 
or  limb  back  to  a branch point.  Thinning reduces  the 

number  of  new  shoots  from  lateral  buds.  Thinning 
inhibits branching and lets limbs grow longer. 

DEGREES OF PRUNING 
When  asked  how  to  prune  a  particular  plant,  expert 
gardeners  often  answer  "Prune  hard  or  prune  light." 
These  are  general  terms,  but  they  do  have  consistent 
meanings.  There  are  intermediate  terms,  too,  and 
every gardener must interpret these terms in individual 
applications.  The  following  pruning  descriptions  and 
common sense are the best guides. 
Light  Pruning—Suggests  minimal  removal  of foliage 
or  woody  growth.  Light  pruning  usually  means  less 
than  1/3  the  branch length or amount of growth is re(cid:173)
moved.  Plants  that  are  not  tolerant  of pruning  or  are 
slow-growing should receive light pruning. 
Hard  Pruning—Usually  means  removal  of two-thirds 
or more of the foliage or woody growth. Plants that re(cid:173)
quire  hard  pruning are  tolerant  of pruning.  Growth  is 
usually stimulated by pruning. 

Good  training  of  young  trees  and  advance  planning 
can  help  prevent  the  need for removal  of large limbs. 
However, removal of large, live limbs is sometimes re(cid:173)
quired.  The  following  process  is  recommended  to 
remove large  limbs  safely  and prevent further damage 
to trees. 

First, use a sharp saw and  undercut the limb several 
inches  away  from  the  trunk.  See  illustration  at  right. 
When the  limb  falls away,  it won't tear bark from the 
trunk. If the limb is large and heavy, tie the limb with a 
strong rope. The rope prevents the limb from crashing 
down on lower limbs or people and structures. 

Make a second cut through the limb from the upper 
side.  This  cut should be made several  inches  past the 
first  undercut.  As  this  second  cut  is  made,  the  limb 
will fall without tearing the bark. 

Finally, make a third cut through the remaining stub 
at  the  shoulder  ring.  Make  this  cut  close  to  the  tree 
trunk.  Do not make the wound any larger than neces(cid:173)
sary. See illustration below, right. 

If  removing  a  dead  limb,  make  the  final  cut  flush 
with the bulge of live bark that surrounds the point of 
origin. Do not cut into live wood to make the cut  flush 
with the trunk. 

You can paint pruning wounds with a wound dress(cid:173)

ing to prevent drying out and deter invasion by insects 
and disease.  However,  use of wound dressings has not 
been proven effective. 

The  purpose  of  making  three  cuts  is  to  avoid  bark tear(cid:173)
ing.  First,  undercut  the  limb  until  saw  begins  to  bind, 
then make the second cut down from the top. 

Correct  removal  of  large  limbs  is  important to the overall 
health  of  trees.  Removing  limbs  incorrectly  can  damage 
the  protective  bark,  providing  an  invasion  point  for  in(cid:173)
sects and disease. 

With  the  second  cut,  remove  the  limb completely.  If  it  is 
a  heavy limb, tie it with a rope to help support it. With the 
third cut, remove the stub close to the trunk. 

In  this  section you will find guidelines and a checklist 
to  evaluate the condition of trees and shrubs.  Use the 
checklist to determine the extent of work to be done in 
your yard. The checklist will help you decide what you 
can  do  and  what  needs  to  be  done  by  a  professional 
arborist. 

You  may  benefit  from  the  services  of a  consulting 
arborist if you  still  have questions about the condition 
of plants in your yard.  An arborist is a specialist in the 
planting  and  maintenance  of trees.  For a  nominal  fee 
the  expert  comes  to  your  property,  identifies  plants 
and  evaluates  their  condition.  The  expert  makes 
recommendations for tree  care and provides specifica(cid:173)
tions  for  that  work.  The  arborist  may  or  may  not  be 
able  to  do  the  actual  work.  This  may  mean  you  will 
need to hire a tree-care service. 

If you  find  trees  needing  extensive  care,  ask  these 
questions  to  determine  the  need  for  professional 
assistance: 
•  Do  I  have  the  knowledge,  skill  and  physical  ability 
to perform necessary work correctly and safely ? 
•  Do  I  have  the  tools  and  equipment  necessary  to 
ensure safe and efficient completion of the task? 
•  Am I able to dispose of debris created by the work? 

Stubs  heal  slowly,  if  at  all.  When  removing an  old  stub, 
do not cut into the branch collar. 

Cutting  into  the  branch  collar  increases  the  size  of  the 
wound and the possibility of invasion by decay fungi. 

It's  essential  to  have proper  tools  to  do  a good job of 
pruning plants. The correct tool makes tasks easier and 
more enjoyable, with less chance of injury to plants. 

There  are  many  types  of  pruning  tools  available. 
Tools  differ  in  size,  shape  and  cutting  action.  Every 
tool  has  advantages  and  disadvantages.  Quality  can 

ONE-HAND PRUNING SHEARS 
Two basic types of one-hand pruning shears are availa(cid:173)
ble.  Both  shears  are  designed  for  light-pruning  cuts. 
They  each  have  advantages  and  disadvantages.  The 
choice between the  two  shears  is  a matter of personal 
preference. 
Anvil  Type—These  shears  cut  by  action  of a  straight 
blade against an anvil. Anvil-type shears are less likely 
to  be  sprung  open  if used  for  too-heavy  a  cut.  Some 
gardeners  believe  anvil  shears  have  a  tendency  to 
crush a stem or branch instead of cutting it. 
Hook  And  Curved-Blade  Type—The  action  of  this 
tool  resembles  scissors.  The  hooked  blade  holds 
branches  and  the  curved  blade  cuts  branches.  These 
shears have a tendency to spring open if used on large 
branches. 

Anvil-type  hand-pruning  shears work with  action  of cut(cid:173)
ting blade against a solid anvil. 

range from poor to excellent, with varied prices. 

Regardless of the type,  size or price of the tool, buy 
the best-quality tool you can afford. A good tool costs a 
little  more,  but it cuts  cleaner,  works  easier  and  stays 
sharp  longer.  A low-quality  tool  never  works  as good 
as  a  high-quality  tool.  A  low-priced,  low-quality  tool 
can end up being an expensive purchase. 

Tools  described  in  this  section  are  common  types 
available in hardware stores, home centers and garden 
shops. 

Long-handled 
lopping  shears  provide  more  cutting 
strength  for  large  limbs.  Hook  and  curved-blade  type  is 
shown. 

TWO-HANDED LOPPING SHEARS 
Long  handles  and  two-handed  action  of  these  tools 
gives greater cutting strength. 

Lopping  shears  are  available  in  anvil  type,  or hook 
and  curved-blade  type.  The  hook  and  curved-blade 
type is more popular.  The hook lets you catch hold of 
the branch. 

Toppers  can  be  purchased with  15-  to  30-inch-long 
handles.  A  pair  with  short  handles  is  useful  for  close 
work.  A  pair  of  lopping  shears  with  long  handles  is 
better  for  general  use  throughout  the  garden.  The 
limiting  factor  in  selecting  size  of  loppers  is  weight. 
Heavy,  long-handled  loppers  are  awkward  to  use  at 
arm's length or above your head. 

Expensive  loppers  have  real  hickory  handles,  or 
possibly  fiberglass  or  metal.  Loppers  with  handles 
made from hickory, fiberglass or metal are better than 
loppers  with  thick,  heavy  handles  of  ordinary  wood. 
Desirable  features  for  loppers  include  a  good  spring-
action  or  rubber  bumper  under  the jaws.  Drop-forged 
jaws are better than stamped-metal ones. 

Compound  action,  ratchet-type  or  geared  loppers 
are available. These types of loppers allow more lever(cid:173)
age for cutting larger limbs. They are easier to use and 
cost more than regular hinge-action loppers. 

SAWS 
Pruning saws come in a variety of styles to fit different 
situations.  Many  saws  have  teeth  that cut only on the 
pull stroke.  These blades make it easy to cut overhead 
branches. 
Folding Saw—Smaller folding saws are easy to carry in 
pockets.  Folding saws have fine teeth, usually 8 to  10 
per  inch.  Fine-toothed  saws  make  fine,  close  cuts  on 
smaller  branches.  Larger  branches  can  be  cut  easier 
with other types of saws. 
Rigid-Handle  Curved  Saw—These  saws  have  blades 
12 to  16 inches long and a big handle for a good grip. 
Curved  saws  with  raker teeth  have  a  deep  slot  after 
every  fifth  saw  tooth  to  carry  away  sawdust.  Raker 
teeth  work  best  for  cutting  green  wood.  Curved  saws 
with lance teeth  are  best for  cutting  deadwood.  Lance 
teeth are all the same size. 
Tree  Surgery  Saw—This  saw is  similar in appearance 
to a carpenter's saw. The teeth cut only on the forward 
stroke.  Tree surgery saws are used for trimming larger 
branches.  These saws require a lot of effort to use be(cid:173)
cause of fine teeth. 
Bow Saw—Handy, fast-cutting type of saw with a thin, 
replaceable  blade.  A  bow  saw is  easy  to  use  and cuts 
through  large  branches  or  limbs  quickly.  The  21-
inch-blade  size  is  the most practical.  The main disad(cid:173)
vantage of a bow saw is it cannot cut as close as other 
saws in tight or crowded locations. 
Two-Edge  Saw—This  saw has  two cutting  edges,  one 
on  top  and  one  on  bottom.  A  two-edge  saw  requires 
skill and care to use. The two-edge saw can cause more 
damage than it corrects. The main disadvantage is that 
when  cutting  with  one  edge  of the  blade,  the  other 
edge may also be cutting the tree. 

Chain  Saw—These  modern  labor-saving  workhorses 
are quick and easy to use. Chain saws perform a variety 
of  pruning  chores  around  the  yard  or  garden—from 
light trimming  to  complete  tree removal.  Manufactur(cid:173)
ers have different models and sizes. Many manufactur(cid:173)
ers offer both electric- and gasoline-powered models. 

Chain saw size is determined by length of the cutting 
bar.  Chain  saws  may  range  in  length  from  small 
10-inch models to large, heavy-duty models with a cut(cid:173)
ting bar over 4 feet long. 

Electric-Power Chain Saws are economical to oper(cid:173)
ate,  easy to use and quiet.  They require little mainte(cid:173)
nance and can handle many pruning chores around the 
home.  They should be used with a properly grounded, 
UL-listed outdoor  extension  cord.  UL-listed  refers  to 
products  tested and  listed by Underwriter's Laborato(cid:173)
ries, Inc.  See page  157.  Avoid tripping over or cutting 
the  electric  power  cord  during  operation.  The  biggest 
disadvantage  to  electric chain saws is operating range, 
which is limited by the length of the extension cord. 

Gasoline-Power  Chain  Saws  are 

larger,  more 
powerful  and  more  expensive.  They  require  more 
maintenance  and  adjustments,  but  offer  complete 
portability and convenience. The  12- to  15-inch-blade 
is  a  versatile  size  for  homeowners.  This  size  has 
enough  power  to  handle  all  but  the  largest  pruning 
jobs  and  is  lightweight and easy to  maneuver for light 
pruning operations. 

All chain saws, both electric and gasoline, are poten(cid:173)

tially hazardous.  They are sharp, fast-cutting tools and 
should  be operated with  extreme caution.  Chain saws 
are  safe and reliable  if properly  adjusted and used cor(cid:173)
rectly,  but  are  difficult  and  unsafe  if used  incorrectly. 
See page 25. 

LADDERS 
A good,  safe ladder is one of the most important tools 
for pruning work.  A ladder provides a secure platform 
to  work  from  and  lets  you  extend  your  reach  safely. 
Ladders come in all sizes,  from 4-foot-tall stepladders, 
to  towering  extension  ladders  reaching  more  than  40 
feet high. 

The  best  ladders  are made  from wood,  fiberglass or 
aluminum.  Wooden  and  fiberglass  ladders  are  heavy 
and  strong.  Aluminum  ladders  are  lightweight  and 
strong. 
Stepladders—There are two basic styles of stepladders. 
The  most  common  is  the  four-leg  household ladder. 
The  household  ladder  is  not  recommended for  use  in 
gardens or orchards. Four-leg ladders are unstable and 
dangerous  on uneven surfaces or soft earth. 

The best stepladder for gardeners is called an orchard 
ladder. The orchard ladder has three legs and a wider 
stance.  Orchard ladders come in various sizes.  The 6-
or  8-foot model is most useful.  Larger sizes are heavy 
and difficult to use. 

In setting up an orchard ladder,  make sure the third 
leg  is  an  equal  distance  from  the  other  two.  No  leg 
should be resting on soft dirt,  a slippery surface or in a 
gopher hole.  If unsure about stability of the ladder, tie 
the ladder securely to the tree or don't climb on it. 
Extension  Ladders—These  ladders  are  perfect  for 
reaching higher parts of a tree.  Extension ladders have 
two  or  more  sections  nested  inside  one another.  Sec(cid:173)
tions  are interlocked by guides.  The guides allow one 
section  to  slide  inside  another  and  extend  to  the 
desired  height.  For  general  use,  extension  ladders  in 
16-foot,  20-foot  or  24-foot lengths  are  most  practical. 
The  ladders  are  tall  enough  to  reach  most  areas  of a 
tree and still lightweight enough to move easily. 

Wooden extension ladders are heavy and expensive. 

Aluminum extension ladders are  lightweight and rela(cid:173)
tively  inexpensive.  They  are  most  often  purchased. 
Care  should  be  taken when  using a metal  ladder  out(cid:173)
doors,  because  aluminum  is  an  excellent  conductor. 
The metal ladder must not contact any electrical wiring 
or power lines. 

Be  careful  in  placing  the  ladder's  feet.  One  foot  in 
soft dirt can cause a ladder to tip as you climb it. Don't 
lean too  far over to one side when standing on an ex(cid:173)
tension  ladder.  Leaning  can  cause  the  ladder  to  slip 
and fall over.  To prevent an extension ladder from fall(cid:173)
ing over, tie it to the tree. 

SAFETY EQUIPMENT 
Protection is the key word here. Any safety equipment 
that  provides  protection  to  you—your  hands  and  fin(cid:173)
gers, face and eyes, feet or any part of your body—is an 
essential  tool.  Safety  equipment to protect you  during 
any  pruning  operation  should  be  the  first  tools  you 
pickup. 

Basic  protection  items  include  gloves,  boots  or 
sturdy  shoes,  long-sleeved  shirt,  pants  and  perhaps  a 
hat. 

One  important  piece  of  safety  equipment  highly 
recommended is a good pair of safety goggles to protect 
eyes  from  pruning  cuttings  and  debris.  Safety  goggles 
are  essential  when  using  electric  hedge  shears  or  a 

Orchard  ladder  is  safest  model  for  use  in  gardens. 
Three-leg  model  provides  stability  on  uneven  or  soft 
ground.  For  safety,  never  stand  on  the  top  two  steps  of 
any  ladder. 

chain saw.  Ear plugs are also essential when using any 
chain saw, gas or electric powered. 

Some type of safety belt is recommended if climbing 

a tree without a ladder. Professional safety belts are ex(cid:173)
pensive,  but so  is a hospital stay from a broken leg or 
concussion. A strong rope can be used to secure you to 
a tree. The rope may be uncomfortable, but it can save 
you from a fall and serious injury. Tie the rope around 
your waist securely, then tie it around the tree trunk. 

If you  are  uncomfortable  about  climbing  a  tree  or 
working on a tall ladder, consider calling an arborist or 
tree service to handle the job.  See the section on How 
To Evaluate A Tree on page 19 for more information. 

Pruning a tree can put you in touch with sudden dearth! 
Each  year  thousands  of homeowners  are  electrocuted 
when pruning tools, ladders, or bodies come in contact 
with energized power lines.  A  230-volt houselead can 
kill, and so can an ordinary 115-volt extension cord. 

Carefully check to see if a line of any passes through 
a  tree  before  attempting  to  prune.  Look  carefully. 
Sometimes lines and cables are difficult to locate. Con(cid:173)
sider  all  lines  to  be energized and carrying  lethal  vol(cid:173)
tage.  Call the local utility company for help. Commer(cid:173)
cial  line-clearance  companies  are  required  by  law  to 
maintain  10  feet  of clearance  between  tree  limbs  and 
all electrical wires. 

The following information has been provided by W. Doug(cid:173)
las Hamilton. He is horticultural advisor for the University 
of California's Cooperative Extension Service, serving 
Alameda, Contra Costa and Santa Clara counties. 
Trees  are  an  important  part  of our  natural  surround(cid:173)
ings.  If undamaged,  trees  can live for years.  Unfortu(cid:173)
nately,  trees are  damaged by a wide variety of natural 
and  unnatural  causes.  This  damage  creates  wounds, 
which are a normal part  of a tree's life. If tree wounds 
are  treated  promptly  and  correctly,  only  scars  will 
remain. Wounds can destroy entire trees if left untreat(cid:173)
ed. This section explains what tree wounds are and dis(cid:173)
cusses treatments to help heal wounds. 

Additional  information  is  provided  on  diseases, 
decay  and  treatment  to  prevent  further  damage  to 
trees.  This  information  is  based  on  research  results 
plus  practical  suggestions  from arborists.  This  section 
should  help  you  make  decisions  for  treatment  of tree 
wounds. 

CAUSES OF WOUNDS 
Scars are  left by fallen leaves and limbs.  Stubs are left 
by fallen dead branches. Orchard and city trees are sub(cid:173)
jected  to  damage  from  automobile accidents  and lawn 
mower blades. Trees are beaten by baseball bats. Holes 
are  made  by  nails  and  fence  staples.  Branches  can 
break  during  storms.  Limbs  can  split  and  burn  from 
lightning.  Fire,  insects  and  animals  create  small  and 
large wounds such as scrapes, punctures and breaks. In 
many  cases,  trees  are  neglected  by  society.  All  these 
wounds  provide  entrance  points  for  insects,  disease, 
wood-rotting fungi and decay. 

A  tree  wound  is  any  injury  that  damages  living 
tissue.  Living  tissue  includes  external  bark,  phloem, 
cambium and sapwood in the xylem. Non-living heart(cid:173)
wood in the xylem may also be damaged. 

Branch  stubs  are  especially  susceptible  to  infection 
by  decay-causing  organisms.  These  organisms  create 
discoloration and decay in living trees. 

This  large,  spacious  tree  has  received  good  care  and 
proper pruning to reach this size. It is healthy and attrac(cid:173)
tive, providing plenty of shade for its owners. 

RESPONSE TO DAMAGE 
Trees  have  active  defenses  against  wounds.  When  a 
wound  occurs,  specific  chemical  and  physical changes 
take place in tissues around the wound. 

A waterproof covering of suberin is quickly produced 
over the tree's live cells.  Suberin protects tissues from 
sunburn and prevents drying out.  In many cases, resin 
or sap may flow from wounds. Resin helps defend non(cid:173)
living heartwood from invasion by fungus and bacteria. 
As wounds heal, cells begin to divide from the cam(cid:173)

bium layer.  Cells create protective tissue called callus. 
Successive  layers of callus form over wounds from the 
outside  to  the  inside or center  of wounds.  Callus pre(cid:173)
vents entrance of decay organisms into inner tissue of 
trees. 

Callus  growth  is  encouraged  by  protecting  wounds 
from  heat,  light  and  drying  for  four  to  eight  weeks 
after injuries. This is where suberin plays an important 
role—protecting injuries from heat, light and drying. 

After  callus  has  formed  over wounds,  an additional 
covering  is  created  by  normal  production  of  new 
phloem,  xylem  and  cork.  Cork  is  sometimes  called 
inner bark. If wounds are covered rapidly, deadwood in 
wounds  is  protected  before  decay-causing  organisms 
become  established.  At  present,  there  is  no  proved 
way  to  increase  rate  of wound  closure,  except  to  in(cid:173)
crease vigor in trees. 

Protective  wound  dressings  are  often  added  to  the 
tree's  natural  protective  responses.  Wound  dressings 
are discussed in greater detail later in this section. See 

NON-DECAY ORGANISMS FIRST 
Fresh  wounds  provide  an  attractive  habitat  for  many 
microorganisms. Bacteria and non-decay fungi are  first 
to  appear  on  wounds.  Few  of these  specific  microor(cid:173)
ganisms  can  grow into  wood.  Crown-gall  bacteria and 
cankers  caused by  Ceratocyctis and  Cytopspora fungi 
are good examples of non-decay fungi. 

Organisms  that  do  grow  into  wood  must  pass 
through  protective  chemical  barriers  produced  by 
trees. These chemical barriers are called phenolic com(cid:173)
pounds.  Some organisms can pass these chemical bar(cid:173)
riers. Most organisms never get inside trees. 

Deep wounds in a tree's heartwood produce no pro(cid:173)

tective response from non-living tissue.  Deep wounds 
are highly susceptible to invasion by decay fungi. 

DECAY ORGANISMS SECOND 
Decay fungi, Hymenomycetes, are the next microorgan(cid:173)
isms  to  invade  tree  wounds.  Decay fungi  appear  after 
wood around wound  has  died.  This makes  sense,  be(cid:173)
cause  decay  is  the  breakdown  or  decomposition  of 
dead  organic  matter.  When  tree  wounds  are  not  cov(cid:173)
ered by callus, decay usually occurs. 

Decay  can  occur  within  one  year  in  some  trees. 
Decay can take from two to ten years to appear in other 
trees.  Protection  of  open  wounds  should  continue 
until wounds have healed. 

Healthy,  vigorous  trees  slow  decay.  Years  of  re(cid:173)
search and practical experience suggest the more vitali(cid:173)
ty a tree has, the stronger the protective response is to 
decay.  In  weak  trees  with  little  vigor,  decay  is  rapid. 
Decay is rapid in older, mature trees with slow growth. 
Decay  is  also  rapid  on  wounded  trees  that  have  been 
defoliated during the growing season. 

LIMITS TO DECAY 
Decay  does  not  normally  involve  the  entire  cross-
section  of  a  tree's  limb  or  trunk.  There  are  natural 

limits  to  the  spread  of decay  in  a  tree.  The  greatest 
diameter  of  decay  in  any  tree  is  the  diameter  of the 
tree  at  the  time  of the  injury.  New  tissues  form  each 
year,  always  outside  the  injured  area.  Decay  does  not 
spread into new, living tissues formed after injuries. In 
effect,  trees  are  compartmentalized  multiple  plants, 
capable of walling-in injured areas. 

BARRIERS TO DECAY 
Tree  decay  is  slowed  and  halted  by  four  distinct  bar(cid:173)
riers.  The first barrier is the plugging of live cells im(cid:173)
mediately  above and below the wound.  This barrier is 
easiest for decay organisms to breakthrough. Live cells 
must  be  plugged  before  decay  occurs  to  prevent 
damage to the tree. Plugging is a dynamic process that 
depends  on  many  factors.  Long,  discolored  compart(cid:173)
ments are formed when the plugging process is slow. If 
plugging is fast, compartments are shorter. 

The second barrier to decay is the live, inner growth 
ring. This is the first layer of living cells under the bark 
of trees. The growth ring is continuous from the top to 
the  bottom  of  a  tree.  The  inner  growth  ring  is  the 
second weakest barrier.  If wounds are deep,  this layer 
of cells  is damaged.  Decay fungi are not  stopped from 
entering. 

Side  walls  of trees  form  the  third  barrier.  Sidewalls 
are  ray tissues, or sheets of cells that form across tree 
rings.  Rays  form  from  the  center  of  trees  out  to  the 
sides.  Discoloration  and  decay  does  not  appear  to 
follow  ray  tissues  into  the  center  of trees  beyond  in(cid:173)
jured rings,  but the edges of ray tissues usually appear 
ragged. 

The  cambium  layer is  the fourth  and  strongest  bar(cid:173)

rier.  The cambium layer is found just inside  the  bark. 
Strength  of  this  barrier  depends  on  many  factors, 
including size, type, position and severity of wounds. 

The  time  of year  when  wounds  occur  and  a  tree's 
genetic sensitivity  to  damage  have  some  influence  on 
effectiveness of these barriers. 

Decay  is  slowly  spreading  throughout  the  trunk  of  this 
large tree.  Entry was  provided  through a wound created 
by improper removal of a large limb. 

Callus  growth  helps  prevent  the  entrance  of  decay  or(cid:173)
ganisms.  Callus also protects wounds from  sunlight and 
drying out. 

lions, such as Galltrol and Gallex, are effective in pre(cid:173)
venting infection. 

Eutypa is commonly called  dieback in apricot trees. 
Dieback  is characterized by tips of twigs and  branches 
dying backward toward the center of trees. Dieback is a 
wound-invader.  Dead  branches  should  be  cut  and  re(cid:173)
moved. Prune infected branches al least 8 to  12 inches 
below  visible  damage.  Apply  benomyl  fungicide  to 
cuts. 
Wound  Dressings  —A  classic  definition  of  a  wound 
dressing says: 'ideally,  it should disinfect, prevent en(cid:173)
trance  of wood-rotting  fungi,  stimulate  callus  and  be 
toxic or harmful to parasitic organisms."  Unfortunate(cid:173)
ly, no one treatment meets all those qualifications. 

Tree  pathologists  have  found  some  compounds, 
such  as  copper  and  creosote,  to  be  harmful  to  living 
tissues.  Water-soluble  asphalt  emulsions  are  believed 
to  stimulate callus growth in some cases.  But asphalt-
based dressings  tend  to crack and  provide less  protec(cid:173)
tion against drying. 

Newer  paints  are  made  with  a  poiyvinyl-acetate 
base. These paints maintain an elastic,  durable, crack-
free protective coat. 

Some  tree  pathologists  suggest  that  tree-wound 
dressings are strictly cosmetic and have no positive in(cid:173)
fluence  in  healing  wounds.  Others  pathologists  disa(cid:173)
gree,  recommending  use  of  wound  dressings  for  all 
wounds  and  pruning  cuts.  Conclusive  scientific  evi(cid:173)
dence is lacking. 
Drains—In most situations, it is not advisable to install 
drains through live and uninjured tree tissue. Installing 
drains  may  create  new  wounds.  Drains  may  not  have 
any influence on the healing process. 
Cavities-  In  almost  every  case,  it  is  better  to  leave 
cavities open.  One exception to this is installation of a 
smooth  surface  across  a  large  cavity.  This  provides  a 
surface for callus  to grow on and the  shortest distance 
to cover wounds. Arborists have used concrete, asphalt 
and even polyurethanefoam with success. Polyurethane 
foam is a synthetic material. 

CaretuI  training and  correct  pruning  practices  have  helped  produce these beautiful ornamental  trees.  These trees  il(cid:173)
lustrate good form and height control. They will maintain their health and  beauty  for years. 

TRAINING YOUNG TREES 
Training young fruit trees is important. Training devel(cid:173)
ops  branch  frameworks  and  helps  trees  fit  in  the 
proper spaces in gardens.  Training also  helps trees ar(cid:173)
range leaves for maximum exposure to sunlight. Train(cid:173)
ing involves many things,  including pruning, bending, 
spreading and tying  branches.  Training normally takes 
three to five years of work from planting. 

Strong  Branches  are  developed  through  training. 
Strong  branches  hold  heavy  fruit crops without break(cid:173)
ing  or  needing  support.  Some  training  methods,  such 
as trellis-palmette and espalier, use some kind of support 
for trees. 

Training  shapes  trees  to  fit  the  space  allowed.  The 
size  of a garden and  the  role  of trees in the landscape 
determin  how to train trees. 

Trees  can  be  trained  to  be  large  and  spreading, 
spherical  and  small,  or narrow and upright.  Trees can 
flatten  against  a  wall  or  fence,  or  grow  high  to  allow 
gardening  under  them.  Fruit  trees can  be  trained into 
hedges  or  as  large  specimens.  Many  fruit  trees  are 
grown  in  patio  containers.  Different  training  methods 
are required in each case. These methods are explained 
throughout this chapter. 

Commercial  orchards  train  fruit  trees  for  ease  of 
pruning,  spraying  and  harvesting.  Methods  are  quick 
and  efficient,  with  little  concern  for  the  tree's  appear(cid:173)
ance.  As a home  orchardist,  you  should train  trees to 
be beautiful and practical. 

It  is  not  always  necessary  to  train  peach  trees  in  a 
vase  shape,  or  grow  apple  trees  in  an  orchard.  Peach 
trees can be trained to an espalier form.  Apples can be 
grown  in  large  patio  containers.  Knowing  the  funda(cid:173)
mentals  of tree growth  and a  tree's fruiting  habits can 
help  you  train  trees  successfully.  See  page  9  for more 
on basic principles of plant growth and development. 

Productivity of a tree is affected by pruning.  A fruit 
tree  that  has  never  been  pruned begins  to  produce  at 
an  earlier age.  The  tree also produces more fruit in its 
early years.  But production of fruit decreases dramati(cid:173)
cally after several years and the quality of fruit is not as 
good.  In  addition,  heavy  fruit  loads  in  early  years  of 
growth  may cause limbs to develop poorly.  This over(cid:173)
abundance  of fruit  could  result  in  weak  or  damaged 
branches susceptible to breakage. 

A tree that has been carefully pruned produces more 
and  better  fruit  over  a  longer  period with no  injury  to 
the tree.  Training  involves  light pruning to delay fruit 
production as little as possible. 

Nursery  trees  are  trained  differently  depending  on 
whether  limbs  are  well-branched  or  poorly  branched. 
A  well-branched  young  tree  has  limbs  spaced  evenly 
around the trunk. Limbs are 8 to 12 inches apart verti(cid:173)
cally.  Well-branched  trees have scaffold limbs selected 
at  planting  time.  The  rest  of the  limbs  are  removed. 
Side limbs are headed back at least 1/2 their length. 

Poorly  branched  nursery 

trees  have  unevenly 
spaced branches.  All side limbs should be removed at 

This  apple  tree  is  an  excellent  example  of  an  open-centered,  well-
pruned  mature fruit tree.  Note the balance of the scaffold and terminal 
branches. 
Dwarf and  semidwarf fruit trees often  produce  more fruit than they can 
support.  Use  some  kind  of  support  system  so  crop  weight  does  not 
ruin the trees. 

A hedge or fence of apples is an efficient, space-saving training method.  Pruning, spraying and harvesting require no 
ladder. Training is simple, but requires constant attention. 

planting time. If young trees will be watered frequently 
during  the  first  summer,  leave  more  branches  on  top 
at planting time. 

Staking is necessary to develop normal upright trees 
on  windy  sites  or with  certain  species  such  as walnut. 
Tie trees loosely so they do not become too dependent 
on stakes for support. 

TRAINING METHODS 
Bending,  spreading,  tying-out  and  pruning  are  meth(cid:173)
ods  used  to  train  fruit  trees  to  be  stronger,  healthier, 
more  productive  and  attractive.  The  four  methods 
may be used in combination. 

These  methods  reduce  influence  of  apical  domi(cid:173)

nance  by  terminal  buds.  These  methods  partially  or 
completely  allow buds and shoots to grow from below 
terminal  buds.  If  a  limb  is  bent,  shoots  might  form 
flower  buds  during  the  current  season  or  the  next. 
Spreading  helps  to  increase  fruit  set  if blossoms  have 
formed. 
Bending—Limb  bending  has  certain  effects  on  trees, 
depending  on  degree  of  bend.  Bending  changes  the 
number,  length  and  position  of side  branches  formed 
on limbs. 

Bending limbs to about 30° from vertical slightly de(cid:173)
creases  length  of  terminal  shoots.  Bending  also  in(cid:173)
creases the number and length of side branches. 

Bending  limbs  45°  to  60°  from  vertical  suppresses 
terminal shoot growth Bending to 45° to 60° increases 
shoot growth on the upper side of branches away from 

Loose staking of young trees permits some  movement in 
wind. Movement helps develop strong trunks. 

terminal  buds.  This  degree  of bending  does  not allow 
extremely vigorous growth of side shoots. 

Bending limbs down to 90° horizontal or more, stim(cid:173)
ulates growth of vigorous shoots or water sprouts close 
to the trunk. Remove these water sprouts by pruning. 
Spreading—Spreading  young  shoots  in  the  first  or 
second  season  of growth  creates  wide  crotch  angles. 
Wide  crotch  angles  are  structurally  stronger  than 
narrow angles. As limbs grow and thicken, wide-angled 
crotches  develop  strong  supporting  wood.  Narrow-
angled crotches develop bark inclusions. Inclusions are 
weak or damaged areas covered by callus growth. 

Wide-angled  crotches  reduce  the  chance  of  limb 
breakage,  especially when limbs carry a heavy load of 
fruit.  In  cold  Northern  climates,  strong  crotches  sup(cid:173)
port snow and ice better.  Narrow-angled crotches with 
bark inclusions  break apart  when ice forming in them 
expands. 
Tying-Out—This  method  is  used  in  conjunction with 
bending  and  spreading.  Tying-out  involves  tying 
branches  into  desired  positions.  Branches  can  be  tied 
down  with  ropes  or wire  cable  to  help  develop  wider 
crotch  angles.  Branches  can  be  tied  to  the  central 
leader to help support them. 
Pruning—Pruning is used as little as possible for train(cid:173)
ing  purposes.  Pruning  reduces  tree  size  and  delays 
onset  of  production.  For  best  results,  use  pruning 
moderately in conjunction with spreading. 

Spread  trees  first,  then  determine  which  limbs  to 
keep and which limbs to remove. In spring, pinch back 
poorly placed shoots when they have made only a few 
inches  of  growth.  Pinching  poorly  placed  shoots 
directs 
into  usable  scaffold 
branches.  Don't  remove  unwanted  shoots  entirely, 
just pinch back to discourage growth. 

the  energy  of  trees 

Original  wide  crotch  angles  of young  tree,  shown  inset, 
will  develop  into wide,  strong  crotches  as tree grows  in 
thickness. 

When  the  original  branch  angles  are  narrow,  shown 
inset,  bark  inclusions  form  as  the  tree  grows.  This  re(cid:173)
sults in weak crotches. 

One of  the  easiest ways  to train  young  trees to develop 
wider  crotches  is to  use  spring-type  clothespins.  Install 
clothespins when  shoots are 6 to 8  inches  long and still 
flexible. 

Use  simple  wooden  spreaders  to  bend  young  branches 
outward  during  training  of  young  fruit  trees.  Cut  a  V-
shape  in  each  end  of  a  short  piece  of  1x4  lumber,  or 
drive  nails  in  the ends of  boards.  Clip off the  nail  heads 
to form sharp points. The sharp points will hold spreader 
boards in position. 

Because  midsummer  pruning  has  a  dwarfing  effect, 

it is not used for training trees.  Dormant-season prun(cid:173)
ing plays the major role in training. 

TRAINING SYSTEMS 
Different  training  systems  have  been  developed  to  fit 
various plants and situations. Some systems are simple 
and easy; others are more difficult. 
Vase or Multiple Leader—This system is widely used 
by commercial orchardists. The mature tree assumes a 
vase shape if properly trained. 

Head  the  tree  between  18  and  30  inches  above 
ground  at  planting.  During  the  first  dormant  season, 
select three or four lateral shoots to develop as primary 
scaffold limbs.  Scaffold limbs  should originate about  1 
or  2  feet  above  ground  level  and  be  evenly  spaced 
around  the  trunk.  The  height  of limbs  remains  at the 
same  point  above  the  ground  throughout  the  tree's 
life.  Make  sure  there is  enough space between young 
shoots to grow without pressing on one another. 

The  vertical  distance  between  primary  scaffold 
limbs should vary 6 to 8 inches for the tree to be struc(cid:173)
turally strong.  Too little vertical distance between pri(cid:173)
mary  scaffold  limbs  is  a  common  weakness  of  vase 
training. 

Primary  scaffold  limbs  should  be  unequal  in  length 

and thickness. Equal forks and branches are structural(cid:173)
ly weak.  Prune hard on the most vigorous limb to bal(cid:173)
ance it with the others. 

Three  or  four  primary  scaffolds  are  enough.  More 
scaffolds results in a tree with an excessive spread and 
weak,  unproductive  branches.  Scaffold  limbs  do  not 
bear fruit.  Only  fine  wood is productive.  Fine wood is 
small-diameter,  young wood that develops on  second(cid:173)
ary and terfiary scaffold limbs. 

During  the  second  dormant  season  select  three  or 
four  secondary  scaffold  limbs  12  to  18  inches  above 
the primary scaffold limbs. 

If there  are  too  many  scaffold limbs,  fine  wood de(cid:173)
velops  at  branch  tips,  instead  of near  the  trunk.  Each 
scaffold  limb will  be  smaller  and weaker.  Heavy  loads 
of fruit will grow near the end and limbs will spread ex(cid:173)
cessively  outward.  An  ideal  vase-trained  tree  spreads 
little under the weight of a heavy fruit crop. 

One problem with vase or multiple-leader training is 
easy  to  see  in naturally  upright trees.  Leaders tend to 
close  in  on  one  another  in  the  center.  To correct this 
condition,  place  limb  spreaders between primary  scaf(cid:173)
fold  limbs  when  limbs  are  flexible  enough  to  bend. 
Bend  scaffold  limbs  about  20°  to  30°  from  vertical  to 
open the tree's center. 
Modified  Leader—This  training  system  is  better  for 
upright and closed-center trees.  A  leader is developed 
from a central axis and is  kept in place until the basic 
framework  is  established.  This  temporary  central 
leader  helps  develop  well-spaced,  wide-angle  scaffold 
limbs. 

If necessary,  scaffold  limbs  are  spread  with  boards 

placed against the central axis. Later, the central leader 
is  pruned  back  to  a lateral.  This seldom-used method 
takes  longer  and  requires  more  pruning  than  the vase 
system.  The  end  result  produces  a  tree  similar  to  the 
vase system. 
Central  Leader—Central-leader  training  will  develop 
a framework for a tall,  narrow  tree.  A conical shape is 
produced  for  efficient  utilization  of  light.  Central-
leader  training  avoids  most  problems  caused  by  tree 
spreading. 

Central-leader  training  is  easier with certain species 
of  trees  than  with  others.  This  method  is  especially 
useful with dwarf and semidwarf trees because harvest(cid:173)
ing  is easier with smaller trees.  Central-leader training 
is  not  recommended  for  large  trees.  It  is  difficult  to 
reach the center of a tree when the center is 10 feet or 
more above ground. 

To  develop  a central-leader  tree,  remove  or  spread 
competing shoots to establish the dominant position of 
the central leader. This is best done in the summer fol(cid:173)
lowing planting. 

Each year during the dormant season,  head the cen(cid:173)

tral  leader  2  or  3  feet  above  the  lower  whorl  of 
branches.  The  ideal  distance  between  whorls  of 
branches  is  related  to  the  distance  branches  must 
spread.  The larger the tree,  the greater the spread and 
distance required between the branches. 

Before pruning,  use wooden spreaders to hold limbs 
45° to 60° from vertical. Some central-leader fruit trees 
do not need limb spreading because side limbs natural(cid:173)
ly form wide angles. 

Spreaders can be moved to  higher limbs the follow(cid:173)
ing  year.  Remove  spreaders  in  midsummer.  Three 
main  whorls  of  branches  on  a  12-foot-high  central-
leader tree is common. About four to six side branches 
develop  per  whorl.  Some  temporary  limbs  can  be  left 
for early fruiting.  Remove these temporary limbs later. 
Remove about  1/3  of the terminal shoot on side limbs 

In  the  modified-leader  system,  the  central  leader  is  re(cid:173)
moved after main scaffold limbs have formed. 

Central-leader trees,  such  as  this  'Red  Delicious' apple, 
tend to grow into upright, columnar trees. You can coun(cid:173)
teract  that tendency  by  placing  small  boards or  spread(cid:173)
ers  between  branches,  forcing  the  branches  to  grow 
apart. 

Limbs  of  a  central-leader-trainea  tree  won't  spread  far 
off center with weight of crop. 

each year.  Head to  outward-pointing  buds on varieties 
that do not branch well. 

Remove  water  sprouts  growing  on  upper  sides  of 
spread  limbs.  The  presence  of water  sprouts  indicates 
limbs are spread too far apart. 

Remove  all  fruit  from  the  upper  1/3  of the  central 
leader.  If fruit is not removed,  the leader bends to the 
side and growth stops. 
Trellis Training—There are many ways to train a tree 
to  a  trellis.  The  trellis  may  be  constructed  against  a 
wall  or  fence,  or  between  posts.  Usually  a  trellis  has 
three or four wires strung horizontally and spaced 2 or 
3  feet apart vertically. The tree is trained onto the trel(cid:173)
lis while shoots are limber. 

Limbs  or  a  multiple-leaaer-trained  tree  spread  wide 
under the weight of a heavy crop. 

Numerous  methods  are  used  to  fasten  limbs  to  the 
trellis,  including  wire  staples,  cloth  strips,  masking 
tape and twine. Avoid using ties made of materials that 
could  injure  growing  limbs.  Ordinary  masking  tape  is 
good for flexible shoots because it does not need to be 
removed to prevent damage to limbs. Large, U-shaped 
wire staples are useful for permanently fastening limbs 
large  enough  to  hold  staples.  The  limb  grafts  itself to 
the wire where staples are attached. 

Horizontal Espalier training requires heavy pruning 
to control  shoots on  top  of horizontal  limbs.  Create  a 
horizontal  espalier  by  heading  the  central  leader just 
below the lowest wire. This will develop two horizontal 
shoots  and  one  vertical  shoot.  Spread  the  two  lower 
shoots  horizontally  along  the  wire.  As  the  horizontal 
shoots grow,  continue attaching them to  the wire.  As 
the vertical central leader grows to the next horizontal 
wire, head below that wire, and repeat the process. 

Baldessari Palmettes are  developed by heading the 
tree 4 to 6 inches below the first wire.  Use the upper(cid:173)
most  shoot  for  the  central  leader  and  the  next  two 
lower  shoots  to  form  side  limbs  at  an  angle  of about 
45°.  As the tree grows,  head the leader just below the 
next  wire.  Repeat  the  procedure  at  each  wire  level 
until the top wire is reached. Pinch back or remove all 
other  shoots.  Don't  head  side  limbs  of the  palmette. 
See the illustration on page 62. 

A simple variation of the palmette involves develop(cid:173)

ing  only  two  limbs  in  a  V-shape.  This  is  done  with 
some trees such as peaches. Training in a V-shape can 
be done without a trellis. 

If shoots are cut or pinched back in summer,  flower 

buds may form at the next bud below the cut. This hap(cid:173)
pens only when shoots are in a certain stage of develop(cid:173)
ment.  The best time for pruning varies among species 
and  varieties.  If you  can  determine  the  right  time  to 
pinch  back  shoots  arising  from  horizontal  espaliers, 
flower bud formation is stimulated. 

Drapeau  Marchand  is  another  system  of  training 
plants  to  a  trellis.  The  tree  is  planted  at a 45°  angle, 
rather than straight. The tree is not headed, but all side 
shoots are removed.  The trunk and side limbs are de(cid:173)
veloped  at  about  45°  from  vertical.  The  tree  may  be 
planted straight, but all side limbs are attached to trellis 
wires at 45° from vertical. 

Limbs  are  bent  and  spread  with  spreaders.  Limbs 
are  trained across the axis of the next tree in the row. 
Train secondary scaffolds at 90° to primary scaffolds. 

The  drapeau-Marchand  system  controls  growth 
well,  but the plant is dependent on the trellis.  Staples 

are used to hold limbs permanently to the wires. 

Cordon  systems  are  started  the  same  as  horizontal 
espaliers,  but  the  side  limbs,  after a short distance of 
horizontal  growth,  are  turned  90°  upward.  Numerous 
variations  on  these  basic systems have been tried.  All 
have advantages and disadvantages. 

Another way to fit fruit trees into limited space is to 
develop  the  head high so flowers or vegetables can be 
grown  underneath.  Start with  a central-leader system, 
but  don't  develop  lower  limbs.  Instead,  gradually 
remove  lower  limbs  as  the  head  of the  tree  is  devel(cid:173)
oped higher on the central axis. 

SUPPORTING FRUIT TREES 
Weak  scaffold  limbs  with  too-wide  or  too-narrow 
crotch  angles  can  sometimes  be  corrected  by  radical 
tree  surgery.  In  an  extremely  old and weakened tree, 
there  is  nothing  to  do  but  hope  for  the  best.  No 
amount  of pruning  will  correct  advanced  age  or  dete(cid:173)
rioration  of a tree.  Weak  scaffold  systems can be held 
together  by  wiring  a  strap  around  the  outside  of the 
limbs. 

The  tree can be used to support heavy or weak scaf(cid:173)
fold  limbs  by  twisting  water  sprouts  together  from 

nearby scaffold limbs. The water sprouts become graft(cid:173)
ed  to  one  another,  forming  a  living bridge of support. 
If too  many  scaffold  limbs  are  found  in  a young  tree, 
remove one limb per year. 
Wind—Wind  is  a  complicating  factor  in  tree  training. 
To support a tree in windy locations, angle a stake into 
the ground downwind from the tree. Tie the trunk and 
any major limbs on the windward side to the stake with 
loose  ties.  If  the  site  is  extremely  windy,  a  trellis 
system  may  be  the  best  solution.  Wind  can  make  it 
almost impossible to grow some varieties of fruit. 

Pruning  for  training  should  be  completed  in  three  to 
five years. Although it is important to remember train(cid:173)
ing goals, pruning has other objectives. 

The  prime  purpose  of pruning  a  bearing  tree  is  to 
renew fruiting wood.  Another purpose is to reduce the 
need  to  support  fruit-laden  branches.  Prune  a  young 
bearing  tree  as  little  as  possible  so crop  production  is 
not reduced. Lightly pruned peach trees produce twice 
as much fruit as heavily pruned trees. Unpruned peach 
trees  will  soon  stop  producing.  Peach  trees  bear  only 
on  wood  that  grew  the  previous  season.  This  is  not 
true for trees that bear on long-lived spurs. 

Pruning  is  necessary  to  keep  trees  accessible  for 
spraying  thinning  and  harvesting.  Tree  height  must 

be  limited  and  openings  made  for  ladders.  Foliage 
must be thinned so chemical sprays penetrate and coat 
foliage  and  branches.  This  is  especially  important  to 
control  scale  insects  and  spider  mites.  Pruning  also 
helps maintain good-quality fruit. 
Determining  Age—You  can  determine  the age of any 
portion of a branch up to 4 or 5 years old by counting 
rings  of bud-scale  scars  back  from  the  terminal  shoot. 
Counting  rings  is  more  difficult with  trees that branch 
frequently.  The  distance  between  rings  of  bud-scale 
scars  tells  the  years  the  tree  grew  well  and  years  of 
poor growth. 
Bearing  Habit—This  refers  to  position  and  age  of 
wood  that  carries  fruit.  Fruit  is  borne  on  current-
season's wood,  last-season's wood,  long-lived spurs or 
on a combination of shoots and spurs. 

Plum blossoms are among the first to bloom  in spring.  Knowing the flowering time of fruit trees  helps you  learn the lo(cid:173)
cation of fruiting wood. Fruiting wood helps you determine the location of pruning cuts. 

Fruit-bearing wood is positioned terminally, laterally 
or both.  See the table below for fruiting habits of vari(cid:173)
ous  fruit  trees.  Bearing  habit  influences  the  number 
and kind of pruning cuts. 

Species 

that  fruit  only  on  current-season's  or 
previous-season's  growth  require  more  pruning  than 
trees  that  fruit  on  spurs.  More  pruning  is  required  to 
renew  fruiting  wood  on  trees  that  bear  on  short-lived 
spurs. See pruning of individual species for details. 
Pruning  to  Increase  Fruit—Deciduous  fruit trees dif(cid:173)
ferentiate  flower  buds  from  leaf buds  the  year  before 
the  spring when these  buds open,  bloom and set fruit. 

In  midwinter,  flower  buds  are  easily  distinguished 
from  leaf  buds.  Flower  buds  are  larger  and  rounder 
than  leaf buds.  Normally,  more  flower  buds  are  pro(cid:173)
duced than are needed for a good crop. 

Pruning  helps  improve  fruit  size  by  reducing  the 
number  of fruit-setting  flower  buds.  Some  fruit  trees 
produce  few  or  no  flower  buds  during  the  year when 
trees bear a crop. These are alternate-bearing trees that 
bear fruit every other year.  Pruning  heavier in winters 
with  abundant  flower  buds  promotes  more  regular 
bloom and bearing. Fruit-thinning early in the growing 
season encourages trees to bear consistently. 

Supporting  Heavy  Crops—The  growth  rate  of  trees 
usually slows considerably after trees begin to produce 
heavy crops. Even if trees are well-trained and properly 
pruned,  the  first  few crops often bend or break limbs. 
Prevent limb breakage by stringing a light rope or flexi(cid:173)
ble wire around scaffold limbs about 2/3 of the way up 
the tree.  Hold ropes  in place by  tying them to limbs. 
Strings  or  ropes  can  be  tied  to  the  central  leader  of 
trees.  Or,  tie a pole in the tree's center and run strings 
or  rope  out  to  the  limbs  to  hold  and  support  them. 
Other  support  methods  are  described  on  page  63. 
After  scaffold  limbs  have  reached sufficient  thickness, 
support is not necessary. 

Heavy fruiting pulls upper limbs down into horizon(cid:173)

tal  angles.  As  limbs  become  horizontal,  buds  on  the 
upper  side  are  released  from  apical  dominance.  Long 
water  sprouts  form.  Top-growth  shades  and  weakens 
lower parts of the tree.  To avoid this,  cut upper limbs 
back to upright shoots where limbs arch over. 

Young  bearing  trees  tend  to  produce  more  shoots 
than fruit during fruit-bearing years.  But as trees grow 
older,  this  gradually  changes  and  trees  begin  to  pro(cid:173)
duce  more fruit than  wood.  Pruning  encourages  trees 
to  produce more  wood and less fruit.  Avoid excessive 
pruning of young trees that are slow to set fruit.  Prune 
vigorous  young  trees  by  thinning,  with  little  or  no 
heading.  If  early  heavy  fruiting  has  stunted  tree 
growth,  stimulate  growth  by  making  many  heading 
cuts. 

This  mature  peach  tree  has  been  well-trained  and 
pruned. It will require little support to carry a heavy crop. 

This  illustration  shows  how  heavy  cropping  affects  equilibrium.  As  limbs  bend  under the  load  of  fruit,  apical  domi(cid:173)
nance  is  lost.  Water  sprouts  appear.  Use of the  leader-renewal  system  and  tree supports  will  counteract this  effect. 
See opposite page for more information on establishing renewal  leaders. 

SUMMER PRUNING 
Summer pruning of vigorous young trees reduces tree 
vigor,  but  does  not  interfere  with  flower-bud  forma(cid:173)
tion.  Pruning during or soon after bloom stimulates as 
much  regrowth  as  dormant  pruning.  Later  summer 
pruning  creates  a  dwarfing effect up  to  the time when 
shoot growth stops. 

Early  summer  to  midsummer  heading  or  pinching 
of shoots promotes branching. Regrowth after pinching 
is often too thin, weak and parallel to be useful fruiting 
wood.  Pinching  is  essential  to  control  growth  with 
some espaliers. 

Heading current-season shoots on apples and leaving 
a  1/4-inch stub at the base ensures regrowth from less-
well-developed  buds  near  the  shoot  base.  Regrowth 
from  theft  buds  is  weak,  and  vigor  is  controlled. 
Excess  vigor  in  the  tops  of young  trees  can  be  con(cid:173)
trolled by summer pruning. 

Pruning  from  midsummer  to  late  summer  delays 
acclimation of trees to fall cold. Pruning at this time in(cid:173)
creases  vulnerability  to  an  early  freeze.  Don't  prune 
trees  in  fall,  especially  if  winter  cold  threatens. 
Summer pruning slightly increases the amount of chill(cid:173)
ing  required  to  ensure  normal  leafing-out  in  spring. 
This factor is important in areas with warm winters. Al(cid:173)
though  summer  pruning  of  young  bearing  trees  has 
some useful  applications,  most pruning of young trees 
is best accomplished during the dormant season. 

DORMANT PRUNING 
When trees are dormant, it is easier to see the amount 
of new growth and distinguish scaffold-limb structure. 

Start by pruning a ladder bay.  This is an area in the 
tree's center that allows access for ladders,  with room 
for you to work. Set the ladder and climb to the highest 
point you wish to work. 

Establish  the  permanent  renewal  point  for  each 
leader  at  a  place  that  can  be  easily reached with your 
loppers.  See below for information establishing renew(cid:173)
al  points.  Select  a  single  vertical  shoot  and  head  it. 
Remove  all  other  shoots  above  or around the  vertical 
shoot.  The  headed  shoot  that  forms  at  the  renewal 
point is now the highest point on the leader. The grow(cid:173)
ing  tips  of  these  leaders  will  hormonally  suppress 
growth of shoots below. 

Descend through the tree, thinning shoots and leav(cid:173)

ing  shoots needed for renewal of fruiting wood.  Prune 
hardest in  upper,  outermost  parts  of the  tree.  Thin  to 
an outward-headed terminal shoot where more spread(cid:173)
ing  is  needed.  Thin  to  a  more  upright  shoot  where 
spreading isn't needed. Most productive wood tends to 
migrate  upward  and  outward  away  from  the  trunk. 
This  is  due  to  a  tendency  for  the  greatest  growth  in 
well-lighted  parts  of  the  tree  and  for  fruit  weight  to 
spread the tree. 

This  trend  is  counteracted  by  maintenance  of  a 
series  of  renewal  leaders.  As  the  secondary  scaffold 

Low,  wide-spreading  brancnes  are  the  Key  to  successful  training  of  peach  ana  nectarine  trees.  Developing  two  or 
three primary scaffolds in a Y-configuration saves space and makes harvesting easier. 

bends  down,  remove  the  old  leader  that  has  become 
nearly horizontal. 

Keep higher limbs upright so light can pass into the 
center  of the  tree.  Lower  limbs  may  be  horizontal  or 
angled  downward.  Don't  allow  one  limb  to  develop 
directly  over  another.  The  lower  limb  will  be  shaded 
and weakened. Prune so there is space for light to pass 
between  secondary-scaffold  limbs  and  main  scaffolds. 
Most pruning of bearing-age trees is done by thinning, 
not  heading.  See  descriptions  of individual  plants  for 
details and exceptions. 

Two general  problems  often arise  with young trees. 
Either  the  top  of  the  tree  overgrows  and  dwarfs  the 
lower portions,  or lower limbs grow up around the top 
and stunt tree development. This last problem is espe(cid:173)
cially  true with certain central-leader-trained varieties. 
Both  problems  are  solved  by more  severe  pruning of 
excessively  vigorous  parts.  Such corrective pruning is 
more effective if done in midsummer. 

PRUNING MATURE TREES 
Once  trees  have  settled  into  a  regular  pattern  of pro(cid:173)
duction  and  attained  adult  size,  trees  are  said  to  be 
mature.  If given  space,  trees  can continue  to  become 
larger  long  after  regular  production  begins.  This  con(cid:173)
cept of maturity cannot be defined with precision. The 
principal objective of pruning mature trees is to contain 
trees  in  a  specified  space.  Regular  pruning  lets  you 
reach  the  tops  of trees  from the top of a ladder.  If the 

Optimum  light distribution  is the key to  high  productivity 
in  mature  fruit  trees.  The  pyramidal-shaped  tree  at  left 
gives  better light distribution  down the sides and toward 
the  inner  part  of  the  tree.  Only  the  center  and  bottom 
parts of the tree receive little light. Tree at right has good 
light distribution only throughout the top.  Light does not 
reach the center and  lower parts. 

Prune hardest in  upper, outermost limbs to allow light  into interior of tree. This keeps fruit producing on  heavier wood. 
Larger branches can  support fruit without bending. 

tops grow out of reach,  you either get a taller ladder or 
lose control over the trees. 

Correct  pruning  promotes  production  from  the  top 
of the  tree  all  the way  down  to  the crotch,  not just in 
the highest,  most difficult-to-reach parts of the tree. A 
tree  pruned  to  bear  all  over  will  be  covered  top  to 
bottom  with  bloom  in  spring.  A  well-pruned  tree 
doesn't  need  limb  props  that  a  poorly  pruned  tree re(cid:173)
quires to prevent limb breakage. 

Correct  pruning  increases  fruit  size,  sugar  content 
and improves color and skin texture.  Pruning for good 
light  penetration  and  accessibility  for  thinning  and 
picking  improves  disease  and  insect  control  because 
the  sprays  penetrate  better.  Correct  pruning  does  re(cid:173)
quire a lot of time.  A  large apple or pear tree may re(cid:173)
quire  1  to  3  hours  of detailed work.  The  time  is well 
spent  if you  value  the  tree's  beauty  and  the  quantity 
and quality of fruit. 

Vigor And Fruiting Zones—In large, mature trees it is 
usually  possible  to  discern three main zones in regard 
to the balance of fruiting to vigor: 

Zone 1: Greatest vigor in the top. 
Zone 2: Good balance between vigor and fruiting. 
Zone 3: Generally  low  in  vigor.  Blooms  well,  but 

sets few fruit. 

As trees grow older, Zones 1 and 3 enlarge at the ex(cid:173)

pense  of the  more  ideal Zone  2.  Principal reasons are 
shading  of lower  limbs  by  upper  limbs  and  weight  of 
fruit pulling limbs off-center. 

Pruning hard in upper,  outermost part of trees helps 
counteract  this  trend.  As trees age,  upper limbs grow 
thicker  and  tend to  produce  longer shoots.  Occasional 
saw  cuts  are  needed  to  keep  heavy  wood  out  of 
treetops.  Heavy,  horizontal wood should not be allow(cid:173)
ed to develop in treetops. 

As  trees  grow  older  and  limbs  stiffen,  the  need  for 

replacement  leaders  diminishes.  It  is  important  to 
maintain the upright angles of higher limbs. 

The overall shape of the fruit trees should be conical 
or  trapezoidal.  The  widest  part  should  be  at  the  base 
and  the  tree  should  taper  inward  toward  the  top. 
Unless  upper  limbs  are  pruned  to  be  shorter  than 
lower ones, this shape relationship is quickly reversed. 
Remove  long  water  sprouts  and  suckers  during 
summer.  Well-pruned  trees  have  few  suckers  because 
apical  dominance  has  been maintained.  Water sprouts 
can  be  entwined  limb  to  limb  to  form  a  living  brace. 
Tying  water  sprouts  together  strengthens  the  internal 
limb  structure  of trees.  If water  sprouts  are  bent over 
and  tucked  under  a  spur  or  other  limb,  they  usually 
form  a  flowering  spur.  This  increases  productivity  of 

that part of the tree. 

Here are some steps to take in pruning large, mature 

trees: 
1. Prune shoots and limbs that extend into ladder bays. 
2. Working  from  the  top  of  a  ladder,  head  vertical 

shoots of leaders on each major scaffold. 

3. Remove  outward  and  downward-angling  fruiting 
wood on limb ends. Cut to replacement leaders—or 
at least cut in that direction. 

4.  Remove old fruiting wood,  especially on the under(cid:173)

side of limbs. 

5. Selectively  remove  shoots, 

leaving  well-spaced 

branches to renew fruiting wood. 

6. Create space between limbs for passage of sunlight. 

This  section  provides  specific  information  on  pruning 
requirements of common fruit-bearing trees and vines 
and several  nut-bearing  trees.  Trees  and vines  are  ar(cid:173)
ranged  in  alphabetical  order  by  common  name.  The 
botanical name follows. 

ALMONDS 
Prunus dulcis 
Almonds bear laterally on spurs that usually live about 
five  years.  Train  an  almond  tree  with  three  or  four 
leaders and an open center. 

Prune  the  tree  to  renew  about  1/5  of fruiting  wood 
each  year.  Cut  into  wood  1/2  to  1-1/2  inches  thick 
throughout  the  tree.  Remove  older,  more  horizontal 
wood,  especially  in  upper  parts  of the  canopy.  Prune 
the tree low enough so you are always able to remove 
some of the highest wood. Prune both upper and lower 
limbs to ensure adequate renewal of bearing wood. 

Before  pruning,  this  almond tree  has  become too  dense 
for good  light penetration and fruit set. 

When  reducing  the  height of a tall  tree,  look  for  upright 
side  limbs  lower  on  the  leaders.  To  continue  growth  in 
that  direction,  make  pruning  cuts just above side  limbs. 
This reduces water sprouts and speeds stub healing. 

When  pruning  mature  pears,  clear  ladder  bays  and  re(cid:173)
establish  renewal  points.  Thin  shoots  but  leave  enough 
to  renew  fruiting  wood.  Head  long  shoots  and  remove 
old spur systems. Remove water sprouts. See page 94. 

After  pruning,  the  almond  tree  is  well-thinned.  The tree 
will  produce nuts throughout the canopy. 

APPLES 
Malus species 
Apple varieties have been classified into four types: 
Type  I—spur-types,  characterized  by  'Starkrimson 
Red Delicious' and 'Jonagold' apple. 

Type I trees tend to be upright with narrow crotches 
and  sparse  branching.  Fruiting  occurs  on  many  long-
lived  short  spurs.  The  fruiting  zone  is  close  to  the 
trunk. 
Type II—non-spur-types,  characterized by most  stan(cid:173)
dard  non-spur strains of 'Delicious'. 

Type  II  apple  trees  are  a  variation  of type  I,  with 
branching  more  frequent.  There  is a  tendency  for the 
fruiting zone to move away from the trunk. 

Type III—spreading-types,  characterized by  standard 
'Golden Delicious' and 'Mutsu' varieties. 

Type  III  apple  varieties  tend  to  be  wide-spreading 
with  wide  crotches  and  frequent  branching.  Type  III 
apples bear on spurs and shoots at 1  to 3 years of age. 
The fruiting  zone  moves  rapidly  away  from  the  trunk 
to the outside of the tree. 
Type  IV—tip-bearers,  characterized  by  'Red  Rome', 
'Granny Smith' and 'Tydeman's Early Worcester'. 

Type  IV varieties  have  upright main  scaffolds,  with 
narrow crotches and frequent branching. Fruit is borne 
on  the  end  of last  season's  shoots.  The  lower  half of 
shoots  may  be  without  leaves  or  fruit.  Fruiting  wood 
moves to ends of branches, causing the tree to spread. 

EARLY TRAINING, ALL APPLE VARIETIES 
At  planting time,  all varieties should be headed at  18 
to  24  inches  to  develop  main scaffold  limbs.  Training 
can begin in the first summer. 

Dwarfs are trained to a central leader.  Use a stake or 

wire to support espaliers. 

Semidwarfs are also trained to a central leader. Use a 
temporary support only if the tree is exposed to strong 
wind. Spread side limbs if necessary. 

Non-dwarf  training  involves  developing  three  or 
four  leaders  at  20°  to  30°  from vertical.  Head leaders 
annually  and  remove  competing  shoots.  Spread 
secondary scaffolds if necessary. 
Training  and  Pruning,  Individual  Types—Each  type 
of apple tree requires different methods of training and 
pruning to develop a strong structure and good fruiting 
habits. 

Type  I  Varieties  naturally  grow  few  branches. 

These varieties tend to  be sparse and leggy.  Head pri(cid:173)
mary scaffolds to stimulate branching or retain a large 
number  of  primary  scaffold  limbs  from  the  central 
leader  without  heading.  Dormant-season  heading 
must  be  followed  by  thinning  branch  ends  to  single 
shoots after new growth begins. 

Once trained,  type  I varieties require  little pruning. 
Spurs  remain productive  10  or more years.  However, 
this  is  true only if trees have adequate light and don't 
have a disease that kills most of the old spurs. This dis(cid:173)

ease is known as dead-spur disease. If dead spurs occur, 
renew  trees  by  sawing  off entire limbs.  Regrow limbs 
from a nearby water sprout. 

Type  II  Varieties should be trained with few limbs. 
Use spreaders on scaffold limbs to develop wide crotch 
angles. 

Mature type II trees require moderate to heavy prun(cid:173)

ing  to  renew fruit buds.  To  renew fruiting wood,  thin 
to  relatively  upright  replacement  shoots.  Nearly hori(cid:173)
zontal  branches  may  be  headed  to  2-year-old wood to 
prevent breakage under heavy fruit loads. 

Type  III  Varieties  should  be  trained with no  more 
than  three  primary  scaffold  limbs.  After  the  first  fruit 
crop, head secondary scaffold limbs to stiffen. 

Mature  type  III  trees  require  extensive  thinning 
each year.  Thin to  upright shoots that appear on 2- or 
3-year-old  wood.  Thinning  renews  fruiting  wood. 
Lighten  branch ends  every year by thinning to  single, 
upright shoots. 

Type  IV  Varieties  should  be  trained  to  no  more 
than three leaders. Head leaders annually, about 2 feet 
from  the previous  heading.  Heading causes branching 
and stiffens leaders.  Midsummer heading also helps in 
training. 

Mature  type  IV trees  require  heavy  thinning to  re(cid:173)

place  fruiting  wood.  Make  thinning  cuts  to  upright 
shoots in  2-  or 3-year-old wood around the outside of 
the tree canopy. 

AVOCADOS 
Persea americana 
Train to a multiple leader with three or four main scaf(cid:173)
fold  limbs.  Some  species  have  a  sprawling  growth 
habit. Control this sprawling habit by selecting upright 
shoots for framework branches.  Remove long horizon(cid:173)
tal  limbs  that  interfere  with  development  of a  sturdy 
framework.  Most varieties produce a strong framework 
with little training. 

Prune  mature  avocado  trees  to  restrict  height  and 
spread  and  for  convenience  in  harvesting.  Pruning 
maintains  productivity  of  lower  limbs  by  admitting 
light.  Lighten  ends  of excessively  spreading  branches 
to  prevent  breakage  caused  by  a  heavy  crop  load.  In 
tall,  slender  varieties, 
long 
branches in the top of the tree to prevent breakage. 

remove  or  shorten 

APRICOTS 
Prunus armeniaca 
Train  to  vase  shape  with  three  leaders.  Apricot  trees 
tend to spread excessively, so thin to upright wood. 

Apricots  bear  laterally  on  spurs that usually  live for 
no  more  than three years.  Annually thin bearing trees 
to  upright  shoots.  Thinning  renews fruiting wood and 
improves  light  distribution.  Don't  head  remaining 
branches  unless  branches  are  excessively  long.  Head 
long branches lightly to contain them. 

CANE FRUITS 
Rubus species 
The  genus  Rubus  includes  blackberries,  boysenber-
ries,  loganberries,  red  raspberries  and  others.  With 
few  exceptions,  these  plants  share  common  growth 
and  fruiting  habits.  Canes  grow  one  season  and  pro(cid:173)
duce  blossoms and fruit  the  next season.  A few ever(cid:173)
bearing  raspberries  produce  fruit  in  late  summer  on 
canes  produced  the  current  season.  Wild,  untrained 
and unpruned blackberries are difficult to pick because 
of thorny canes. 

Train and prune these fruits with these objectives: 
Support  fruiting  canes  for  ease  of  harvest.  When 
fruiting  canes  are  supported,  new  canes  spread  out 
below fruiting portions. 

Separate fruiting from non-fruiting canes for ease of 
harvest.  This makes removal of fruit easy and protects 
non-fruiting  primocanes from  pickers  and  cultivation. 
Primocanes  are  canes  that  appear  during  the  first 
season of growth and before flowers appear. 

Prevent  spreading  of fruiting  canes  throughout  the 
garden.  New canes are headed to force fruiting close to 
the plant's base. The farther berries are borne from the 
base,  the smaller the fruit are at maturity.  Keep canes 
in  the  trellis  row  and  protect  canes  from  being 
trampled  by  pickers,  mangled  by  cultivation  or 
sunburned. 

BLUEBERRIES 
Vaccinium species 
High-bush  blueberries  are  slow-growing,  long-lived 
woody shrubs  that require  little  pruning.  Head rooted 
cuttings  at planting with  no  additional training.  Prune 
bearing  plants  close  to  the  ground  in  winter  or  early 
spring.  If shoots are  too crowded,  remove some older 
shoots entirely. To increase fruit size, head shoots that 
have an abundance of flower buds. 

Prune  blueberries  by  removing  oldest,  weakest  shoots 
in  winter  or  early  spring.  Remove  weak  side  shoots  in 
top  of  plant.  Increase  fruit  size  by  heading  back  shoots 
that have an abundance of flower buds. 

Bliackberries—Immediately  after  harvest, 
remove 
fruited canes and train the strongest new canes loosely 
on a two-wire trellis. Remove weak canes, keeping 8 to 
10 strong canes. A fanlike arrangement of canes is best 
because  it  allows  for  the  best  fruit  and  leaf develop(cid:173)
ment.  Group  several  canes  together  in  bundles  for 
easy handling. 

In  addition  to  new  canes  that  rise  from  the  crown, 
erect  blackberries  send  up  root  suckers.  Pull  out  all 
root suckers. Head canes at about 6 to 8 feet in hot cli(cid:173)
mates; 8 to 10 feet in cool climates. 

In winter, after leaves fall,  remove all laterals within 
2 feet of the ground. Head any long laterals from 12 to 
15  inches.  Head  shorter  laterals  less  to  increase  fruit 
size. 

to produce canes. Plants are set 2 or 3 feet apart. 

In the  hedgerow  system,  plants are  set 3  feet apart. 
Both leader buds and suckers in the row are allowed to 
develop. 

All  three  systems  require  support  from  stakes,  or 
posts  and  wire.  Supports  are  important  where  canes 
grow to heights greater than 4 or 5 feet.  If canes grow 
less than 4 feet,  canes will stand without support after 
light heading.  Supports help  keep berries clean,  make 
picking  easy and help  separate fruiting canes from pri-
mocanes.  Remove  fruiting  canes  immediately  after 
harvest. 

Red raspberries are often supported by two parallel, 
horizontal  wires about  18  inches apart.  The wires are 
held by crossbars. Headed canes are pulled up between 
wires as fruiting canes are removed. 

Canes  of ever-bearing  varieties  fruit  on  the  tips  the 
first  year.  More fruit is produced on the basal portions 
in following years. Annual pruning consists of removal 
of  second-year  canes  after  canes  have  fruited.  First-

year  canes  should  also  be  headed  several  inches 
behind the area of fruiting. 
Black Raspberries—Black raspberries do  not produce 
suckers.  These  plants  are  pruned  differently  from  red 
raspberries.  Canes  are  left  free-standing  because  they 
are stiffer and less vigorous than red-raspberry canes. 

Fruiting canes are headed to spurs annually. Laterals 
on  small canes should be headed to  two  buds.  Larger 
canes may carry 8 to 12 buds per lateral. 

CHERRY, SOUR 
Prunus cerasus 
Training  Immature  Trees—Sour-cherry  trees  have 
weak wood and tend to form crotches that break easily 
under  a  load  of fruit.  Head  nursery  trees  at  18  to  24 
inches and select three or four shoots with wide crotch 
angles.  Train  to  a  multiple  leader.  Because  sour cher(cid:173)
ries  branch  freely,  heading  is  not  required  after  the 
first  dormant heading of scaffold limbs. 
Pruning  Bearing  Trees—Contain  height  and  spread 
by thinning as needed. Sour cherries also tolerate hedg(cid:173)
ing if not allowed to become too dense. 

CHERRY, SWEET 
Prunus avium 
Training  Immature  Trees—Sweet-cherry  trees  ordi(cid:173)
narily  branch  only  at  the  start  of a  season's  growth. 
Sometimes,  sweet  cherries  won't  branch  at  all.  If not 
pruned,  these  trees  quickly  become  tall  with  few 
branches close to the ground. 

Head  trees  about  18  to  24  inches  above  ground at 
planting.  Head  all  shoots  to  24  to  36  inches  after  the 
first  and second year's growth.  Remove terminal buds 
of shorter  shoots  to  promote  branching.  In  the  third 
and fourth years, head only the vigorous shoots. When 
fruiting  begins,  gradually remove a few scaffolds until 
seven or eight remain. Head all shoots annually in dor(cid:173)
mant  season.  Heading  develops  low,  spreading  trees 
that are easy to pick. 
Pruning  Mature Trees—Sweet cherries fruit on spurs 

that live up to 10 years. Thin tops as necessary to let in 
more  light and keep  upper  limbs in reach.  Prune  old, 
devitalized  trees  harder,  using  both  heading  and thin(cid:173)
ning cuts to increase vigor. 

CITRUS 
Citrus species 
Oranges,  grapefruit  and  lemons  are  closely  related 
members of the citrus family.  These plants have simi(cid:173)
lar growth and fruiting habits. 

Citrus  are  evergreens  and  do  not  have  reserves  of 
starch for growth.  Citrus grow,  bloom and fruit at any 
time  when  weather  is  favorable.  This  makes  pruning 
for renewal  of fruit  unnecessary.  Citrus  are  pruned  to 
let light and chemical sprays into the center of the tree, 
for containment and for appearance. 

Prune  tops  regularly  to  keep  trees  from  becoming 
too  tall.  Avoid  pruning  lower,  outer  limbs.  These 
limbs  produce  most  of the  fruit.  Train  by  thinning  to 
maintain a compact shape. Thinning ensures that early 
fruiting takes  place  on wood strong enough to support 
weight  of  fruit.  Thin  to  strong  laterals  or  to  main 
branches  at any time in frost-free areas or after danger 
of frost in cold climates. 
Oranges—Training  is  necessary  to  prevent  breakage 
under  weight  of heavy  crops  and  to  keep  lower  limbs 
high. Train trees to a central leader. Gradually remove 
lower  side  limbs  and  raise  the  head.  Train  until  trees 
are high  so  lower limbs can spread out and downward 
without touching the ground. 

CHESTNUT 
Castenea mollisima 
The  edible  chestnut  needs  little  encouragement  to 
grow  with  a  single  straight  trunk.  Develop  wide-
spreading  permanent  scaffolds  about  6  feet  above 
ground. Mature trees seldom need pruning. 

Once established,  oranges need little pruning except 

to remove dead, twiggy growth. 
Grapefruit—Prune the same way as oranges. 
Lemons—Because  lemon  trees  grow  more  open  and 
rangy  than  other  citrus,  more  pruning  is  needed  to 

keep  lemon  trees  under  control.  Lemons  respond  to 
pruning with vigorous new growth. 

Head young trees at about 3  feet and select three or 
four  main  leaders.  Head  leaders  severely  to  balance 
the  top  if  many  roots  have  been  removed  through 
transplanting.  More  leaders  may  be  selected  as  trees 
grow.  Thin  and  head  as  required  to  develop  compact 
trees. 

Lemon  trees  produce  strong-growing  water  sprouts 
on the trunk. Water sprouts run up through the center 
of  trees  and  cause  crowded  conditions.  Properly 
spread,  water  sprouts  can  be  used  to  fill  gaps  in  the 
canopy.  Pull  water  sprouts  over  before  they  are  too 
stiff or  tie  them  in  place.  Remove  all unwanted water 
sprouts  several  times  annually.  Prune  rangy  branches 
to  solid wood closer to the trunk. This lightens branch 
ends and prevents breakage. 

CURRANTS 
Ribes species 
At planting,  cut tops back to two or three canes. Head 
these canes to stimulate shoot development.  On bear(cid:173)
ing  bushes,  remove  any  borer-infested  wood  and  de(cid:173)
stroy  it  immediately.  Remove  weak  shoots  and  head 
other shoots a few inches. 

On  a  mature  bush,  thin  to  keep  two  to  four  third-
year canes,  three to five second-year canes and four to 
six first-year canes. 

With  black  currants,  remove  all  canes  over  1  year 
old  and  thin  the  rest.  Head  6  to  10  of the  strongest 
canes, removing approximately 1/4 of the growth. 

FIG 
Ficus carica 
Training  Young  Trees—Figs  can  be  grown  as bushes 
with  multiple  trunks  or  as  trees.  In  cold  regions,  fig 
bushes  regenerate  faster  after  a  freeze  than  single-
trunk trees. 

Rejuvenating  Citrus  Trees—As  citrus  trees get older 
and larger,  they  produce  fewer  and  smaller  fruit.  This 
happens  because  inside  and  lower  limbs  become 
weaker from shading. Topping and hedging are used to 
correct this problem.  Pruning can be done all at once, 
with  a  consequent  loss  of  yield.  Or  pruning  can  be 
done  gradually,  removing  parts  of the  tops  and  sides 
each year.  Removing deadwood allows more light into 
the interior and stimulates new growth. In areas with a 
frost hazard, don't prune until after the frost-free date. 
Old,  weak  trees can be renewed by  skeletonization. 
Skeletonization  removes  all  foliage  and  all  wood  less 
than 1  inch in diameter. It stimulates the production of 
much new wood.  A coating of whitewash must be ap(cid:173)
plied  to  the  entire  tree  immediately  after  skeletoniza(cid:173)
tion to prevent sunburn of the limbs. 

If  wood  in  lower  limbs  becomes  weak  and  sickly, 
remove  branches  by  undercutting.  Leave  new  upper 
foliage. 

To train as bushes, plant in a depression and head 12 
inches  above  the ground.  After  several  branches  have 
formed,  fill  in  the  depression  and  mound  soil  so  the 
bases  of  the  shoots  are  below  ground.  Head  shoots 
annually  at  2-  or  3-foot  intervals to  stimulate  branch(cid:173)
ing. This ensures fruiting close to the ground. 

Train  fig  trees  to  the  multiple  leader  system  with 
three  or  four  main  scaffold  limbs  and  two  or  three 
secondary  scaffolds  on  each  main  scaffold.  Remove 
suckers and basal sprouts annually. 
Pruning  Mature  Trees—The  first  crop  of  some  fig 
varieties is borne on previous-season's wood. Because 
most of this  old wood would  be removed by  heading, 
prune mature trees by thinning. Remove any suckers. 
Some  fig  varieties  produce  primarily  on  current-
season's  shoots.  Head  all  of  the  previous-season's 
shoots to one or two buds during the dormant season. 
Remaining  buds  produce  long  shoots  that  bear  10  to 
15 figs. 

GOOSEBERRY 
Ribes species 
Cut  back  to  several  strong  shoots  at  planting  time. 
Train  to  a spreading  bush.  Thin shoots  to  allow space 
for  picking  berries without being stuck  by  thorns.  On 
bearing bushes, remove branches over 3 years old. 

GRAPE 
Vitis species 
Three species of grapes are grown in the United States: 
Vitis  vinifera,  the  European  grape;  Vitis  labrusca,  a 
native of northeastern America; and  Vitis rotundifolia, 
known as  muscadines and grown in the southern parts 
of  the  United  States.  Some  hybrid  varieties  are  also 
grown. The principal Vitis labrusca, or slipskin, variety 
is  Concord.  This grape is used in making grape juice, 
grape jelly and for fresh table fruit. 

Many table grapes such as Thompson's Seedless and 
Tokay, as well as most wine grapes, are varieties of the 
European or Vitis vinifera group. 

One important difference in fruiting habit influences 
training  and  pruning  of these  species.  Although  buds 
on the base of the previous-season's wood of European 
varieties  are  fruitful,  basal  buds  of American  varieties 
often  are  not  fruitful.  This  means  that  while  vinifera 
can be pruned back annually  to  two to four basal buds 
on each cane,  labrusca and rotundifolia varieties must 
keep much longer stretches of cane. 

Grapevines  are  trained and pruned for two reasons. 
One  is  to  train  vines  for  the  gardener's  needs.  The 
second is to  increase fruit production.  Grapevines can 
serve other purposes too. On a multilevel trellis, grape(cid:173)
vines can shade and cool the sunny side of a house in 
summer.  In  winter,  when  leaves  are  off,  grapevines 
admit light and warmth.  Grapes can be used to screen 
areas from view,  increasing privacy.  Grapevines on an 
arbor can shade a patio or a bed of begonias. Be careful 
where  you  plant  grapevines.  Vines  may  need  to  be 
sprayed  for  disease  and  insect  control  and  sprays  can 
drift onto surrounding areas. 

Training  New  Plantings—Grapevines  are usually ob(cid:173)
tained as rooted cuttings and  trained to  a stake.  Head 
cuttings  to  three  buds  and  prune  roots  to  about  6 
inches.  Plant  top  buds  level  with  the  soil  surface. 
Mound loose soil over the top of plants to protect from 
sunburn, especially in hot climates. At this time, insert 
a  stake  next  to  plants.  As  canes grow,  the  stake  sup(cid:173)
ports  them.  The  growing  shoots  push  out  of  the 
ground. 

At  the  first  dormant  pruning,  remove  all  but  one 
cane from vines.  Cut single canes back to two or three 
buds.  After a few inches of growth have been made in 
the  second  summer,  the  best-placed  and  strongest 
shoots  are  saved  and  others  are  removed.  Shoots  are 
tied loosely  to the  stake  that was  set at planting time. 
Remove suckers from roots and old stems.  Allow tied 
canes  to  branch  freely.  Vines  to  be  head-trained, 
cordon-trained or cane-pruned are trained to stakes. 

when plants are confined to a small space. 

Canes  of head-trained  vines  are  cut  off at  the  node 
above where the head forms.  Cut through the node to 
destroy the bud. Tie canes tightly to the top of support(cid:173)
ing stakes and loosely about halfway to the ground. 

Head  Pruning  is  used for  training European grapes 

Remove  all  lateral  canes  below  the  middle  of the 

trunk.  Weak  laterals  in  the  upper  half should  be  re(cid:173)
moved.  Two  to  four  of  the  stronger  laterals  may  be 
headed  to  two  or  three  basal  buds.  The  greater  the 

diameter of vines, the more buds that can be left. 

Mature  head-trained  vines  of European  grapes  are 
spur-pruned.  Spur  pruning  restricts  the  space  vines 
occupy. Depending on vine vigor, remove all but three 
to six of the strongest canes that developed in the third 
summer.  Head remaining canes to leave two,  three or 
four  basal  buds,  based  on  vine  vigor.  These  are  the 
fruiting spurs. More spurs, from 10 to 20 per head, are 
left each year as vines age. 

Cordon  Design  is  a  modification  of  head  training. 

Cordons  have  two  permanent  laterals  that  stretch  in 
opposite  directions along  a support.  This support may 
be a wire trellis, a wall or the top of a fence. 

Choose  two  strong  laterals,  one  on  the  main shoot 
and  another  strong  lateral,  at  a  point  8  to  10  inches 
below  the  support.  These  are  the  cordon  arms.  All 
other  laterals  and  the  main  shoot  are  pinched  back. 
Fasten cordon arms to the support at least a foot back 
from growing tips. 

During  the  third  dormant  season,  retain  fruiting 
spurs on cordon arms. Space spurs about 8 to 12 inches 
apart,  along  the  arm.  Head  the  spurs  to  two  or  three 
buds depending on the cane vigor. 

After  heading  spurs,  refasten  and  straighten  the 
cordon  arm.  Canes  that  grow  from  spurs  often  break 
off because  of weight.  To  avoid  breaking  and  twisting 
the  cordon,  tie  side  arms  to  wires  above  and  to  the 
sides of the cordon. Pinch back vigorous canes. 

Cane Pruning is similar to head pruning. Instead of 
heading  canes  to  leave  only  a  few  basal  buds,  a  few 
long canes are left. The remaining canes are headed to 
6 to 18 buds, depending on vigor. Select canes in a fan-
shape instead of evenly around the trunk. This system 
is  used  for  European  and  American  varieties.  Many 
European  varieties  are  more  productive  if pruned  by 
the cane system. 

In the  third dormant season,  two canes are selected 
and  tied  to  a  support.  Head  two  other  canes  at  basal 
buds.  Growth  from  basal  buds  supplies  next  year's 
fruiting  canes.  As  vines  become  older,  more  canes 
may be kept. 

The Kniffen System,  commonly used for American 
varieties,  is  basically  the  same  as  cane  pruning.  A 
second,  higher  pair  of canes  is  selected  and  tied  to  a 
higher support. Tie the central leader to a cane to keep 
it straight. Head canes just above top vines. 

After  the  next  season's  growth,  remove  all  but  two 
canes  at  each  level.  Head  canes  to  four  to  eight  buds 
and fasten canes to the support. 

In  later  years,  remove  all  canes  that  have  fruited. 
Select vigorous  new canes for  next year's fruiting.  Tie 
canes  to  the  support  and  head  the  canes  to  6  to  10 
buds, depending on vigor. From the base of old fruiting 
canes  or  arms  near  the  trunk,  select  two  or  three 
strong  canes.  Head  these  canes  to  two  or  three  buds 
each.  Growth  from  these  buds  supplies  next  year's 
fruiting canes. 

Top:  A  cordon  is  a  permanent,  horizontal  branch  on  a 
wall  or  trellis.  In  the  second  summer,  cordon-trained 
vines  are  allowed  to  go  unheaded.  Two  strong  laterals 
are  chosen.  Pinch  back  all  other  laterals  and  the  main 
shoot. 
Center:  Two  laterals  are  trained  in  opposite  directions 
along the trellis. Space ties a foot away from the growing 
points. 
Left:  During the third dormant season, fruiting spurs are 
spaced  8  to  12  inches  apart  along  laterals.  Spurs  are 
cut to two or three buds, depending on cane vigor. 

trunk.  Remove  suckers  in  spring.  Remove  suckers 
annually  throughout  the  tree's  life.  Train  trees  to  a 
multiple leader with four or five main scaffold limbs. 
Pruning  Mature  Trees—Prune  mature  hazelnut trees 
severely  once  every  four  or  five  years.  Remove  all 
twiggy,  horizontal wood of poor vigor.  Make  thinning 
and heading cuts into wood  1  to 2 inches in thickness 
throughout  the  top.  Thinning  and  heading  stimulates 
vigorous new growth that produces heavily the second 
season after pruning. 

KIWI 
Actinidia chinensis 
Training  Young  Plants—The  kiwi  is  a vigorous vine 
that  requires  careful  training  on supports.  Vines  must 
be  pruned  properly  to  renew  fruiting  wood.  Vines 
should  be  grown  where  they  are  not  exposed  to  high 
wind.  Construct a  trellis  6  feet above ground or  train 
vines  to  a  wall  or  fence.  Permanent  arms  are  trained 

trained  by 

Top:  American  grapes  are 
the  Kniffen 
system.  This  system  is similar to cane  pruning,  but with 
an  additional  upper wire.  Tie the central  cane to a stake 
and  head  cane just  above  top  wire.  After  next  season's 
growth,  prune away all  but two canes at each wire level. 
Cut canes to two to four buds and tie to trellis. 
Bottom:  In  later  years  of  Kniffen  pruning,  remove  old 
fruiting  canes  and  select  vigorous  canes  for  next  year's 
fruiting. Tie canes to trellis and cut back to 6 to 10 buds. 
Select two or three strong canes from base of old fruiting 
cane  or  arms  near  the  trunk.  Cut  canes  back  to  two  or 
three  buds  each.  Growth  from  these  buds  will  supply 
next year's fruiting canes. 

Training  To  An  Arbor  is  similar  to  the  Kniffen 
system.  The  leader  is  not  headed  until  it  has  grown 
across  the  entire  trellis.  Once  the  basic  framework of 
vines  is  established,  side  arms can be  cane-pruned or 
spur-pruned. 

HAZELNUTS 
Corylus species 
Training Young Plants—It is easier to train hazelnuts 
as bushes than as trees. At harvest time it's more diffi(cid:173)
cult  to  rake  nuts  from  under  bushes  than  to  harvest 
trees.  To train hazelnuts as bushes,  plant trees and let 
them grow  without  removing  suckers.  To grow  trees, 
remove  all  6-  to  12-inch-long  suckers  close  to  the 

along  the  trellis.  Fruiting  occurs  on  side  branches. 
Kiwi  may  also  be  trained  on  flat-topped  pergolas. 
Pergolas are arbors with an open roof of crossed rafters 
or wires. 

Stake kiwi at planting  time  and train a single leader 
up  the  support  system.  During  the  growing  season, 
remove  all  side growth not needed for  the  main stem. 
When  the  leader  reaches  the  permanent  supports, 
train two  leaders  in  each  direction.  Remove  all  other 
shoots. A single leader in each direction is satisfactory, 
but more fruit is produced when two are used together. 
As leaders grow, twist them around the wire with a full 
turn every  18  to  24  inches.  Leaders  can  also  be  tied 
into position.  A system of temporary fruiting arms de(cid:173)
velops at 12- to 15-inch intervals along these leaders. 

Head Suiting laterals to seven or eight buds early in 
the season.  Shorten excessive growth back to the same 
point.  Laterals are grown for three seasons and fruited 
for two before they are removed. When kiwi are grown 

on pergolas,  head spurs harder and more often to keep 
them as short as possible. 

Prune kiwi in midwinter to avoid bleeding. Remove 
all  3-year-old  fruiting  arms  each  year.  Head  younger 
fruiting  arms,  but  leave  two  buds past where  the fruit 
was borne. Head new canes to clear the ground. 

To  train  kiwi  on  a  pergola,  plant  vines  down  the 
middle and train single stems to the top of the pergola. 
Let  vines  branch  and  train  one  or  two  branches  to 
become  main  leaders.  Allow  these  leaders  to  grow 
lengthwise up and down the center of the pergola. De(cid:173)
velop  a  series  of  permanent,  horizontal,  fruiting-
secondary  laterals  at  right  angles  to  the  main  leaders. 
Fruiting-secondary  laterals  should  be  24  to  30  inches 
apart.  Temporary  fruiting  spurs  are  developed  along 
permanent secondary laterals. 

To ensure adequate pollination, graft in a male scion 
in place of every ninth fruiting arm.  Scions are buds of 
stems of the kiwi plant. Scions develops into staminate 
arms or male pollen-bearing organs. 
Pruning  Bearing Vines—Summer and winter pruning 
is  needed  to  control  the  exceptional  vigor  of  kiwi 
vines. Fruiting occurs on the first two buds of current-
season's  growth.  Although  new  canes  may  appear  at 

almost  any  point on  vines,  only  canes  from previous-
season's growth bear fruit. 

Strong,  upright  shoots  on  some  kiwi  varieties  are 
slow  to  bear.  Remove  these  shoots  soon  after  growth 
starts.  Strong  uprights  on  other  varieties  can  be  tied 
down and fruited.  Shorten long,  pendant fruiting arms 
about 18 inches above ground. 

OLIVES 
Olea europaea 
Training  Young  Plants—At  planting,  remove  poorly 
placed  suckers and  shoots.  Select  three  scaffold  limbs 
and  remove  or  pinch  back  all  other  limbs.  If young 
olive trees receive heavy pruning for training purposes, 
they will not bear fruit.  Avoid pruning  until after trees 
have begun to bear. 

Once  trees  start  to  produce,  gradually  select  about 
nine  well-placed  secondary  scaffold  limbs.  Thin  out 
surplus  limbs.  Too-severe  thinning  during  a  year 
forces  trees  into  a  non-fruiting,  vigorous-growing 
condition. 
Bearing  Olive  Trees—Olives  are  borne  laterally  on 
shoots  produced 
the  previous  season.  Prune  to 

Peaches require severe pruning during training to develop a strong,  healthy tree. Here are results of hard work. 

remove wood that has fruited.  Pruning stimulates pro(cid:173)
duction of new fruiting wood.  Prune in years of poten(cid:173)
tially  heavy  crops  after  fruit  has  set  in  spring  or early 
summer.  Thinning  to  renew  fruiting  wood  and  im(cid:173)
prove  light  penetration  is  helpful.  Don't  prune  too 
heavily because trees may become vegetative and pro(cid:173)
duce few olives. 

PEACHES AND NECTARINES 
Prunus persica 
Training  Young  Trees—Peach  and nectarine  trees re(cid:173)
quire  more  severe  pruning for  training  than any other 
kind  of  fruit  tree.  Trained  to  a  central  leader,  these 
trees  may  overgrow  in  the  top  and  lose  lower  limbs 
due to shading. Y-shaped two-leader trees are practical 
and may fit limited spaces better than trees with more 
limbs.  Three-leader  trees  are  strong  and  easy  to  care 
for.  Trees  with four  or five leaders definitely have  too 
many leaders.  Genetic dwarfs require  thinning  to four 
or five scaffolds with little other training. 

Head  young  peach  and  nectarine  trees  6  inches 
above ground at planting if you want a short tree. Head 
up  to  2  feet above ground for  gardening space under(cid:173)
neath.  Central-leader  trees  can  be  developed  without 
heading, but all side limbs must be removed. 

After heading at planting, shorten side shoots to 2 or 
3  inches where you want a scaffold branch. Remove all 
others.  Space  scaffold  limbs  evenly  around  the  trunk 
and  several  inches  apart  vertically.  Scaffold  spacing  is 

This  peach  tree  has  been  well-pruned.  It  will  require 
little support for a heavy fruit crop. 

important  because  peach  trees  tend  to  have  weak 
crotches. These crotches break if limbs originate at the 
same height on the trunk. 

Pinch  unwanted  shoots  in  summer  to  direct  most 
new  growth  into  scaffolds.  During  the  first  dormant 
season,  head  scaffold  limbs  at  24  to  30  inches  away 
from  the  trunk.  Heading stiffens scaffolds and ensures 
development of strong secondary limbs. 

Remove  all  vigorous  shoots  that  compete  with 
secondary  scaffolds.  Thin  shoots  again  in  the  second 
dormant season and develop  secondary-scaffold limbs. 
In the third dormant season,  thin fruiting wood to pre(cid:173)
pare  for  next  summer's  fruiting.  Favor  the  outward-
growing  wood  so  sunlight  can  reach  into  the  tree's 
center. 
Pruning  Bearing Trees—Because peach and nectarine 
trees bear only on previous-season's wood,  trees must 
be  pruned  extensively  every  year.  Heading  upper, 
outer  shoots  in  midsummer  to  late  summer  helps 
bring  sunlight  to  lower  limbs  and  prevents  dieback 
from  shading.  During  the  dormant  season,  remove 
fruiting  shoots.  Cut  back  to  shoots  of medium  vigor. 
Prune  to  counteract  strong  tendency  of fruiting  wood 
to move upward and outward, away from the trunk. 

Remove  or  thin  strong-growing  shoots  in  the  tree 
top.  Thin  these  shoots  back  to  more  upright  shoots. 
Upper,  outermost  branches  tend  to  spread  too  far 
apart.  Thin  weakest  shoots,  leaving  shoots  of pencil-
thickness  far  enough  apart  for  good  light  distribution 
and fruit production. 

Remove  more  wood  from  early  maturing  varieties 
than from later-maturing varieties.  Clingstone peaches 
may  be  allowed  more  fruiting  shoots  than  freestone 
peaches.  Leave more fruiting wood in rainy regions of 
the  country  where  fruit-set  is  likely  to  be light.  Head 
longest  shoots  back  to  2  feet  or  less,  especially when 
excess shoot growth is a frequent problem. 

PEARS 
Pyrus species 
Training  Young  Plants—Pears  can  be  trained  to  a 
central-leader,  multiple-leader,  espalier  or  palmette. 
Central-leader  trees  are  likely to  be damaged severely 
by a disease called fireblight. 

Bartlett  pears  have  soft,  flexible  wood  that  bends 
down  easily  with  the  weight  of  leaves.  This  makes 
central-leader  training  difficult because  limb-spreading 
must be followed promptly by tying-up of limbs. Other 
varieties  of  European  pear  are  more  easily  grown  as 
central-leader trees. 

Head  pear  trees  24  to  30  inches  above  ground  at 

planting.  Select  three  well-spaced  scaffold 
limbs. 
Shoots  below  these  limbs  can  be  left  to  fill  in  the 
bottom  of trees.  Remove  any  shoots between  scaffold 
limbs.  The  central  leader  may  be kept for one or  two 
years  to  help  spread  permanent scaffolds.  The  central 
leader should be suppressed and eventually removed. 

Head  scaffolds  each  year  at  2-1/2  to  3  feet  above 
previous  year's  heading.  Do  not  head  side  shoots.  If 
leaders  are  growing  rapidly,  summer  pinching  can 
stimulate branching. Tie or strap scaffold limbs togeth(cid:173)
er  to  prevent  breakage  while  limbs  are  young  and 
flexible. 
Pruning  Bearing  Trees—Pears  bear  on  long-lived 
spurs.  However,  pear  trees  generally  require  heavy 
pruning  to  stimulate  fruit-set.. This is particularly true 
if  there  has  been  no  provision  for  cross-pollination. 
Fruit-set  is  usually  extensive  on young spurs on 2-  or 
3-year-old  wood.  Don't head  shoots  unless shoots are 
over  2  feet  long.  Remove  or  head shoots  to  about  18 
inches in length. 

Head  shoots  to  flower  buds  on  2-  or  3-year-old 

wood.  Remove wood that fruited heavily in the previ(cid:173)
ous season.  Leave  a well-positioned,  1-year-old  shoot 
to  replace  the  wood  removed.  Remove  water  sprouts 
and suckers to replace fruiting wood. 

PECANS 
Carya illinoinensis 
Head  at  planting  time  to  about  4  or  5  feet.  Remove 
about  1/3  of the top,  depending on size of the nursery 
tree.  Limb  breakage  can  be  a  problem  because  of 
narrow crotches and brittle wood. 

the  first  growing  season.  Avoid  further  pruning  until 
the  tree begins to bear fruit.  Remove occasional cross(cid:173)
ing or poorly placed limbs. 

Bearing trees require little pruning. Thin to more up(cid:173)

right  shoots  to  lighten  branch  ends.  Thin  out  tops  of 
old, weak trees to let in sunlight and stimulate growth. 

PISTACHIO 
Pistacia vera 
Train  to  a  modified central  leader with well-spaced la(cid:173)
teral  branches.  Stake  the  tree  the  first  two  or  three 
years. Develop three to five main leaders with the first 
leader  about  4  feet  above  the  ground  and  the  others 

Train  pecans  to  a  central  leader,  avoiding  narrow-
angle  crotches.  Head  scaffold  limbs  to  stiffen  and 
strengthen.  Prune  lightly  the  first  five  or  six  years. 
Remove limbs that are crowded,  have poor angles, are 
too low or compete with the leader. Mature trees need 
little or no pruning except to remove low limbs. 

PERSIMMONS 
Diospyros species 
Head  the  nursery  tree  at  2-1/2  to  3  feet  at  planting. 
Select five or six shoots spaced over a foot or more up 
the  trunk  to  form  scaffold  limbs.  Suppress  other 
growth below scaffolds.  Head  scaffolds  1/3  to  1/2  after 

spaced  at  about  1-foot  intervals.  Pinch  off undesired 
growth  the  first  few  years.  Avoid  large  wounds. 
Wounds  heal  slowly.  Trees  bear  on  wood  formed  the 
previous  year.  Pistachio  trees  are slow growing.  Little 
pruning is required to contain them. Male trees are re(cid:173)
quired to pollinize female  trees.  Male  trees are vigor(cid:173)
ous and may need more pruning than female trees. 

PLUMS and PRUNES 
Prunus domestica, P. salicina 
Training  Young  Trees—Plum  and  prune  trees  are 
trained  to  a  multiple  leader  with  three  or  four  main 
scaffold limbs. Head trees at 18 to 24 inches at planting 
and  select  shoots  to  be  leaders.  If shoots  are  upright 
with  narrow  crotches,  use  spring-type  clothespins  to 
spread limbs during the first growing seasons. 

Most European plums—some are called prunes—re(cid:173)

quire  only  one  light heading  of scaffold limbs about 2 
to  2-1/2  feet  from  the  crotch  to  stimulate  branching. 
These  plums  bear  heavier  and  earlier  if  they  are 
pruned lightly instead of heavily. 

Japanese plums require more severe heading of scaf(cid:173)

fold  limbs  to  stiffen  limbs  and  promote  branching. 
Thin  to  keep  outside  spreading  limbs.  Avoid  severe 
bench-cutting  because  this  pruning  method  weakens 
scaffolds.  Bench-cutting is a method of spreading trees 
by  heading  leaders  to  outward-growing  shoots.  Keep 
secondary branches that are well-positioned. Head pri(cid:173)
mary scaffolds just above secondary branches.  Head at 
24 to 36 inches from the crotch to stimulate branching. 
During  the  third  dormant  season,  thin  tertiary  or 
third-year  scaffolds  to  one  or  two  per  secondary.  Be(cid:173)
cause Japanese plums tend to be narrow and upright, it 
helps to thin interior shoots to spread the tree. 
Pruning  Bearing  Trees—Prune  European  plums  to 
lighten  branch  ends  as  needed  to  prevent  breakage. 
Fruiting wood renewal comes from long water sprouts. 
These water  sprouts arise  on  the upper side of arched 
fruiting  limbs.  Cut back  to  the  arch  on  these limbs to 
reduce tree height and renew fruiting wood. 

Pruning mature Japanese plums consists of thinning 
out  1-year-old  shoots.  Leave  some  1-year-old  shoots 
to renew fruiting wood.  Remove a few branches carry(cid:173)
ing old, weak spurs. 

POMEGRANATES 
Punica granatum 
Pomegranates may be  pruned to bushes,  or to  single-
trunk  or  multiple-trunk  trees.  Bushes  are  easier  to 
maintain  because  pomegranates  produce  many  basal 
suckers. A single trunk is likely to be killed in a freeze, 
but some  of the  multiple  trunks could survive.  If one 
or  two  trunks  are  lost,  new  ones  can  be  developed 
from suckers. 

Bearing  trees  require  annual  thinning  to keep them 
open for harvesting and to renew fruiting wood. Light, 
annual  thinning  leaves  slow-growing  mature  wood 
with  flower  spurs  and  maintains  production.  Remove 
basal suckers annually. 

QUINCE 
Cydonia oblonga 
Quince  can  be  trained  as  shrubs  or  small  trees. 
Multiple-leader trees with four main scaffold limbs are 
easiest to manage. Head young trees at 18 to 24 inches. 
Space branches about 6 inches apart. 

Quince fruit is borne terminally on shoots that grow 
the  same  year.  Thin  branches  to  improve  penetration 
of sunlight and chemical sprays. Do not head shoots. 

WALNUTS 
Juglans species 
Training  Young  Trees—Walnut  trees  are  large  and 
wide-spreading.  It  is  best  to  develop  main  scaffold 
branches about 5 or 6 feet above ground. Because nurs(cid:173)
ery  trees  headed  at  5  or  6  feet  would  grow  little,  if 
ever,  it is necessary to head trees lower and develop a 
new trunk. 

Head trees at planting to four or five buds.  Install a 
2x2  stake  extending  6  feet  above  ground.  Tie  the 

Walnut  trees  should  be  trained  to  a  modified-leader 
system.  After  4  years  of  training,  tree  should  look  like 
this. Note stubs left to shade trunk. 

is 

It 
important  to  avoid  scaffold  development  from 
necked-buds  on  walnut  trees.  Scaffolds  should  not  be 
developed from  buds shown at left. The closely attached 
buds on the right will  produce strong scaffolds. 

leader  loosely  to  the  stake.  Pinch back all shoots  that 
compete with the leader. 

After the first growing season, head the leader about 
three  buds  above  the  stake.  Remove  all  side  limbs. 
Break  off buds  on  short stems or  "necks."  Removing 
these necked buds lets strong scaffold limbs form from 
secondary  buds  below.  Limbs  formed  from  necked 
buds  have  weak  crotches  and  break  off easily.  If the 
leader didn't grow enough, head back the leader to last 
season's  growth.  Continue  to  train  this  leader  in  the 
second  summer.  Keep  the  leader  staked  up  through 
the second summer. 

In the second dormant season select four to six scaf(cid:173)

fold  limbs  at  5  to  7  feet above ground.  Choose  limbs 
with  wide-angle  crotches.  Avoid  limbs  that  are  com(cid:173)
pletely horizontal.  Remove lateral branches below the 
lowest  scaffold  limb.  Branches  lower  on  the  trunk 
should be cut to short stubs. 

Heading of scaffolds is not necessary with tip-bearers 

such as  'Franquette'  and  'Hartley'.  Heading is impor(cid:173)
tant with newer varieties that bear laterally.  Head scaf(cid:173)
fold  limbs  of  'Amigo',  'Chico',  'Payne',  'Serr'  and 
other heavy bearers 1/4 to  1/2 during the first dormant 
season. Prune and head scaffolds each season. 

Careful attention to this training procedure is neces(cid:173)

sary to obtain a structurally strong walnut tree. 
Pruning  Bearing  Trees—Young,  bearing walnut trees 
usually do not need pruning. Some new, heavy-bearing 
varieties  stop  growing  or  break  apart  if shoots  aren't 
headed  25%  to  50%  annually.  As  trees  mature  and 
foliage  becomes dense,  all varieties  benefit from  thin(cid:173)
ning  to  let  light  into  the  canopy.  It  is  difficult for  the 
average  homeowner  to  prune  mature  trees  25  to  35 
feet tall.  You may need to call in a professional to care 
for mature walnut trees. 

SPECIAL  TRAINING 
PROCEDURES 
Fruit trees can be grown successfully as espal(cid:173)
iers or hedges that create garden dividers and 
boundary  plantings.  These  special  training 
techniques  save  space  and  allow  the  home 
gardener to grow more  varieties  than would 
otherwise be possible. This section details the 
use  of dwarfing  and  training  to confine  fruit 
trees within small spaces. 

Growing fruit  in  tight  spaces  is  really  no 
harder than maintaining a healthy rosebush, 
but keep the following points in mind. 
1  Be  especially  careful  about  planting  and 

general maintenance. 

2  Prepare your soil well, and where drainage 

is a problem, use low raised beds. 

3  Feed and water on a regular schedule, and 
keep a careful watch  for signs  of any in(cid:173)
sects or diseases. 

D  Don't let new growth escape from you and 

spoil the pattern. 

4  Inspect  your plants  frequently 

In limited-space planting, training contin(cid:173)

ues  all  seasons  throughout  the  life  of  the 
plant. Be ready to pinch or snip at any time. 
Major  pruning  is  still  a  winter  task,  but  in 
summer you  will  need  to  head,  or  cut  away 
wild growth and suckers, and you may need to 
loosen or renew ties or add new ones. 

Be sure you understand the normal growth 
patterns of the plants you intend to train. For 
example,  apples  and  pears  bear  fruit  in  the 
same places for years. Although fruiting spurs 
may need to be renewed over the years, the 
growth  pattern  means  that  you  can  confine 
these  trees  to formal  shapes  and keep them 
that way 

On the other hand, peaches and nectarines 
fruit on branches that grew the previous year. 
Old branches will not bear, so they should be 
cut away like berry canes and replaced with 
new  growth  from  the  base  of the  tree.  This 
heavy pruning makes rigid training patterns 
impossible.  Peaches  and  nectarines  can  be 
fanned out over walls or grown as hedges, but 
they cannot be held to strict geometric shapes. 
Grapes are vines and therefore are almost 
always trained on a wall, wire, or fence. See 
Training Grapes on page 52 for instructions. A 
variety that requires  a little more heat than 

These apples are in 
their third year of 
training as a hedge. 
Because hedge train(cid:173)
ing is less structured 
and formal than is 
espalier training, it is 
a little simpler. 

your region normally offers may produce good 
fruit when grown on a south or west wall. 

You  can  train  cane  berries  flat  against 
fences or walls, and treat them something like 
peaches, since you must replace all canes that 
have fruited with canes of the current season. 
The  poorest  subjects  for  limited  space 
training  are  the  quince  and  cherry  The 
quince fruits at the tips of new twigs, and the 
cherry  is  normally  too  large  to  confine  and 
will not fruit at all without a pollinator close 
by  Both  of these plants  can be  trained,  but 
your  efforts  would  be  better  spent  on  some(cid:173)
thing more rewarding. 

Espaliers 
Technically  speaking  an  espalier  is  a  plant 
pruned to grow all in one plane. Most often, a 
symmetrical  pattern  is  established  through 
careful  pruning  and  training.  Supple  young 
branches  are  fastened  to  a fence,  a wall,  or 
wires  with  soft  string  or  bands  of  rubber. 
Plants  trained  against  a  wall  should  be  at 
least  6  inches  away  from  the  wall  to  allow 
good air circulation and room to grow. 

Espaliers usually require the formation of 
cordons—side arms—off a main trunk. Cor(cid:173)
dons should be spaced no less than 16 inches 
apart to allow for optimal growth. 

A  word  of  caution:  Where  summer  tem(cid:173)

peratures reach 90° F or more, heat from the 
wall will cook the fruit. In this situation, es(cid:173)
palier  a  tree  onto  a  free-standing  trellis  for 
better air circulation. 

Apples and pears as espaliers  Of all the 
fruit  trees,  apples  and  pears  are  really  the 
best suited for this  specialized training.  Run 
horizontal wires  18  inches  across  a  wall  or 
between  two  posts.  Plant  a  bare-root  whip, 
then cut it off at 18 inches, at or just below the 
height of the first wire. This will activate the 
buds just below the cut. 

The first summer, train two side buds onto 
the  wire,  letting  a  third  bud  develop  as  a 
trunk. Tie the two side branches onto the wire 
so that the tips are lower than the branches. 
Rub off all growth from the trunk and prune 
the tips and the branches. 

Next winter, cut the trunk off a little below 

the second 36-inch-high wire.  This will acti(cid:173)
vate another set of buds. Again, keep two buds 
for side branches and one for the trunk exten(cid:173)
sion.  Train  these  as  you  did  the  first  set of 
buds. Cut the laterals on the branches on the 
first wire back to three buds.  These will de(cid:173)
velop into fruiting spurs. 

Continue training until three wires (or as 
many as you wish) are covered with branches. 
On the top wire there will be no trunk exten(cid:173)
sion, just the two side branches. 

Hedges 
Home  gardeners  are  not  the  only  ones  con(cid:173)
cerned with limited space planting. Commer(cid:173)
cial growers are experimenting with training 
methods  that  let  them  grow  fruit  in  hedge(cid:173)
rows and harvest their crops without ladders. 

Apples  and pears  as hedges  Both dwarf 
apples  and  pears  grow  and  fruit  well  when 
trained  as  hedges  against  horizontal  wires. 
Set posts about 8 feet apart. Stretch a bottom 
wire between the posts  24  inches  above the 
ground. For very small trees, place the upper 
wire at 4 or 5 feet.  For larger trees, place a 
third wire at 6 or 7 feet. 

Plant the young bare-root trees about 3 feet 
apart, beginning next to an end post. The last 
tree should be placed about 2 to 3 feet short of 
the  final  post.  If you  buy  unbranched  trees, 
bend the trunk at a 45-degree angle and tie it 
to  the  wire.  If there  are  any  branches  with 
wide crotches, cut them so only two leaf buds 
remain.  Clip  off  branches  with  narrow 
crotches at the trunk. 

During the first season, train the trunk and 
any new branches at about 45 degrees, tying 
loosely  where  they  touch  the  wires.  Pinch 
off at  the  tip  any  branches  that  seem  badly 
spaced or that extend from the fence at right 
angles. The first winter remove badly placed 
branches at the trunk.  Remove the tips from 
well-placed branches, cutting to a healthy bud 
on the top of each branch. 

The second summer continue training the 
shoots  at  the  ends  of branches  upward  at  a 
45-degree angle. Cut side growth to four buds 
beginning in July 

Each winter thereafter remove  tangled or 
damaged  growth  and  cut  remaining  long 
shoots  to  four  leaf  buds.  Each  summer  cut 
out suckers and excessively vigorous sprouts 
as  they  appear.  Shorten  new  growth  to four 
leaves after July 

This training method allows side branches 
to  grow  outward  away  from  the  fence.  Your 
hedge will eventually become 3 to 4 feet wide. 
You can hold it at that width by pulling some 
of the outward growth back toward the fence 
with string, but check ties frequently or they 
will cut the branches.  If parts of your hedge 
begin to escape and grow too far outward, trim 
them  back  to  healthy  side  branches  in  May 
To maintain the proper height of 5 to 8 feet, 
cut top growth back to a  healthy side  shoot 
in May Make the cut close to the top wire. 

Peaches and nectarines as hedges  Since a 
peach hedge must have its fruiting wood re(cid:173)
newed  annually,  you will  need  long  replace(cid:173)
ment branches each year. Plant your hedge as 
described for apples, using wires at 2, 4, and 
6 feet. Cut the whips to about 24 inches tall, 
and  shorten  side  branches  that  point  along 
the  fence  to  two  buds  each.  Cut  off  other 
branches at the trunk.  Train all new growth 
at 45-degree angles in both directions. Remove 
any suckers from below the bud union, cutting 
to the trunk. 

The first winter cut out about half the new 
growth  at  the  base,  choosing  the  weakest 
branches  for  removal.  Cut  off  the  tops  of 
branches  you  retain  if they  have  grown  be(cid:173)
yond the hedge limits. 

Fruit will form on the branches that grew 
the previous summer. The original trunk and 
the  lowest branch will  form an  approximate 
V shape at or below the lowest wire. During 

the  second  summer,  choose  the  healthiest 
shoots from the lower portions of these main 
branches, and pinch back all other growth— 
especially above the second wire—after it pro(cid:173)
duces six to eight leaves. The lower shoots will 
replace the entire upper structure and should 
be tied back loosely to the fence. Continue to 
remove suckers below the bud union. 

When  leaves  drop  in  fall,  cut  out  all 
branches that have fruited, and head back the 
V-shaped main structure to the middle wire. 
Train the new growth to the fence. During the 
summer again encourage the lower shoots and 
pinch back the upper growth. Always be sure 
that there is new growth above the bud union. 

Apricots  and  plums  as  hedges  Use  ap(cid:173)
proximately the same technique as described 
for  peaches,  but  instead  of  replacing  all 
growth each year replace about one-third and 
head  back  new  growth  on  the  remaining 
branches to four to six leaves. 

Learn the principles of fruit growth and apply 
them when caring for your home orchard. If you 
follow the planting, feeding, and watering 
instructions in this chapter, you'll get maximum 
production from your garden. 

T he art of growing abundant fruit lies in selecting the right 

varieties for your region, then growing them with informed 
skill. This chapter discusses how fruit plants produce fruit, how 

they grow, and tells you everything you need to know to get them 
started and keep them healthy and productive. 

Every time you bite into an apple or pear, you're tasting the results 

of plant breeding, particularly the act of pollination. With a few 
exceptions (certain figs, for example), fruit will not form unless pollen 
from the male parts of a flower is transferred to the female parts of 
a flower. The pollinating insects for most of the fruits in this book are 
bees. The presence of bees around your plants, however, does not 
necessarily mean you'll get a crop. The pollen the bees carry must be 
of the right sort. Most of us know that apple pollen, for example, 
will never pollinate a pear blossom; it's also true that apple pollen will 
not always pollinate an apple blossom. 

The same sweet goodness that attracts us to fruit attracts a wide 
variety of insects. A few well-timed sprays, however, protect your 
fruit against unwelcome guests. 

Planting for Pollination 
A fruit plant that needs a pollinator needs it 
close by  The maximum distance is  100 feet, 
but the closer the better. The bees that carry 
the pollen are unlikely to fly back and forth if 
the distance between the trees is any greater. 
If your neighbor has a pollinating variety 
across the back fence, you're in good shape; if 
not, do one of the following. 
1  Plant two trees fairly close together. 
2  Graft  a  branch  of  another  variety  onto  a 
tree that needs pollination. 
3  Place a bouquet of flowers from a pollinat(cid:173)
ing tree in a vase or jar of water and lodge the 
container in the branches of a second tree. 

The  "Encyclopedia  of  Fruits,  Berries  & 
Nuts,"  beginning  on  page  59,  will  tell  you 
which  varieties  need  pollinators  and  which 
varieties act as pollinators. 

HOW  FRUIT  PLANTS  GROW 
All plants must have sugar to produce energy 
and grow. They make the sugar through pho(cid:173)
tosynthesis. You can stimulate this process by 
planting them  in  a sunny spot;  pruning and 
training them for good leaf exposure; keeping 
the soil properly watered; and keeping leaves 
free of dust, pests, and disease. Each piece of 
growing fruit needs some 30 leaves working 
for  it,  not  including  the  leaves  that  supply 
nourishment to roots and branches. 

The illustration on the opposite page gives 
you some idea of the day-to-day workings of a 
fruit plant.  While the leaves are busy above 
ground,  the  roots  spread  out  underground 
searching for water, oxygen, and mineral nu(cid:173)
trients.  These  essential  elements  are  then 
transported  to  the  green  leaf  tissues  where 
photosynthesis is carried out using the energy 
supplied  by  sunlight  to  manufacture  needed 
sugars. The sugar not immediately converted 
to  usable  energy  for  the  plant's  growth  is 
stored  throughout  the  plant,  including  the 
fruit. It's easy to understand that the greater 
the supply of factors that produce sugar—sun(cid:173)
light,  water,  and  carbon  dioxide—the  more 
abundant and sweet the fruit. 

To get a crop from 
most  fruit  trees,  you 
need  a separate 
source of pollen and 
a bee to carry it. 

POLLINATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
Some plants are called self-pollinating or self-
fertile.  This means that their flowers can be 
fertilized by pollen from flowers either on the 
same plant or another plant of the same kind. 
Self-fertile  plants  will  produce  fruit  even  if 
they  are  planted  far  away  from  any  other 
plant  of  their  kind.  Among  the  self-fertile 
plants are a few types of apples, pears,  and 
plums; most peaches, apricots, and crabapples; 
and all sour cherries. 

Other plants  set  fruit only when they  re(cid:173)
ceive pollen from a plant of a different vari(cid:173)
ety When a plant's pollen is ineffective on its 
own  flowers,  it  is  called  self-sterile.  This 
group  includes  some  peaches,  apricots,  and 
crabapples,  most  apples,  pears,  and  plums; 
and all sweet cherries. The plant that can fer(cid:173)
tilize a sterile plant is called a pollinator 

Never  assume  that  because  you  have  a 

SOIL 
Roots depend on the soil for a good supply of 
air and consistent moisture. The best soil for 
fruit trees allows air into the soil quickly after 
a rain or irrigation and holds much water. 

Heavy soils are soils that drain slowly. You 
can  improve  them  for  fruit  trees  by  adding 
plentiful  organic  matter,  and  by  planting 
high, so the tree sits on a low mound. 

Some  fruits,  such  as  pears,  will  tolerate 
dense,  airless,  heavy  soil.  Apples  and  crab-
apples will take short periods of airless soil, 
but apricots, cherries, figs, plums, grapes, and 
currants all need fair drainage. Strawberries, 
cane berries, and peaches need good drainage, 
and blueberries must have perfect drainage. 

In gardens with extremely heavy soil, you 
can still  plant  fruits  that prefer porous  soils 
by using containers or raised beds. A raised 
bed for a standard fruit tree should be 3 feet 
deep  and  6  feet  square.  Soils  for  containers 
are discussed on page 26. 

Soils that don't hold much water are called 
droughty. They are most easily improved by 
adding large amounts of organic matter. The 

organic matter acts like a sponge, holding wa(cid:173)
ter until the tree needs it. Most fruit trees can 
be grown on droughty soil, but they should be 
watered  and  fertilized  more  frequently  than 
trees on better soil. 

You can supply these needs best if you first 
examine your soil. If it is rock hard when dry 
and gummy when wet, you have the very fine-
textured soil called clay. Clay holds moisture 
so well that there is little or no room for air. 
To correct this, aerate clay soil by adding or(cid:173)
ganic  matter  such  as  peat moss  or  compost. 
Spread 4 or 5 inches of organic matter over 
the  soil  and  mix  it  in  evenly.  Ideally  you 
should  add  organic  material  wherever  the 
plant's  roots  might  spread  at  maturity;  the 
roots spread more widely than the branches. 
If water soaks directly into your soil with(cid:173)

out significant spreading and the soil dries up 
a few days after watering, your soil is sandy. 
Sandy  soils  contain  a  great  deal  of  air,  but 
moisture  and  nutrients  wash  away  quickly. 
Additional organic matter helps here, too, by 
filling in spaces between the coarse soil parti(cid:173)
cles and retaining the water. Peat moss, com(cid:173)
post, and manures are especially beneficial to 
sandy  soils.  You  can  also  use  sawdust  or 
ground bark, but with these you must add ex(cid:173)
tra nitrogen—1/4 pound ammonium nitrate, or 
equivalent,  per  bushel—or  the  soil  microbes 
will rob nitrogen from plants as they convert 
the sawdust or bark into humus. 

If you  have  soil that  feels  moist  for days 
after watering, but still crumbles easily when 
you pick up a handful and squeeze it, you are 
blessed with loamy soil and shouldn't need to 
amend it. 

P L A N T I NG 
Nurseries  and  garden  centers  sell  plants  in 
three  ways:  bareroot,  balled  and  burlapped 
(with the rootball wrapped  in burlap), or in 
containers. 

Most  deciduous  fruit  plants  are  sold  bare 
root.  The  leafless  plant  is  taken  from  the 
ground in late fall or winter after it has gone 
dormant and it is then shipped to the nursery 
where it is held in moist sand or wood shav(cid:173)
ings.  Sometimes  the  roots  are  enclosed  in  a 
plastic bag full  of damp  shavings.  Bare-root 
plants are fragile and must be kept cool and 
moist. Plant them as soon as possible. 

Bare-root  plants  are  sometimes  put  into 
containers at the nursery. If you buy them in 
winter or while they're still dormant, you can 
bare  the  roots  again  to  plant  them.  If  they 
have  already  leafed  out,  keep  them  in  their 
containers until May or June so the root sys(cid:173)
tem has time to knit the container soil. 

Fruit  trees  are  seldom  sold  balled  and 
burlapped, but they are frequently sold in con(cid:173)
tainers made of plastic, pulp, or metal. Balled 
and  burlapped  plants  are  sold  at  the  same 
time as bare-root plants and should go into the 
ground or their permanent containers quickly 
Trees sold in containers are available the year 
around and may be held until time to plant, as 
long as you don't cut the container. 

Never let bare-root or balled and burlapped 
plants  lie  around  unprotected.  If  you  must 
keep  bare-root  plants  for  a  time  before  you 
can plant, dig a shallow trench, lay the plants 
on their sides with the roots in the trench, and 
cover the roots with moist soil. This is called 

"heeling  in."  Wrap  balled  and  burlapped 
plants  in  a  sheet  of  plastic  so  the  rootball 
stays moist. 

Planting  Trees  and  Shrubs 
The illustrations here will give you some idea 
about  how  to  plant  a tree  from  the  nursery. 
Remember  never  to  plant  if the  soil  is  very 
wet. Working wet soil packs it, driving out the 
air and trapping the roots.  In rainy climates 
you can dig the hole for the plant in the fall 
and  keep  the  soil  mound  dry  by  covering  it 
with  a  weighted  plastic  sheet.  The  soil  will 
then be workable any time. 

A good rule of thumb is to dig the planting 
hole twice the width of the rootball. Another 
good  rule  of thumb  is  always  to  plant  high. 
Notice  in  the  illustrations  that  the  planting 
soil  is  mounded  above  the  normal  soil  line. 
The most fragile part of a woody plant is the 
crown,  that  section  where  the  roots  branch 
and  the  soil  touches  the  trunk.  The  crown 

must  be  dry  most  of the  time,  especially  in 
spring  and  fall.  Raised  planting  minimizes 
crown  rot fungus  (which can be  fatal to the 
plant)  by  making  it  impossible  for  water  to 
puddle  near  the  trunk.  If  you  plant  at  soil 
level, the soil in the planting hole might settle, 
causing your plants to sink. 

Be  especially  careful  when  planting 
grafted dwarf fruit trees. Dwarfing rootstocks 
may blow over unless they have support and 
most apples on dwarf rootstocks require stak(cid:173)
ing. Many growers now place the bud of the 
fruiting variety high on  the  rootstock,  up to 
6 or 8 inches above the roots. This bud union 
shows later as a bulge with a healed scar on 
one side. It's tempting to plant the tree close to 
this  union  for  stability,  but  don't  plant  the 
tree deeper than it was at the nursery, or you 
may have problems with crown rot later. 

Be careful not to bury the bud union in soil 
or  mulch  at  any  time  during  the  life  of the 
tree (see illustration,  at left).  If moist mate(cid:173)
rial touches the union, the upper fruiting part 
will  root,  and  its  vigorous  root  system  will 
produce a full-sized tree instead of the dwarf 
you bought.  Check the  bud  union  frequently 
for signs of rooting and keep mulches  a few 
inches away from it. 

Planting  Cane  Berries  and  Grapes 
Cane berries and grapes are usually sold bare 
root in the spring. Plant at the same depth as 
they were growing before being harvested for 
sale.  There  is  usually  a  line  on  a  bare  root 
plant  that  indicates  the  previous  soil  level. 
Cut back canes to two or three buds. If you are 
staking the plant, place the stake at planting 
time to avoid injuring the roots. 

Planting  Blueberries, 
Currants,  and  Gooseberries 
These plants are often sold in containers and 
should  be  planted  slightly  deeper  in  the 
ground than they were in the container.  For 
currants  and  gooseberries,  leave  only  the 
three  strongest branches  and  cut these  back 
to eight inches. Space plants 3 to 4 feet apart. 
Plant  blueberries  about  an  inch  deeper 
than they grew in the container. Plants should 
be spaced about 4 to 6 feet apart. Rabbiteye 
blueberries grow larger and should be spaced 
a bit farther apart. 

Feeding is less a matter of exact measure(cid:173)
ment than of how the plant responds.  Nitro(cid:173)
gen forces leafy growth, but too much growth 
at the wrong time can harm your fruit crop. In 
most cases feed the plant less from mid-June 
through  leaf  fall.  If  it  produces  only  a  few 
inches of growth one season, step up feeding. 
If it sprouts up like a geyser, feed less.  Slow 
growth  and  pale  or  yellowish  leaves  mean 
that the tree is getting too little nitrogen. 

The  following  are  general  guidelines  for 
the  amount  of  10-10-10  fertilizer  needed  for 
fruiting  plants  each  year.  These  three  num(cid:173)
bers, found on all fertilizer labels, refer to the 
percentages of nitrogen, phosphorus, and po(cid:173)
tassium  (always  in  that  order)  contained 
within  that  particular product.  If a  different 
analysis fertilizer is used, adjust with respect 
to  the  percent  nitrogen  (that  is,  double  the 
amount of fertilizer if the analysis is 5-10-10 
but don't change the amount if the label reads 
10-5-5). 

Although one or two feedings are often rec(cid:173)
ommended, we suggest feeding equal amounts 
of  chemical  fertilizers  four  times  at  evenly 
spaced  intervals  between  early  spring  and 
late June unless otherwise noted. Keep fertil(cid:173)
izers  away  from  the  trunks  of  trees  and 
shrubs and water very deeply after feeding. 

Fruit  and  Nut  Trees 
Use the following schedules for standard-sized 
fruit  trees.  Dwarf  trees  will  require  propor(cid:173)
tionately  less,  and  very  large  nut  trees  will 
require more. 

First and second season  Four tablespoons 
10-10-10 fertilizer per year; one at each feed(cid:173)
ing, scattered evenly 

Third  to  seventh  season  Double  the 
amount each year: 8 tablespoons or 2 table(cid:173)
spoons per feeding in the third year, 16 table(cid:173)
spoons  or  4  tablespoons  per  feeding  in  the 
fourth year,  32 tablespoons or 8 tablespoons 
per feeding in the fifth year, 64 tablespoons or 
16  tablespoons  (one  cup)  per  feeding  in  the 
sixth year,  and  128 tablespoons  or two cups 
per feeding in the seventh year. 

Planting  Strawberries 
Strawberries are sold either bare root in early 
spring or planted in flats, six-packs, or 4-inch 
containers. Plant strawberries with the roots 
spread in a fan shape. Be sure to plant so that 
the crown is above the soil line. 

Strawberries can be grown in the  matted 
row or double row hill systems. In the matted 
row system, all runners are allowed to grow 
which gives larger yields the first bearing sea(cid:173)
son.  The  plants  should  be  spaced  12  inches 
apart and rows should be spaced 3 feet apart. 
In the double-row hill system, plants are 12 
inches apart in the row and rows are 12 inches 
apart. All runners are picked off. Each double 
row  is  raised  and  separated  by  a  24-inch 
trough  that  allows  you  to  walk  among  the 
plants  to pick  or care  for them.  The  system 
lends  itself  to  everbearing  strawberries  or 
those that don't send out many runners. 

F E E D I NG 
Plants  "eat"  sunlight; what we feed them is 
actually mineral nutrients. The three primary 
plant  nutrients  are  nitrogen,  phosphorous, 
and potassium. Plants also need three second(cid:173)
ary nutrients—calcium, magnesium,  and sul(cid:173)
fur—and small  quantities  of trace  nutrients, 
including iron, manganese, and zinc. Nitrogen 
in some usable form is the only element that is 
always in short supply You can add it as am(cid:173)
monium nitrate, ammonium sulphate, calcium 
nitrate, complete fertilizers, or manure. 

Fruits  rarely  need  extra  phosphorus,  but 
they will occasionally need potassium and the 
other  nutrients.  If  growth  is  slow  or  leaves 
and fruit look unnatural or unhealthy, check 
with  your  nursery  or  agricultural  extension 
agent to find out what should be added. 

Mature tree  Continue feeding with 2 cups 
per feeding, for a total of 8 cups per year. 

Grapes 
Apply  4  tablespoons  10-10-10  fertilizer  per 
plant per feeding four times a year for a total 
of one cup per plant per year. 

Strawberries 
Apply 2 cups 10-10-10 fertilizer per 100 feet of 
row at the end of June and again in August. 

Brambles 
Apply 2 cups 10-10-10 fertilizer per 100 feet of 
row per year. 

Blueberries 
Apply  2 tablespoons to  1  cup of ammonium 
sulfate (which makes the soil more acid) per 
plant, depending on plant vigor and size. 

Feeding  With  Animal  Manure 
Animal manure improves the soil texture as 
well as adding nutrients but it is lower in ni(cid:173)
trogen  than  chemical  fertilizers,  and  it  may 
contain  salts,  which  can  be  harmful  in  dry 
climates. Be especially careful of bird, rabbit, 
and feed-lot manures in dry climates. If leaves 
show  brown  edges  from  salt  burn,  soak  the 
root  area  for  several  hours  and  change  to 

another  feeding  method.  Well-rotted  barn  or 
stable manure is safer. 

Since  manures  contain  less  nitrogen  per 
pound than chemical fertilizers, you can use 
relatively more, and because they release ni(cid:173)
trogen  slowly  through  bacterial  action,  you 
can put the whole amount around the tree at 
one time. For young trees begin with a little 
less  than 1/2 pound  of  dry  bird  manure,  or 
about 1 pound of dry cattle manure, and dou(cid:173)
ble each year. For mature trees, use 50 to 70 
pounds of well-rotted bird or rabbit manure, 
spreading it under the outer branches in fall. 
For the same trees, use 100 to 200 pounds of 
well-rotted cattle manure. 

W A T E R I NG 
Standard fruit trees need a lot of water. If this 
is not supplied  by spring and summer rains, 
deep  watering  is  necessary  Dwarf  trees  on 
shallow-rooted stocks may not need as much, 
but they must have a constant moisture sup(cid:173)
ply At planting time, water each layer of soil 
in the planting hole. If the garden soil is dry 
soak  the  hole  itself  before  you  put  in  the 
plant. Finish by creating a depression in the 
planting mound to hold the water, then soak(cid:173)
ing the tree thoroughly Take care that water 
does not run out of the depression. 

Do not water again before new growth be(cid:173)

gins unless the soil seems dry. The roots are 
not growing actively at this time,  and  soggy 
soil will invite rot. When new growth begins, 
let the top inch of soil dry and then give the 
plant a thorough soaking. Be sure to water at 
the top of the planting mound.  This is espe(cid:173)
cially  important  with  balled  and  burlapped 
plants since the soil in the  rootball may not 
take  up  water  unless  it  is  applied  directly 
overhead. 

When first-season growth is abundant and 
plants are growing well in midsummer, build a 
shallow basin around the base of the planting 
mound  to  direct  water  to  the  plant's  roots. 
Water by filling the basin. This basin should 
be expanded in size each year so that it is just 
outside the tips of the branches. 

Plants that are actively growing generally 
need 1 inch of water once a week, or about 2 
gallons of water per square foot of root spread 
once a week. (The roots generally spread out 
somewhat farther than the top canopy of the 
tree.) A newly planted tree would have a root 
spread of up to 2 square feet and, therefore, 
would need  2  to  4 gallons  of water a week. 
Adjustments can be made for rainfall and soil 
type. Your tree may need water quite often in 
very sandy soil, less often in heavier soil. Al(cid:173)
ways dig down a few inches into the soil first 
to see if watering is necessary 

Trees  in  a lawn  area should  have  a deep 
soaking about twice a summer in addition to 
normal lawn watering. 

F R U IT  IN  C O N T A I N E RS 
Containers make plants mobile. Moving fruit 
plants to shelter when cold weather comes or 
to a shady spot if excess heat is the problem, 
makes it possible to grow them outside their 
normal  climate  ranges.  With  containers  you 
can relocate plants to find out where they do 
best and even try varieties not usually recom(cid:173)
mended for your climate, such as peaches in 
North Dakota. Deciduous trees can survive a 
winter season in a garage. One caution, how(cid:173)
ever: plants in containers are not as hardy as 
those in the ground. You must give container 
plants winter protection in climates where the 
ground freezes to any depth at all. 

What  fruits  can  you  plant  in  containers? 
Virtually any you like. Trees, of course, must 

be grafted or genetic dwarfs. The "Encyclope(cid:173)
dia of Fruits, Berries & Nuts," beginning on 
page 59, lists a great many dwarf varieties of 
apples, apricots, cherries, nectarines, peaches, 
pears, and plums, all of which are suitable for 
container culture. Any fig can be grown in a 
container.  Strawberries  can  be  planted  in 
large or small containers, and blueberries and 
currants make excellent container plants. You 
can  even  plant  grapes,  providing  you  give 
them  a  trellis  or  other  support  during  the 
growing season. 

Choosing  Containers 
What  kinds  of  containers  are  suitable  for 
growing  fruit  plants?  Again,  virtually  any(cid:173)
thing you like, as long as it will hold the plant 
and  a  sufficient  amount  of  soil,  is  nontoxic, 
and  contains  holes  for  adequate  drainage. 
Half-barrels,  for  example,  make  excellent 
containers for fruit trees,  as do wooden and 
ceramic planters. 

Whatever type of container you choose, the 
size should be just 2 or 3 inches wider than the 
roots of your plants. The right size container 
allows  roots  easy  access  to water  and nutri(cid:173)
ents without giving them so much space that 
root  growth  occurs  at  the  expense  of  top 
growth. If you start with a bare-root apple, a 
pear, or one of the genetic dwarf fruits, your 
first  container should be  about the  size of a 
5-gallon  can.  Let  the  young  tree  grow  for  a 
season and then repot it the following spring 
in a larger container. 

If  you  plan  to  relocate  the  plant  and  its 
container, carefully consider container size in 
advance. The maximum for mobile containers 
should be about bushel size. Anything bigger 
will  be  too  bulky  to  handle  or  move.  Half-
barrels, or any boxes or pots that hold about 
an equal volume of soil, are roughly the right 
size. The smaller the container, the easier it is 
to move. However, keep in mind that the plant 
must  have  sufficient  room  for  its  roots  and 
that more work is involved in feeding, water(cid:173)
ing, and root pruning with smaller containers. 
All  these  factors  must  be  balanced  when 
choosing the best container. 

Strawberries are the 
ideal container plant; 
they are attractive, 
tasty, and small 
enough to be easily 
moved. Bring them 
up front when they are 
flowering and 
fruiting, then move 
them to an out-of-sight 
corner until the 
following spring. 

Some  gardeners  like  to  add  a  little  rich 
loam to the mix of sand and organic material. 
Add up to one-third loam if you like, but be 
careful not to  include clay  soil,  which  holds 
too much water for a container mix. Also re(cid:173)
member that if you add topsoil to the mix, you 
may give it good physical properties but you 
will also increase the risk of introducing soil 
pests and diseases that can harm your plants. 

Potting  and  Repotting 
Before  you  pot  your  fruit  plant,  make  sure 
your container has drainage holes. Cover the 
holes with screen or broken pieces of crockery 
but don't cover the holes tightly or you'll re(cid:173)
tard  drainage.  Do  not  fill  the  bottom  with 
rocks  or  coarse  gravel;  contrary  to  popular 
opinion these do not improve drainage,  they 
simply take up space in the container. 

To  plant  a  bare-root  plant,  place  enough 
tamped-down soil mix in the bottom of the pot 
so that the plant crown is slightly below the 
container rim when the roots are touching the 
mix. Hold the plant at that level and toss in 
enough mix to support it, tamping lightly as 
you go,  and filling the container to about an 
inch below the rim. The soil will settle, leav(cid:173)
ing room to water. 

When planting fruits grown in nursery con(cid:173)
tainers, remove the container and scratch the 
rootball all around with a fork to rough up the 
roots and direct them outward. Be sure to cut 
off long  roots  spiraling  at  the  bottom  of the 
rootball. The plant should be planted just as 
deep as it was in the nursery container—and 
no deeper—with at least an inch between the 
pot rim and the soil level. 

Repotting is similar, as shown in the illus(cid:173)
trations on the opposite page. Repotting is nec(cid:173)
essary  because  plants  tend  to  bunch  feeder 
roots at the wall of a container where they dry 
out  and  die  more  easily  This  creates  short(cid:173)
ages  of water  and  nutrients  even when  you 
are providing proper care. When you shave off 
an inch of root  and add fresh soil,  the plant 
will grow healthy young roots in the new res(cid:173)
ervoir  of  moisture  and  nutrients.  New  top 
growth will soon follow new root growth. Af(cid:173)
ter potting or repotting, give the plant a good 
deep watering. 

You can grow what 
would otherwise be 
a large tree—such 
as this fig—in a 
container, but use a 
light mix or it will be 
difficult to move. 
Substitute perlite for 
some of the sand in 
the recipe on this page 
to make it lighter 

Container  Soils 
Because  containerized  soil  loses  moisture 
easily,  the  soil  must  hold  moisture  well.  To 
prevent soggy roots and the possibility of dis(cid:173)
ease, it must also have good drainage. Com(cid:173)
mercial  mixes,  often  referred  to  as  soilless 
mixes or synthetic soils, fit the bill. 

Synthetic  mixes  offer  several  advantages. 
They  are  free  of disease  organisms,  insects, 
and  weed  seeds.  They  are  lightweight—half 
the weight of garden soil when both are wet— 
which is an advantage both in relocating con(cid:173)
tainer plants and in growing them on roofs or 
balconies. In addition they can be used just as 
they come from the bag, often without need(cid:173)
ing to be moistened for planting. 

If you plan to fill a number of containers, 
you may want to save money by mixing your 
own planting medium. Here is a basic recipe: 

9 cubic feet of fine sand designated 
as 30-270 (numbers refer to screen 
sizes the sand will pass through) 

9 cubic feet of ground bark 
5 pounds 5-10-10 fertilizer 
5 pounds ground limestone 
1 pound iron sulphate 

Feeding  Container  Fruit  Plants 
If you are using a purely synthetic mix, you 
must be careful about feeding. The nutrients 
you add often wash through the soil when you 
water,  so you'll have to feed more often.  It's 
best to keep to a regular schedule. 

One  good  feeding  method  is  to  give  each 
plant about half the recommended quantity of 

complete  fertilizer  (one  that  contains  nitro(cid:173)
gen, phosphorus, and potassium) every two or 
three weeks. If the label recommends 1 table(cid:173)
spoon per gallon of water each month, use 1/2 
tablespoon per gallon instead and feed every 
two weeks. A liquid fertilizer is easier to mea(cid:173)
sure in exact proportions and is also less likely 
to burn roots. 

Vacation watering  When you leave home 
for a long period, group your containers near a 
water  source  and  away  from  the  afternoon 
sun. Grouping them will help keep them moist, 
shade will further cut the need for water, and 
if they are located near a hose, your vacation 
waterer won't miss any of them by accident. 
For large numbers of containers, you can hook 
up a permanent system of small hoses and add 
a timer that turns water on at regular inter(cid:173)
vals. Drip systems are particularly effective. 

Leaching 
It is important to leach container 
soil  occasionally  to  remove  built-up  mineral 
salts that can burn leaves.  Salts accumulate 
from  fertilizers  and  from  hard  water.  (Any 
water  that  won't  produce  good  soapsuds  or 
leaves bathtub rings is hard water and has a 
high salt content.) You'll know you have a salt 
problem  when  you  see  brown  leaf  edges. 
Leaching  is  running  enough  water  through 
the soil to wash away the salts. 

Every  couple  of  months,  leach  your  soil. 
Put your garden  hose  in  each  container  and 
let  it  run  slowly  for  about  20  minutes.  The 
water  should flow just  fast  enough  that  it 
soaks  through  the  soil  and out the  drainage 
holes of the container. It is a good idea to fill 
the container until water runs freely from the 
bottom, go on to other containers, then return 
and repeat the process. This will keep salts to 
a  minimum.  Avoid  using  softened  water  on 
your  plants  because  it  contains  harmful 
chemicals. 

Winter  Protection 
If you live in a climate where your garden soil 
freezes in winter, then container soil is likely 
to  freeze  all  the  way  through.  Gardeners  in 
the coldest northern zones should plan to pro(cid:173)
tect even  hardy deciduous plants  during the 
coldest months of the year when these plants 
are in containers. 

The  easiest  way  to  protect  a  container 
plant from freezing winter temperatures is to 
move it into an unheated cellar, garage, porch, 
or  room.  You  can  also  bury  the  pot  in  the 
ground, making sure to place it deep enough 
that the soil covers the rim. Heaping sawdust, 
leaves, or woodchips around the pot will help 
protect the roots if temperatures do not drop 
too far below freezing. 

It can be difficult to 
know when to water 
hanging plants 
because you can't 
see—and sometimes 
can't feel—the soil 
surface. Try lifting the 
container slightly to 
test its weight. With 
some practice you will 
be able to gauge its 
dryness accurately. 

Another good method is to use slow-release 
fertilizer pellets. These dissolve slowly over a 
period of time, releasing nutrients with every 
watering. 

Feed  from  the  beginning  of  the  growing 
season until the end of summer if the plant is 
to receive winter protection. Stop about mid-
July if the plant is to stay outdoors. This will 
give both a chance to harden new growth. 

Watering  Container  Plants 
If you check the  soil occasionally by digging 
down an inch or two, you'll soon learn when to 
water. Water whenever the soil just under the 
surface begins to dry Judge when to water by 
the  behavior  of  your  plant.  It  should  never 
wilt, but it shouldn't stand in soggy soil either. 
The  top  inch  may  stay  moist  for  a  week  in 
fairly cool weather, but in hot, windy weather 
you'll need to water more often, perhaps even 
every  day  for  a  plant  that  needs  repotting. 
(This  is  why  well-drained  soil  is  important. 
You can water liberally without drowning the 
roots.) Water enough with each irrigation so 
that a good amount drains from the bottom of 
the container. Don't count on rain to do all of 
your watering.  The  foliage  of plants  in  con(cid:173)
tainers can act as an umbrella, shedding most 
of the rainfall. Check the soil even when rain 
has been abundant. 

PESTS AND DISEASES 
OF FRUIT 
The more energy your plants expend recover(cid:173)
ing from the effects of pests and diseases, the 
less fruit they will bear. Here are some tips on 
giving  them  a  helping  hand  that  will  bring 
ample rewards at harvest time. 

One of the best defenses against pests and 
disease is a vigorous plant. Healthy fruit and 
nut  trees  and  berry  plants  resist  infection 
and  can  overcome  insect  attacks,  but  sickly, 
weak plants will succumb to these problems. 
Sanitation  is  another good method of dis(cid:173)
ease and insect prevention. Be sure to remove 
all remaining fruits,  berries,  and nuts at the 
end  of  the  season  and  clean  up  the  ground 
below the plants. This material can provide a 
home  for overwintering pests;  either  burn  it 
or seal it in a bag to be discarded. Your neigh(cid:173)
bors' trees and shrubs may be the source of 
some of your trouble, but there is no way to 
make others keep their plants pest-free. Just 
be sure to prepare the soil properly and keep 
the tree, shrub, or vine watered and fed. Be(cid:173)
yond that you must accept the fact that you 
may lose some fruit each season: In most cases 
there will be plenty left for a good harvest. 

When you use chemical control measures, 

read the  label carefully  and  follow  all  direc(cid:173)
tions exactly 

Fruit  Pests 
The pests listed here are among the most com(cid:173)
mon, although you may encounter others. A 
few  are  confined  to  specific  regions  of  the 
United States. 

Aphids  These  are  soft-bodied  insects  that 
damage leaves and fruit by sucking plant sap. 
A dormant oil spray kills overwintering eggs, 
and malathion or diazinon contact sprays help 
control the insects during the growing season 
if sprayed once a week. 

Apple  maggots  (railroad  worms) 
This 
pest is found primarily east of the Rockies, but 
it  is  also  becoming  a  problem  in  the  Pacific 
Northwest and northern California. The apple 

maggot has adult flies that lay eggs under the 
skin  of  the  fruit.  When  the  eggs  hatch  the 
larvae tunnel through the flesh. The flies are 
active from July through harvest. Keep trees 
clean and remove damaged fruit.  Spray with 
diazinon  or  carbaryl  (Sevin®)  products,  fol(cid:173)
lowing label directions.  Do not use diazinon 
within  14  days  of harvest.  These  pests  can 
also  be  controlled  effectively  by  hanging 
"sticky balls"—red spheres coated with  auto 
grease  or  latex,  which  traps  the  insects—in 
your trees. 

Birds  The  biggest  problem  with  cherries, 
blueberries,  and  other  small  fruits  is  that 
birds can remove the entire fruit. When fruit 
begins  to  ripen,  cover  the  whole  plant  with 
plastic netting, which is available from nurs(cid:173)
eries and hardware dealers. Throw the net di(cid:173)
rectly  over  the  plant,  or  build  simple  wood 
frames  to  support  netting  over  dwarfs  and 
bushes.  For  larger  trees,  strands  of  cotton 
twine will annoy the birds when they try to 
land  and  may be  sufficient.  Throw  a  ball  of 
twine over the tree repeatedly from different 
sides.  The twine  usually rots  away over the 
next winter. 

Cherry fruit  flies  This fruit fly starts as a 
white  larva  that  burrows  through  the  cher(cid:173)
ries, leaving a hole. Spray at seven-day inter(cid:173)
vals with diazinon insecticide.  Do not spray 
diazinon within 14 days of harvest. 

Cherry (pear) slugs  These small, wet-look(cid:173)
ing  green  worms  are  the  larvae  of  a  wasp. 
They skeletonize leaves, leaving lacy patches. 
When you notice them (probably in June and 
again in August) spray with malathion insec(cid:173)
ticide or a contact spray registered for control 
of the pest. Follow label directions. 

Codling  moths  The  major  pest  of  apples 
and pears,  these moths lay eggs in the blos(cid:173)
soms and their larvae tunnel in the fruit leav(cid:173)
ing holes  and droppings (frass).  After petals 
fall spray with diazinon insecticide or mala(cid:173)
thion and  methoxychlor insecticide and  con(cid:173)
tinue  to  spray  every  two  to  four  weeks  as 
directed. 

Flatheaded  borers  This  western  pest  is 
the larva of a beetle. The borer burrows into 
bark that has been damaged or sunburned. To 
avoid  the  pest,  avoid  the  damage.  Paint  or 
wrap young trunks or those exposed by heavy 

pruning, and be careful not to cut them with 
tools  or  machinery  When  you  find  tunnels 
and droppings, cut away bark and wood and 
dig out the borers, then paint the wound with 
tree  seal  or  asphalt  emulsion.  For  apples, 
cherries, and pears, use a lindane product reg(cid:173)
istered for control of this pest. 

Grape  berry  moths  This  insect  damages 
grapes in the  northeastern part of the coun(cid:173)
try. Since the insect overwinters on pieces of 
grape  leaves  on  the  ground,  it  can  be  con(cid:173)
trolled by tilling the leaves into the soil. It can 
also be controlled with malathion insecticide 
applied  just  before  bloom,  just  after  bloom, 
and two months later. 

Leaf rollers This moth larva hides in rolled 
leaves  and  feeds  on  both  foliage  and  fruit. 
Once  established  it  is  protected  from  spray 
because  the  spray  cannot  reach  it.  Infested 
leaves  must  be  picked  off.  Spray  with 
diazinon, carbaryl (Sevin®), or malathion in(cid:173)
secticides  when  pests  first  appear  and  con(cid:173)
tinue  spray  treatments  according  to  the 
intervals  recommended  on  the  label.  Leaf 
rollers can also be eradicated using Bacillus 
thuringiensis (a parasitic bacteria). 

Mites  Well-watered,  vigorous  plants  are 
much  less  susceptible to spider mite  infesta(cid:173)
tions  than  plants  subject  to  drought,  dust, 
and dirt, so keep plants both clean and well-
watered. Over-spraying for other insects may 
trigger  a  mite  attack  because  spraying  kills 
the  mites'  enemies.  You'll  know  mites  are 
present if there is a silvery webbing under the 
leaves, or if the leaves are curled, stippled, or 
bronzed.  Kill  overwintering  mites  with  dor(cid:173)
mant  oil  spray.  During  the  growing  season, 
use  dicofol  miticide  or  other  products  regis(cid:173)
tered for mite control on fruit trees.  In sum(cid:173)
mer oil sprays are safe only for pears. 

Oriental  fruit  moths  The  larvae  of  this 
pest of peaches, plums, nectarines, and apri(cid:173)
cots burrows into the twigs, which causes the 
tips to wilt. The most serious damage occurs 
later in  the  season  when  the  larvae  feed  on 
the  fruit.  The  worms  cannot  be  killed  with 
pesticides alone, but you can control the adult 
moth by spraying with malathion insecticide 
and cleaning up infested fruit. 

Peach tree borers  There are two kinds of 
peach  borer:  One  bores  into  twigs  and  fruit 
(peach twig and fruit borer);  the other,  very 
common  borer  attacks  the  trunk  at  the  soil 
line (trunk borer). To check for the latter, dig 
soil away from the trunk  and check for tun(cid:173)
nels and droppings. Kill the worm by pushing 
a bit of wire down its tunnel. For trunk borer, 
spray trees with diazinon, carbaryl (Sevin®), 
or  lindane  products  according  to  the  direc(cid:173)
tions  on  the  label.  Check  cherry  and  plum 
trees for infestations of the same pest. 

To control the twig and fruit borer, spray 
with  diazanon  insecticide  at  the  following 
times:  in winter,  in May,  and before harvest 
(during the safe period indicated on the prod(cid:173)
uct label). Trunk borers can also be controlled 
by placing a ring of mothballs on the ground 
close to,  but  not  touching the  trunk.  Mound 
soil  2  to  3  inches  deep  over  the  ring  for  6 
weeks and then uncover it. 

Trees  damaged  by  lawn  mowers,  frost 
cracking, or other borers are more susceptible 
to peach tree borer. 

Pear psyllas  These  insects  are  related  to 
aphids.  Like  aphids,  the  larvae  cluster  on 
leaves and suck plant juices, and they excrete 
a sticky, sweet honeydew that coats the leaves 
and fruits. A black, sooty fungus may grow on 
the  honeydew,  reducing  photosynthesis  and 
weakening  the  tree.  Dormant  oil  spray,  ap(cid:173)
plied just before the buds swell, is an effective 
treatment against pear psylla. 

Plum curculios  This pest, which belongs to 
the beetle family, is a serious problem for ap(cid:173)
ples,  peaches,  cherries,  and  other  wild  and 
cultivated fruits east of the Rockies. Both the 
adults and larvae damage the fruit. Look for 
the  crescent-shaped  scars  on  fruit  made  by 
the  female  plum  curculio  when  laying  eggs. 
The pests  are active for 3 to 4 weeks start(cid:173)
ing at petal fall. Spray with a malathion and 
methoxychlor  insecticide  or  other  products 
labeled for control of this pest. 

Fruit  Diseases 
The  following  are  the  most  common  of  the 
many fruit tree diseases. Some are easily con(cid:173)
trolled with proper sprays (timing is very im(cid:173)
portant);  others  are  best fought  by choosing 
resistant  plants,  and  some  require  the  re(cid:173)
moval and burning of infected plant parts. 

Apple and pear scab  These diseases over(cid:173)
winter  on  apple  and  pear  leaf debris,  so  be 
sure to rake  up under trees  and destroy the 
material. The fungus infects foliage and fruit. 
The disease is severest in wet weather and is 
less of a problem in dry-summer areas. Crab-
apples  also  are  affected  and  need  spraying. 
Choose resistant plants when possible. 

To control scab, apply captan, dodine, lime 
sulfur, or benomyl to apples at regular inter(cid:173)
vals before and after the tree blooms. 

Bacterial  leaf  spot 
Primarily  attacking 
cherries,  peaches,  and  plums,  this  bacterial 
disease lives through winter in leaf debris. In 
the East and South, the growing of Japanese 
plums is severely limited due to this problem. 
The infection, which occurs during rainy peri(cid:173)
ods  in  the  spring,  causes  brown  spots  that 
form in the leaves and develop into widening 
holes.  It  may  attack  fruit  spurs  and  cause 
fruit drop. 

This  disease  cannot  be  eliminated,  but  it 
can  be  suppressed  by  spraying  with  basic 
copper sulfate at petal fall or by using strepto(cid:173)
mycin and terramycin antibiotics later when 
trees are in bloom and again one month later 
when  rains  may  occur.  For  peaches  another 
alternative is to plant only resistant varieties 
such as 'Redhaven', 'Sunhaven', 'Madison', or 
'Loring'. 

, 

Bacterial canker of cherries  This disease 
causes long, narrow, damp-looking, gum-edged 
patches on the trunk or branches.  Branches 
die as  they are  girdled by these patches.  In 
wet  climates  avoid  'Bing',  'Lambert',  'Royal 
Ann',  and  'Van'  cherries.  Resistant  varieties 
are  'Corum'  and  'Sam'.  The disease can also 
affect  apricots,  blueberries,  peaches,  and 
prune plums. Do not use susceptible peaches 
in damp climates. 

Rodents  Mice,  voles,  and  rabbits  all  eat 
the bark of young trees, especially when the 
ground is covered with mulch or snow in win(cid:173)
ter and better food is  unavailable.  If enough 
bark  is  removed,  the  tree  will  die  after  the 
first growth surge of spring. Protect the lower 
trunk  in  winter  or  the  year  around  with  a 
cylinder of hardware cloth. Check it occasion(cid:173)
ally during the growing season and loosen or 
replace it as necessary 

Scales  This pest causes spots to develop on 
infested fruit.  Scales appear in masses when 
infestations are heavy Use a delayed dormant 
oil  spray  to  control  mature  scales  before 
crawlers (the immature stage) hatch. Crawl(cid:173)
ers  can  be  controlled  with  malathion  or 
diazinon sprays applied in May or June. 

Tent  caterpillars  You  probably won't  see 
this pest if you have sprayed early for others. 
Tent  caterpillars  build  large  webs  among 
branches;  these  webs  contain  hundreds  of 
hairy  caterpillars  that  emerge  to  eat  leaves. 
Spray  with  diazinon  or  malathion  insecti(cid:173)
cides. Tent caterpillars can also be eradicated 
by spraying Bacillus thuringiensis. 

Bitter rot  This is the most serious fruit rot 
of apples in the Southeast. Dark round lesions 
appear on the fruits and irregular brown spots 
on the leaves. Remove mummified and newly 
infected  fruit.  Captan  fungicide  sprays  will 
control the disease. 

Black knot  This disease causes black tar(cid:173)
like swellings on plum branches. The infection 
can  spread  from  infected  wild  cherries  and 
plums to cultivated trees, so plant at least 600 
feet from any infected trees. Prune out infec(cid:173)
tion.  Moderately  resistant  varieties  include 
'Methley' and 'Italian Prune'. Resistant varie(cid:173)
ties are 'Shiro' and 'Santa Rosa'. Some control 
is possible using a captan or benomyl spray, 
but  spraying  alone  will  not  control  this  dis(cid:173)
ease. Prune out and destroy infected twigs and 
branches in the fall and winter, making sure 
to cut at least 4 inches below visible signs of 
infection. 

Black rots  There are two major black rot 
diseases. The first is black rot on apples and is 
sometimes called frog-eye leaf spot because it 
causes  brown  spots  surrounded  by  purple 

margins on the leaves. It is one of the three 
fruit  rots  important  on  apples  in  the  South(cid:173)
east. (The others are white rot and bitter rot.) 
The  rotted  area  is  characterized  by  concen(cid:173)
tric, alternating black and brown rings. Con(cid:173)
trol  by  pruning  out  diseased  branches, 
removing mummified fruit, and applying cap(cid:173)
tan fungicides. 

The  other  black  rot  is  the  most  serious 
disease  of  grapes  in  the  East.  Attacking  all 
young, growing parts of the plant, the disease 
first appears as soft,  round, tan spots on the 
berries. Eventually the berries shrivel to hard, 
dry mummies resembling raisins. 

Plants that dry off quickly are less likely to 
get black rot, so choose a site in the sun with 
good air circulation and prune the plants an(cid:173)
nually Captan fungicide sprays control black 
rot and are applied when new shoots are 6 to 
10  inches  long, just before  bloom, just  after 
bloom,  and then every  10 days until berries 
reach full size. A moderately resistant variety 
is  'Delaware'.  Except  in  unusually  wet  sea(cid:173)
sons, muscadine varieties are not attacked by 
black rot. 

cup-shaped structures; then they turn yellow 
and fall. The galls form on the juniper or red 
cedar plants. Remove junipers and red cedars, 
or avoid planting them. If you have ornamen(cid:173)
tal cedars, remove the galls in summer. Galls 
are brownish and globe shaped and look like 
part of the tree. Spray the apples with a prod(cid:173)
uct registered specifically for control of cedar 
apple rust (ferbam or zineb products), follow(cid:173)
ing  directions  carefully  The  fungicides  in 
multipurpose  sprays  usually  do  not  control 
rust.  Select  resistant  cultivars  where  cedar 
apple rust is a big problem. 

Crown gall  Of bacterial origin, this disease 
occurs in many soils.  It attacks young trees, 
producing  soft,  corky  galls,  or  swellings,  on 
the  crown  and  roots.  The  galls  often  grow 
until they girdle and stunt the tree. 

Avoid buying young trees that show galls, 

and  plant  young  trees  carefully  to  avoid  in(cid:173)
jury  as  injury  allows  bacteria  to  enter  the 
plant.  Older  trees  with  galls  can  be  treated 
with a product called Gallex®. 

Recent  experimental  work  has  indicated 
that young plants  can be  successfully inocu(cid:173)
lated against the disease. 

Crown rot  Almost any plant growing in a 
soil that is frequently or constantly wet may 
be subject to this serious disease. Crown rot is 
caused by a fungus. Infected branches redden 
and foliage yellows  or discolors.  Look at the 
bark below the soil line to see whether it is 
dead; if it is,  scrape the bark away and pull 
back  the  soil  so  that  air  can  reach  the 
infection. 

Avoid  crown  rot  on  established  trees  by 
planting  high  and  watering  away  from  the 
trunk.  The  soil  at  the  crown  should  dry  as 
quickly as possible. 

Downy  mildew  Grapes  in  the  Northeast 
may  be  attacked  by  this  disease  when  the 
weather is  cool  and  moist,  first  in June  and 
then again toward late summer. A white cot(cid:173)
tony  growth  appears,  usually  on  the  oldest 
leaves,  but  it  can  also  attack  young  shoots, 
tendrils, or berries. Control with captan fungi(cid:173)
cide, and clean up dead leaves where the fun(cid:173)
gus overwinters. 

Brown rot  Serious on all stone fruits, but 
especially  on  apricots,  peaches,  and  nectar(cid:173)
ines,  this disease,  in some regions,  makes it 
nearly impossible for fruit to grow to the ed(cid:173)
ible  stage.  The  disease  causes  blossoms  to 
brown, turn wet looking, and drop. Brown rot 
eventually  causes  fruit  rot  on  the  tree.  In(cid:173)
fected fruit must be removed by hand to pre(cid:173)
vent reinfection. 

To control the blossom-blight phase, spray 
as  the  first  pink  petals  show  but  before  the 
flowers open,  using a fungicide such as cap(cid:173)
tan, benomyl, dodine, ferbam, or ziram. 

To  control  attacks  on  fruit,  spray  as  the 

fruit begins to ripen (green fruit is rarely at(cid:173)
tacked) and repeat if there is a period of wet 
weather. On peaches and nectarines, the dis(cid:173)
ease  may  attack  twigs  and  overwinter  on 
them.  Pruning out  dead  twigs  and  removing 
overwintering  fruit  "mummies"  controls  the 
disease in the following year. 

Cedar apple rust  This disease appears only 
where  the  alternate  host,  certain  species  of 
juniper or red cedar, grows near apples. The 
apple leaves first show orange spots and odd 

Fireblight  This disease is spread by insects 
during the bloom period and shows in spring 
as  new growth wilts,  turns  dark,  and finally 
blackens as if burned. 

Only  severe  pruning  and  burning  of  in(cid:173)

fected wood has proven effective for the home 
gardener. Choose resistant pears such as 'Lin(cid:173)
coln'  or  'Magness'.  Where  the  disease  is  se(cid:173)
vere,  plant  resistant  apple  cultivars  such  as 
'Cortland' or 'Delicious'. 

To  control  infection,  cut  off  any  blighted 
branches  several  inches  below  the  infection 
as soon as you notice an attack. Sterilize prun(cid:173)
ing tools between each cut by dipping them in 
a  10-percent  bleach  solution  or  full-strength 
rubbing alchohol. 

Gummosis  Deposits of gum on branches of 
stone  fruits  (peaches,  nectarines,  apricots, 
plums,  and cherries)  are  fairly common  and 
may be caused by mechanical damage, insect 
damage, or a number of diseases. Several seri(cid:173)
ous bacterial diseases with this symptom  al(cid:173)
most  rule  out  the  planting  of  certain  fruit 
varieties  in  some  areas.  There  is  no  spray 
treatment.  A disease  that often causes gum(cid:173)
mosis  is  bacterial  canker  of  cherries,  de(cid:173)
scribed above. 

Peach leaf curl  This disease first shows up 
as a reddening of leaves; leaves then turn pale 
green or yellow, curl, blister, and may have a 
powdery look; and finally they fall. A second 
crop of leaves may grow, which may or may 
not be affected. No spraying is effective once 
the disease has appeared. 

To control curl you should spray immedi(cid:173)
ately  after leaf drop,  or just before  the  buds 
break, with a fixed copper spray or lime sul(cid:173)
fur,  wetting  every 
twig  and  branch 
completely 

Powdery  mildew  This  is  a  fungus  that 
causes  a  grayish,  powdery  coating  to  form 
over  young  shoots,  leaves,  and flower buds, 
often deforming or killing them. It thrives in 
still, shady spots. 

When an infection begins, clip off severely 
mildewed  twigs  and  spray  with  benomyl.  A 
cold winter will eliminate much of the fungus. 

White rot  This is an important fruit rot of 
apples  in  the  Southeast.  Papery  orange  can(cid:173)
kers  form  on  branches.  Prune  out  infected 
branches and spray with captan fungicide. 

spray  Schedules 
To  get  the  kind  of unblemished  fruit  you  are  used  to  buying  in  grocery  stores,  it  is  usually 
necessary to spray fruit trees according to a regular schedule. This chart shows the approximate 
timing for controls for some of the major problems of fruit trees. See the text for recommended 
sprays for each problem. 

Not all of these problems will occur where you live, and they will  probably  not take as many 
sprays  as shown.  For example,  apple maggots don't occur in  much of the country,  and  fireblight 
can be a problem all summer in humid areas, but is only a spring disease in dry-summer regions. 

Roses  are  among  the  most  beautiful  flowering  plants. 
Keeping  roses  looking  lovely  and  healthy  requires 
regular attention.  This means attention to details such 
as  food  and  water,  pest  and  disease  control,  training 
and pruning. 

Proper  pruning  of  roses  keeps  plants  healthy  and 
productive,  providing  a continuous  supply  of blooms. 
Pruning  roses  is  simple  and  easy,  even  for  beginners. 
Following  the  guidelines  presented  here can  result  in 

bushes  full  of beautiful  blooms.  Detailed  information 
on  roses  is  available  in  the  HPBook,  Roses: How  To 
Select, Grow and Enjoy. 

Proper tools make pruning roses easy and enjoyable. 
A  pair  of sharp  pruning  shears  is  the most important 
tool you'll need.  Ragged cuts made by dull tools injure 
rose plants and can create problems with diseases. Lop-
pers  and  a  small  saw  are  useful  if  bushes  are  large. 
Gloves protect hands and arms from thorns. 

BASIC PRINCIPLES 
There are many kinds of roses.  Special pruning meth(cid:173)
ods  have  evolved  for  each  kind.  Use  the  following 
basic  principles  to  keep  your  roses  healthy  and 
beautiful. 

•  Encourage  new  growth  at  the  expense  of  old. 
After  some  roses  are  several  years  old,  new  basal 
growth  virtually  stops.  New  canes  are  produced  high 
on  a  few  older  canes  instead  of  arising  from  below 
ground.  Prune away  old canes just beyond where new 
canes start. 

•  Remove dead canes to the crown. Dead canes are 
brown  and  shriveled  inside  and  out.  Removing  dead 
canes is the first step in pruning any rose. Use a saw if 
necessary. 

•  Renmove  portions  of  frost-damaged  canes  after 
buds  begin  to  swell.  Winter-damaged  wood  can  be 
determined by cutting through a cane. Healthy wood is 
white all the way through. Any brown discoloration in(cid:173)
dicates  frost damage.  Frost-damaged portions of canes 
should be removed. 

•  Remove  all  weak, 

thin,  spindly  growth  that 

crowds  the  bush's  center.  Spread  branches  out,  open(cid:173)
ing the center. Remove crowding stems and twigs back 
to their point of origin. Leave no stubs. 

•  Where two branches cross, remove the one below 

the crossing point to prevent rubbing. 

•  Remove any suckers. Roses are budded, a form of 
grafting,  onto a wild-rose rootstock. Suckers are extra-
vigorous  shoots  that  grow  from  rootstock  below  bud 
unions.  Continued  growth  of  suckers  weakens  pre(cid:173)
ferred rose varieties. 

Suckers are easy to identify. Suckers have a different 

color and character, with distinctly different leaves. 

Suckers  should  be  removed  completely,  not  just 
clipped  off where  they  emerge  from  soil.  Remove  soil 
from roots  until  you  can  see  where the  sucker is con(cid:173)
nected  to  the  rootstock.  Hold  the  sucker  close  to  the 
trunk  and  pull  downward  to  break  the  sucker  off. 
Young  suckers  pull  away  easily.  Removing  suckers 
removes adjacent buds too.  This does not damage the 
plant.  If suckers  are  clipped  off above  the  soil,  they 
sprout and grow another rose bush in the middle of the 
existing one. 

Suckers  occasionally  appear  on  the  tall  trunk-stem 
of  tree  roses  instead  of underground.  Remove  these 
suckers by close pruning. 

• Always  cut  at  an  angle  about  1/4  inch  above  an 
outward-facing  bud.  There  is  a  bud at every  leaf.  The 
angle of the cut should slope away from the bud.  A cut 
made  at  this  point  heals  rapidly  and  water  will  drain 
away  from  the  bud.  Stubs  will  not  develop  if you  cut 
close to a bud. Stubs are a point of entry for disease. 

If  diseases  such  as  black  spot  are  persistent  prob(cid:173)
lems,  dispose of all prunings.  Never leave prunings in 
the rose bed or in compost. Sterilize pruning tools with 
alcohol after each cut. 

Crossed  canes  that  touch  and  rub  together  on  rose(cid:173)
bushes  can  create  open  wounds  on  canes.  The  lower 
cane should be removed by careful pruning. 

Pruning  cuts  on  rose  canes  should  be  made  at  a  45° 
angle  about  1/4  inch  above  an  outward-facing  bud. 
Angle of cut should slope away from the bud. 

Disbudding  is  the  removal  of  secondary  flowering  buds 
from  a  flowering  rose  stem.  This  process  concentrates 
the  plant's  energy  into  development  of  one  flower.  This 
flower will  be larger and stronger. 

Knuckle Cuts—Knuckle cuts are used by commercial 
growers  of rose  flowers.  Knuckle  cutting  obtains  the 
maximum  number  of high-quality  flowers from vigor(cid:173)
ous plants. A commercial grower cuts rose flowers im(cid:173)
mediately  above  the  second  5-leaflet  leaf,  point  A  in 
the  illustration  below  left.  If a  bush  is  getting  tall  or 
later growth is weak, the grower makes a knuckle cut. 
The knuckle cut is made below where the previous cut 
was made, at point C. 
Dead  Heading—This refers to removal of flowers that 
die on the plant.  Dead flowers are cut above the high(cid:173)
est  5-leaflet leaf if the stem is vigorous.  Dead heading 
allows leaves to remain and continue producing energy 
for  subsequent  growth.  Weak  growth  should  be  re(cid:173)
moved back to the second  5-leaflet leaf on new shoots 
or to the older stem. 

Stop  removing  faded  flowers  in  late  summer.  This 
allows seeds and the fruit of the rose,  called  rose hips, 
to  develop  and  mature.  Leaving  faded  flowers  on 
canes in late summer ensures that no late-season, cold-
susceptible  growth  is  encouraged.  This  makes  rose 
plants more winter-hardy. 
Disbudding—This  is  done  with thumb  and forefinger. 
Disbudding directs new growth in spring and promotes 
development  of large  flowers  throughout  the  season. 
As growth begins, some buds grow strongly toward the 
center  of  the  plant.  These  buds  should  be  removed 
with  fingers  as  soon  as  growth  begins.  If three  buds 
begin  to  grow  from  one  leaf node,  rub  off the  weaker 
side buds to direct the plant's energy into development 
of the main bud. 

Roses  that set flower buds  in clusters are  often dis(cid:173)
budded.  Removing  side buds concentrates  the plant's 
growing energy into the central flower. This causes the 
flower  to  become  larger.  Pinch  lateral  flower  buds 
away as soon as possible. 
Candelabra  Canes—These  are  vigorous  new  shoots 
that  usually  appear  after  the  first  wave  of  blooms. 
These  canes  end  in  huge  candelabras  or  branches  of 
buds. Pinch the tips of these shoots when 6 inches tall. 

These large  shoots are usually less  than  1/2  inch in 
diameter at their base.  Candelabra canes are  ordinary, 
but extra-vigorous, basal canes. If pinched, candelabra 
canes  produce  several  good  flowers.  If  not  pinched, 
candelabra  canes  become  unattractive  and  may  die 
back if pruned when dormant. 

Growth  originating  from  a  3-leaflet  bud  is  often 
weak and spindly. This growth has poor-quality flowers 
or no flower at all. Growth from a 7-leaflet bud is often 
vigorous,  but  it  also  produces  a  small,  poor-quality 
flower  on a large stem.  In both cases stems should be 
pinched  above  a  pair  of  5-leaflet  leaves.  Pinching  at 
this  point  encourages vigorous productive growth and 
produces high-quality flowers. 

When growth  is  not vigorous and height is not a problem, 
remove  faded  rose  flowers  at  point  B.  A  cut  made  at 
point  C,  is  called  a  knuckle  cut.  Knuckle  cuts  should  be 
made if growth  is weak or if a bush  is too tall. If growth is 
vigorous  and  overall  height  is  not  excessive,  remove 
faded  rose  flowers  at  point A,  just  above  the  second  5-
leaflet leaf from the top. 

Bare-root  roses from the nursery have tops shortened. 
In  most  cases  additional  pruning  is  still  needed. 
Remove weak twigs and shorten main canes. Cut away 
all  broken  or  dried roots  and  shorten long  roots  until 
they fit into the planting hole without bending. 

Do not cut long-stem flowers from new rose plants. 
removes  food-manufacturing 

long  stems 

Cutting 
leaves needed by young plants. 

Roses require annual pruning. Prune mature roses late 
in  the  dormant  season.  Mild-climate  gardeners  begin 
pruning in December or January. Gardeners in cold re(cid:173)
gions  normally  wait  until  March  or  April, just  before 
new growth starts.  Some rose species tend to die back 
if  pruned  one  or  two  months  before  spring  growth 
starts. Many varieties do tolerate midwinter pruning. If 
roses  are  pruned  just  before  new  growth  starts, 
wounds heal quicker. 

Another  important  reason  to  prune  late  in  the  dor(cid:173)
mant season has to do with winter hardiness. The ear(cid:173)
lier  you  prune,  the  earlier  new  growth  begins.  Early 
pruning promotes growth that might be damaged by a 
late  frost.  Conversely,  pruning  late  in  spring  after 
growth begins wastes plant energy. 

Vigorous  rose  plants,  such as climbing hybrid teas, 
have  several  periods  of  rapid  growth,  called  flushes, 
during  the  season.  These  roses  bloom  over  a  long 
season.  They  may  tolerate  cutting  back  two  or  three 
times  if  growing  conditions  are  favorable.  Frequent 
pruning  encourages  good  blooming  and  maintains 
proper plant shape. 

A few rose varieties bloom only once a year, usually 

in  spring.  Prune  these  roses  after  flowers  fade  to 
ensure growth of new wood for next spring's flowers. 

Pick off faded flowers  and  shorten  new growth after 

each crop of bloom. Cut back to strong side buds or la(cid:173)
terals.  The  uppermost  buds  will  form  new  shoots.  In 
hybrid-tea  roses  and  some  everblooming roses,  these 
new shoots eventually flower. After the second crop of 
flowers  has bloomed, growth may be shortened again. 
This pruning system can produce three or four crops of 
flowers each season if conditions are favorable. 
How  Much To Prune—People who grow roses either 
professionally  or  as  a  hobby  frequently  differ  about 
how hard or far back to prune  roses.  If winter damage 
has been extensive, it may be necessary to prune roses 
to  within  a foot  of the  soil.  In general,  weak-growing 
varieties  can  be  pruned  harder  than  strong-growing 
varieties.  Hard pruning is usually practiced to produce 
fewer, more perfect roses. Light pruning allows a bush 
to  grow  to  its  natural  size  and  shape.  Lightly  pruned 
roses produce more flowers. These flowers are slightly 
smaller than flowers from heavily pruned plants. 

The  following  definitions  can  be  used  as  guidelines 

in pruning hybrid teas and grandifloras: 

Hard—Thin  out  all  but  three  to  five  canes.  Prune 
these canes back to leave two or three eyes or buds on 
each shoot. 

Moderately  Hard—Thin  out  all  but  three  to  five 

canes. Cut canes back to five to ten eyes. 

Medium—Thin out all but four to seven canes. Cut 

canes back about 1/2 their length. 

Light—Thin  out  all  but  four  to  seven  canes. 

Remove cane tips. 

As  a general guide,  remove about  1/3  to  1/2 of last 
year's growth.  For most hybrid teas,  this is five to ten 
eyes  per  cane.  Remaining  canes  should  be  the  thick(cid:173)
ness of a pencil. 

PRUNING DORMANT ROSES 
The  best  time  to  prune  roses  is  during  the  dormant 
season.  Begin  by  removing  all  dead,  twiggy  growth. 
Remove  spindly  stems  that  crowd  the  center  of  the 
bush.  In  general,  all  growth  less  than  1/4  inch  in 
diameter should be removed. 

Next,  remove old canes at bud unions.  Select canes 
or  main  stems  to  form  the  bush  framework.  Rose 
canes  are  old  after  three  or  four  years.  Old  canes  are 
grayish and have creases in the bark.  New canes are a 
rich, reddish brown. New canes have smooth bark and 
brownish thorns. 

Select  healthy  new  canes  to  create  a  symmetrical 
plant.  Use  heavy  loppers  or  a  small  pruning  saw  to 

remove  old  canes.  Never  leave  a stump  or  stub.  Cut 
canes flush with bud unions. 

Shorten  last  season's  growth  by  1/3  to  1/2.  Avoid 
cutting into old wood. Old wood is more susceptible to 
dieback.  Thin  smaller  branches  at the  plant's  top and 
center.  Remove  crossing  branches  and  any  suckers 
growing from rootstock. 

Pruning directs growth.  Roses should be directed to 
form  an  open-center,  vase-shape  plant.  This  means 
cutting  to  a  bud  that  points  up  and  away  from  the 
crown  or  center  of  the  bush.  However,  some  roses 
may tend to sprawl too widely. In such cases, prune to 
an  inward-facing  bud,  directing  growth  in  a  more  ap(cid:173)
propriate direction. 

Wound-sealers  are  essential  for  roses.  Pruned  rose 

canes can lose  substantial amounts of moisture quick(cid:173)
ly, especially when days are warm. Fresh-cut canes are 
favorite entry sites for boring  insects.  Use a non-toxic 
sealer  to  coat wounds.  The sealer prevents drying and 
protects wounds from insects and disease. 

Remove  all  leaves  from  bushes  in  the  fall.  Leaves 
must  be  removed  to  induce  full  dormancy  before 
winter.  If leaves  do  not  fall  in  mild-winter  areas,  cut 
them  off. 

Dispose of all fallen leaves, twigs and pruned stems. 
All  these  can  be  reservoirs  of last  year's  disease  and 
pest problems. 

Older  roses  that  have  been  untended  for  some  time 
may need extensive renovation to recover their beauty 
and  health.  Older  plants  are  quite  tolerant of renova(cid:173)
tion.  Most roses can be cut to  the ground and recover 
beautifully if watered and fertilized. 

The recommended renovation process is a little gen(cid:173)

tler.  At  the  time  of winter  pruning,  remove  all  canes 
except the youngest three or four canes. Use a saw and 
remove  canes  down  to  the  base.  Don't  leave  stumps. 
Remove all weak twigs and cover large cuts with prun(cid:173)
ing sealer. 

Rosebushes  are  pruned  during  summer  to  increase 
vigor and produce high-quality flowers. Pruning is just 
as  important during  the growing  season  as  during  the 
dormant season.  Summer pruning removes flowers for 
indoor bouquets and prevents seed formation. 

Roses that produce seeds do not produce many flow(cid:173)
ers. Summer pruning also removes weak growth to in(cid:173)
crease plant vigor.  Summer pruning of roses results in 
better flowers on new growth. 

Exhibition pruning produces high-quality flowers by a 
specific  date.  Pruning  basics  are  the  same,  but  plant 
energy  is  concentrated  into  fewer  flowers.  Plants  are 
pruned hard  in winter  and disbudded in  summer.  Ex(cid:173)
perts rub off all but about four buds per cane. 

Timing  is  critical.  If pruning  or  disbudding  is  done 
too early, flowering peaks before show time. Prune too 
late  and  there  won't  be  enough  blooms  to  select  for 
shows. The time between pruning and flowering varies 
according  to  climate.  It  usually  takes  about  one  and 
one-half to two months. Ask experienced exhibitors in 
your  area  about  the  best  time  to  prune.  Prune  your 
bushes a few at a time,  beginning one week before the 
best date.  Continue  pruning  up  to  one week after  the 
best date. 

This  exhibition-quality  rose  is  named  'Honor'.  It  was 
judged the top  1980 All-America selection  by the Ameri(cid:173)
can  Rose  Society.  Exhibition  roses  are judged  on  form, 
substance,  color,  size,  stem  and  foliage,  and  balance 
and proportion. 

PRUNING HYBRID TEAS 
AND GRANDIFLORAS 
These  roses  produce  flowers  on  current-season's 
growth.  Rosebushes  need  moderate  to  heavy  annual 
pruning  to  produce  strong flowering canes.  Prune  to 
maintain three  to six strong,  healthy young canes and 
vigorous basal growth.  Newer plants and plants of low 
vigor  may  not  be  able  to  maintain  six  canes.  Canes 
should  be  uniformly  spaced,  ideally  forming  a  vase 
shape. 

Prune  according  to your purpose.  Prune heavily for 

single  long-stemmed  flowers.  Prune  lightly  for  land(cid:173)
scape  display.  Heavily  pruned  bushes  produce  fewer, 
larger  flowers.  Less-vigorous  varieties  are  pruned 
lower.  Prune  these  varieties  to  about  18  inches  high 
and leave two or three dormant buds.  Vigorous varie(cid:173)
ties are pruned to about 2 feet high.  Two to four buds 
are left on each cane. Excessive heavy pruning of some 
vigorous varieties of roses encourages strong, but flow-
erless shoots. 

Remove old, non-producing canes at the bud union. 
Prune overlapping  interior growth to allow light pene(cid:173)
tration and good air circulation. 

Remove  unnecessary  new  shoots  while  still  small. 
Remaining new shoots should be lightly pinched when 
about  1  foot  high.  Pinching  encourages  development 
of laterals. Heading back new tall shoots at regular dor(cid:173)
mant pruning time may kill the entire cane. 

PRUNING FLORIBUNDAS AND POLYANTHAS 
Floribundas  and  polyanthas  are  vigorous  plants.  Both 
plants produce a continuous succession of large  flower 
clusters.  Flowers  are  smaller  and  less  ideally  formed 
than  hybrid  tea  flowers.  Polyanthas  and  floribundas 
are  usually  grown  more  for  landscape display  than for 
individual long-stemmed flowers. 

When  cutting flowers, remove  the  entire  cluster or 
group of flowers. Cut back to the first outward-pointing 
bud. 

Winter-prune 

to  retain  flower-bearing 

laterals. 
Shorten them  1/4 to  1/3.  Cut crowded,  twiggy clusters 
back  to  a  strong  cane  bud.  Low-growing  floribundas 
tend  to  produce  twiggy  interior growth that should be 
removed.  Keep  six  to  eight  canes.  Keep  plants open, 
with plenty of room to develop new flower clusters. 

Light pruning allows early flowering. Heavy pruning 
encourages new basal growth and late flowering. Prune 
roses harder or lighter from season to season. Pruning 
in this manner will balance plant response according to 
what the plant needs and your desires. 

PRUNING MINIATURE AND PATIO ROSES 
Pruning  needs  vary  with  the  plant.  Some  micro-mini 
roses  need  no  pruning.  Some  macro  rose  varieties 
need  severe  pruning in spring  and touch-up  trimming 
throughout the season. 

To  prune  miniatures,  cut  at  a 45°  angle just  above 

outward-facing buds. Open the plant's center by reduc(cid:173)
ing  the  number  of  twigs.  Covering  pruning  wounds 
with a  sealer is not important because the wounds are 
small. But thick stems may require sealing. 

Sometimes  strong  shoots  appear  and  rapidly  grow 

past  all  other  shoots.  Remove  these  shoots  for  bal(cid:173)
anced growth. 

PRUNING CLIMBING SPORTS 
Allow repeat-blooming  climbing  sports  to become es(cid:173)
tablished  during  the  first  few  years.  Let  these  roses 
grow to the height you desire.  Don't prune too hard at 
planting  time  or climbing  sport  roses  may revert to  a 
bush  form.  After  initial  pruning,  bend  canes  and  tie 
them to a fence or trellis.  Flowering shoots grow from 
these  bent  canes.  The  same  canes  produce  flowering 
shoots  for  many years.  Each  time you  prune,  shorten 
flowering  shoots  or  laterals  to  3  to  6  inches  long. 
Prompt  removal  of  faded  flowers  hastens  repeat 
bloom. 

Climbing  sports  do  not  produce  vigorous  basal 
growth  as  easily  as  bush  roses.  New  replacement 
growth originates high on existing main stems. To en(cid:173)
courage new basal growth, cut back the oldest canes to 
where a new stem develops. 

To  obtain  the  largest-possible  flowers  from  hybrid-
tea climbing sports, remove all lateral growth from the 
previous year.  A  series of long stems grow from hori(cid:173)
zontally  trained-canes.  Each  stem bears  a  magnificent 
bloom.  Climbing  sports  of floribundas  bear  on  many 
cluster-type  laterals.  Keep  these  laterals,  but  shorten 
them by 1/3. 

Pillar  roses  are  similar  to  climbing  sports.  Pillar 
roses are stiff and upright.  These roses usually grow 8 
to  10  feet  high  and  are  ideal  for  training  vertically 
against pillars. 

PRUNING LARGE-FLOWERED CLIMBERS 
Flowers  develop  on  short,  6-  to  12-inch  laterals.  The 
laterals grow from 2- and 3-year-old canes. 

Prune  laterals  in  spring  just  before  buds  break. 
Shorten laterals to 3  to 6 inches or three or four buds. 
In summer,  remove faded flowers to prevent seed pro-

duction.  Summer  pruning  promotes  blooms  from 
repeat-flowering  varieties.  Remove  the  oldest,  dark-
brown canes so new canes can replace old canes. 

PRUNING SPECIES, SHRUB 
AND ONCE-BLOOMING ROSES 
Gallicas,  hybrid  musks  and  species  such  as  Rosa 
rugosa  flower  once  a  year.  These  roses  need  light 
annual  pruning  to  maintain  symmetry  and  remove 
dead  and  diseased  canes.  Remove  flowers  of repeat-
flowering  kinds.  Leave  flowers  of  once-blooming 
kinds so attractive hips can develop. 

Old  roses  such  as  albas,  centifolias,  moss  and 
damask roses  produce flowers on laterals of old wood. 
Shorten long shoots during the dormant season. Short(cid:173)
en  last-season's  most  vigorous  growth  by  1/3.  Cut 
back laterals to about 6 inches long or three buds each. 
Cutting back harder destroys the arching habit. 

Hybrid  perpetual,  China  and  bourbon  roses  are 
vigorous growers. These roses easily become a tangled 
mass  of  new  laterals  and  sublaterals.  Remove  faded 
flowers  and  lightly  thin  dense  growth.  Interior  twiggy 
growth should be removed during dormant season. 

Shrub  roses  and  once-blooming  climbers  include 
yellow  and  white  Rosa  banksiae,  'Belle  of Portugal' 
and  'Mermaid'.  Give  these  roses  plenty  of room  to 
grow.  Little  pruning is required.  Prune  these roses to 
shape  when  young.  When  roses  are  mature,  remove 
twiggy growth and old canes.  In general,  most of these 
species need little  pruning.  Prune old garden roses by 

removing old canes.  Shorten other canes by about 1/3. 
These  roses  create  more  flowers  if  canes  are  arched 
and pegged to the ground. 

PRUNING RAMBLERS 
Ramblers  flower  in  midsummer  on  laterals  of  long, 
flexible  basal  shoots  that  grew  the  previous  season. 
Few true  ramblers  remain  except in areas where  they 
thrive—Nantucket,  Cape  Cod  and  the  Oregon  and 
Washington coasts. These areas usually feature at least 
two  or  three  naturalized  rambling  roses.  'American 

Pillar'  is  the  rambler  often  found  in  old  gardens. 
'Chevy  Chase',  'Dorothy  Perkins',  'Thousand  Beau(cid:173)
ties'  and  'Crimson  Rambler'  are  other  well-known 
rambling roses. 

Hard  winter  pruning  of ramblers  encourages  vigor(cid:173)

ous  growth  next  summer.  Hard  pruning  also  reduces 
the number of flowers until the second summer. Ram(cid:173)
blers  are  usually  not  pruned  and  simply  become  a 
thorny  thicket.  To  prune  ramblers  for  containment 
and  appearance,  remove  all  flowering  canes  to  the 
ground immediately after flowering. 

PRUNING TREE ROSES 
Varieties of hybrid tea, grandiflora and occasionally flo(cid:173)
ribunda  are  grafted  to  trunks  of selected  varieties  of 
wild,  climbing roses  that produce  stiff trunks.  Always 
remove  any  growth  from  tree-rose  trunks  below  the 
upper bud union. Principles of pruning are the same as 
for respective  types  of roses,  but  tree  roses are at eye 
level. An attractive, well-balanced tree structure is im(cid:173)
portant.  Lightly  pruned  tree  roses  are  susceptible  to 
toppling  in  strong  wind.  Heavy  pruning  is  advised, 
depending on the variety. 

'Pink  Peace',  'Electron'  and  'Double  Delight'  are 
hybrid teas that produce dense, bushy flowering heads. 
Popular  grandifloras  for  tree  roses  are  'Ole',  'Pink 
Parfait' and 'Prominent'. These tree roses make small, 
dense heads that produce many flowers. 

Low-growing  floribundas  make  excellent  tree  roses 
or 2-foot-high patio standards.  'Sarabande'  is compact 
and  attractive.  Others  varieties  are  'Angel  Face', 
'Cherish',  'Charisma' and 'Europeana'. 

Tree  roses  do  not renew themselves with new basal 
canes.  Canes should not be removed down to the bud 
union.  Cut back hybrid-tea and grandiflora canes each 
year. Leave one or two buds from the previous season. 
Leave four to six buds on floribunda canes. 

Remember  the  growth-direction  effect  of  pruning. 
Cut  to  outside-facing  buds  to  develop  an  attractively 
shaped head. 

Check support stakes to make sure they are in good 

condition and do not rub or chafe plants. 

Different  varieties  of  tree  roses  produce  different 

shaped  trees.  'Bewitched'  and  'Queen Elizabeth'  pro(cid:173)
duce  tall,  vigorous  upright-growing  standards.  They 
are  two  of  the  largest  tree  roses,  almost  the  size  of 
small  specimen  trees.  'King's  Ransom',  'Mister  Lin(cid:173)
coln' and 'Chrysler Imperial' are vigorous and upright, 
but not quite as tall. 

'Peace',  'Chicago Peace' and 'Tropicana' are tall and 
vigorous.  These varieties  produce  spreading,  rounded 
trees. 

