i~\ Scientific-g 

Greenhouse 
Gardening 

Peter Kincaid  Willmott 
MBE, NDH, FIBiol, AInstPRA 

EP PUBLISHING  LIMITED 

Text and illustrations copyright© EP Publishing Limited  1982 

ISBN  0  7158  0663  7 

First edition 1982 

Published by EP Publishing Limited, Bradford  Road, East Ardsley, Wakefield,  West 
Yorkshire, WF3 2JN,  England 

Printed  and  bound  in Great  Britain  by Butler   & Tanner Ltd,  Frome,  Somerset 

Design: Krystyna  Hewitt 

Illustrations: Tony  Gardiner 

Photographs 
ADAS, Ministry of Agriculture,  Fisheries and  Food/Crown  copyright: pp. 29, 30,119,  120 
Brian Furner: pp.  88,90,94.156 
Halls Homes and Gardens Ltd.. Tonbridge: p. 25 
Douglas Hewitt: cover 
ICI Ltd., Plant Protection  Division: pp. 57,58,61 
Pershore College of Horticulture: pp.  189,190 
P.K.Willmott:pp.7,8 

All other photographs: Philip Gardner/EP Publishing  Ltd. 

This book is copyright  under the Berne Convention. All rights are reserved. Apart  from  any 
fair dealing for the purpose of private study, research, criticism or review, as permitted  under 
the Copyright  Act,  1956, no part of this publication  may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted  in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,  chemical, 
mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without  the prior permission of 
t he  copyright owner. Enquiries should be addressed to the Publishers. 

LIBRARY 

1 
\ 
~  UNIVERu...  J,-  ALBERTA 
1 
%*ur-'*MrW.tA\L,".~> tU*U>\WKtaKWKWKWrK\0% 

Chapter 1 

Introduction 

Greenhouses became an essential part of the garden from  the latter part of 
the eighteenth century onwards. Such structures had long been in the 
minds of gardeners but their development had had to await the invention 
and  production of cheap sheet  glass. This in its turn had to wait upon the 
industrial revolution and the development of the necessary techniques. 

Readers of Jane Austen's Northanger  Abbey  will recall General Tilney, 

with great pride, showing young Catherine Moreland  his greenhouses. 
Jane Austen was writing this novel in about  1800, clearly showing that in 
the gardens of the great houses of that time greenhouses were well 
established. By the middle of the last century they were very much a 
status symbol among the gentry, and there was competition to see who 
could own the biggest. The prize probably went to the Duke of Devonshire 
whose head gardener, Joseph Paxton, built the famous glasshouse at 
Chatsworth, a project of such success that he went on to design and 
supervise the erection of the Crystal Palace in Hyde Park for the Great 
Exhibition of 1851. 

The designs worked out in the early days changed little until the 1950s. 
Houses, some 8.5-9 m (28-30ft)  wide with eaves at  1.5 m (5 ft)  and a span 
roof with a ridge at 4.0-4.3 m (l3orl4ft),  were developed for growing 
vines, and were later found equally suitable for tomatoes. Haifa  vinery 
was often  erected against a wall to form a lean-to house, very popular 
against the walls of kitchen gardens. Smaller houses, some 4^4.3  m(13or 
14 ft)  wide and 2.5-3 m (8 or 9 ft)  to the ridge, also proved extremely  useful 
for a whole variety of purposes. Market gardeners found them  especially 
useful for cucumbers, and although commercial gardeners had used  them 
before that time for producing pot plants of the kind favoured  by the 
Victorians, they became known as cucumber houses. Greenhouses with 
very low walls were sometimes constructed over excavations and were 

The exterior of  the 
Victorian  Winter  Garden 
at  Wentworth Castle in 
South Yorkshire.  Now  the 
glazed  ridge capable of 
accommodating quite  tall 
palms or other  trees. 

9 

Fi|j.  1: cross-sections of 
traditional  greenhouses. 
Clockwise from  top  left: 
cucumber  house; 
propagation  house; single-
span Dutch-light  house; 
vinery. 

brick  base 

brick  base 

known as pits. This clumsy arrangement, now extinct, was largely a 
method of trying to conserve heat before central heating had been 
invented by a later generation of greenhouse growers. Another totally 
obsolete idea was that of a glass frame of sufficient  size leaned against a 
wall to forward the growth of a peach or nectarine trained  underneath. 
This was a peach case, which featured  quite often  in garden  literature 
written before the Second World  War. 

Once reliable heating systems were available, the conservatory  became 

a necessary addition to the gentleman's garden. Here were displayed 
flowering plants which a host could show off to his guests throughout the 
year. Most grand of all was the Winter Garden, a greenhouse of very 
generous proportions where a whole variety of temperate plants could be 
permanently  planted safe from  the frost.  Sometimes it adjoined  the 
dwelling itself so a stroll in a tiny simulated Mediterranean world was a 
pleasant alternative to one in the garden outside when the weather was too 
cold. 

The age of the great garden has probably gone for ever, and with it its 
variety of glasshouses. The pineapple pit, the stove (an early name for a 
tropical house), the orchid house, the cool vinery, the heated vinery, the 
peach case, the conservatory and all the rest have passed into history. But 
the fascination  of growing plants under glass remains, and is being enjoyed 
by amateur gardeners all over the country more and more. 

So popular has the small greenhouse become, and so eager for 

knowledge its owner, that an attempt is made in the following pages to 
explain as straightforwardly  as possible the management of a small 
greenhouse and the methods of growing the widest possible range of 
plants, both edible and  decorative. 

10 

Chapter 2 

The greenhouse  microclimate 

Temperature 
and humidity 

Light 
transmission 

When a greenhouse is constructed, the space inside constitutes a special 
environment possessing its own miniature climate, known as the 
greenhouse microclimate. The properties of this microclimate are 
somewhat different  from those of the general climate outside. 

The first of these differences  is that the temperature within the greenhouse 
is always higher than that of the air outside. When the sun is shining 
brightly the difference  may be very great indeed, but on clear winter  nights 
it can be as little as  2 or 3 C° (centigrade degrees) (3-^5 F°), still a little 
warmer. The explanation for this is that heat enters the greenhouse by 
means of radiation  from  the sun and leaves it by means of radiation  from 
the ground which it covers. The radiant  heat from the sun is of short 
wavelengths and passes readily through glass, while that from the earth is 
of longer wavelengths and passes much less readily through glass. There is, 
therefore, a net gain due to the fact that glass behaves rather like a non(cid:173)
return valve for radiant heat. This is called the 'greenhouse effect'  and  is a 
well-known phenomenon  in buildings with large windows and in closed 
motor cars. The need to remove excess heat from greenhouses during 
periods of bright sunshine led, at a very early stage in their  development, 
to the inclusion of ventilators in their  construction. 

An obvious difference  between the greenhouse microclimate and  the 
general climate is that no rain falls on the soil it covers. If this soil is used 
for growing plants serious consequences can arise if it is not irrigated by 
approximately the same amount of water it would have received  naturally 
as rain. 

The relative humidity of the air within the greenhouse is usually  higher 

than outside it and this, coupled with its stillness when the vents are 
closed, provides conditions very favourable for the germination and  rapid 
development of the spores of the fungi  causing mildews and rots. Exerting 
some control over relative humidity (R.H.) is yet another task forced  upon 
the gardener if he is to manage his greenhouse  successfully. 

Another way in which the microclimate is different  is in respect of light. By 
no means all of the light coming from the sun is able to penetrate into the 
greenhouse, and so it is always darker within the house than outside it. In 
summer,  provided it is not shaded by trees or buildings, there is light in 
abundance  and sufficient  enters the house to provide for all the needs of 
the plants. 

During the winter there is insufficient  natural light for plants to grow in 

the open, let alone under glass, so it is obvious that everything  possible 
must be done to allow the maximum amount of light to enter the 
greenhouse. 

It  would  be  quite  simple,  albeit  expensive,  to  provide  sufficient  heat 

within a greenhouse during the winter months to make it warm enough for 
tomatoes,  but  while  they  might  survive  they  would  certainly  not  grow 
satisfactorily,  neither would they set and provide ripened fruit. This would 
be entirely  due  to insufficient  light energy  reaching their  leaves to enable 
them  to photosynthesise,  the process by which plants manufacture  sugars 
and starches which they use for growth and energy  production. 

If a greenhouse is to be used only from mid-April to mid-October  the 
light problem is greatly reduced. But if it is heated and to be used in the 
winter months the problem is acute. There are five factors which control 
light transmission  into the house: the shade cast by buildings and  trees; 
the shade cast by opaque parts of the greenhouse such as glazing bars; the 
design of the house; its orientation; and last but by no means least, the 
cleanness of the glass. 

It is a matter of common sense that the greenhouse should have an 

unobstructed  view of the southern sky and also the southern halves of the 
eastern and western ones. While this may be common sense, it may be 

N 

11 

Fig. 2: the traverse of the 
sun  relative to the 
southern  horizon 
throughout  the year. 
(After  Lawrence,  1948.) 

W 

almost impossible to achieve in some gardens. Hedges, trees, fences  and 
neighbouring houses cannot be removed and may affect  the decision 
whether or not to have a greenhouse, or at least whether to heat it. For 
eight weeks either side of Christmas the mean height of the sun above the 
horizon is about  12 degrees at 52° latitude (southern England).  Before 
buying a greenhouse, then, stand where you intend to put it and take a look 
to the south, trying to estimate what angle of elevation you need to get a 
clear view of the sky. If it exceeds 12 degrees most of the winter sunshine 
will be lost, and heating in winter would be a doubtful  proposition. If it 
exceeds 25 degrees all the winter sunshine will be lost and unless you 
intend to grow ferns or other shade-tolerant plants heating would be folly. 
If it exceeds about 40 degrees the greenhouse will be at a  permanent 

12 

elevation of midday  sun  at summer solstice 

mean  summer  elevation 

elevation  of midday  sun at  spring and  autumn  equinoxes 

elevation of midday sun at  winter  solstice 

mean  winter  elevation 

Fig. 3: the elevation  of the 
sun  in the  four  seasons 
(latitude 52"). 

disadvantage even in midsummer, and not really worthwhile if  frustration 
and disappointment  are to be avoided. 

The shadows cast by the opaque parts of the greenhouse  structure 
cannot be avoided, but a considerable amount of effort  has gone into 
designs which reduce them to the minimum. It all boils down to using the 
largest sheet of glass together with the smallest size of glazing bar and 
other structural  parts consistent with strength and safety. The smallest 
sheet of glass acceptable today is one measuring 600 x 600 mm  (2 ft  x 2  ft). 
Best is the sheet of glass used for a Dutch light which measures 1423 x 731 
mm (56 x 28$in),  but unless this is supported on all four sides by a glazing 
bar, the glass needs to be of very heavy gauge. This combination of large 
size of glass with a small size of bar is now achieved by building the house 
with metal, using glazing strips which are made of aluminium  alloy (which 
never requires painting). If the house exceeds a certain size the most 
successful  arrangement is to have a framework of zinc-galvanised steel 

Fig. 4; the angle of 
incidence (a) of a  light-ray 
on a sheet of glass. 

glass in  horizontal plane: 90° 

with aluminium-alloy cladding. Few garden greenhouses, however, exceed 
the size where they cannot be made entirely of glass and aluminium  alloy. 
The design, insofar as its shape is concerned, has a direct bearing upon 
light transmission  because it determines the angle at which rays of light 
from the sun strike the glass. This angle is known as the angle of incidence 
(see Fig. 4) and it can vary from 0° to  90°. If the light strikes the glass at  0°, 
that is to say perpendicularly, then 90 per cent of it will pass through 
the glass. There is no appreciable loss of light transmission  until the angle 
of incidence exceeds 40° after which it drops very rapidly to a point where 

13 

FiB. 5:  the percentage of 
lignt transmitted  through 
a pane of glass as a 
function  of the angle of 
incidence. Most of the 
light not  transmitted  is 
reflected  off.  (After 
Lawrence,  1948.) 

0° 

20° 

10* 
30° 
angle of  incidence 

40 

T 
60° 

T 
70° 

T 
80° 

90° 

more light is reflected  back than  passes through (see Fig. 5). The 
importance of havingthe smallest possible angle of incidence between 
glass and sunbeam is easy enough to understand, but it must  be 
considered along with the fourth factor,  which is the orientation of the 
greenhouse. 

Traditionally greenhouses were orientated north-south on the correct 
assumption  that each side of the greenhouse would receive an equal 
amount of sunshine during the course of a day provided that  the weather 
stayed more or less the same. Unfortunately  it means that in the winter 
each side gets a more or less equal share of very little. This is because the 
mean angle of incidence will be 78°, when less than 50 per cent of the 
incident  (direct)  light will get through the glass. Things are much worse 
than this, however, because the lower the angle of the sun the greater is the 

Orientation 

14 

shadow  from 
glazing bar 1 

Fig. 6: the  shadow cast  by 
wooden glazing  bars in 
winter in a house oriented 
north-south. The  lower 
the elevation of the sun.  the 
greater  the shade. 

The shading  effect  can 

be greatly  reduced  by 
orienting  the house 
east-west, or by using 
smaller  aluminium  glazing 
bars. 

Fig. 7: this  uneven-span 
greenhouse allows the  best 
transmission of winter 
sunlight, but  is much  more 
expensive  than  houses of 
conventional  design. 

- ^S 

shadow cast by the glazing bars (see Fig 6). 

Our attention was first drawn to these facts by one of this century's 

greatest gardeners, Mr W.J. C. Lawrence, when he was the Head of the 
Garden Department at the John Lines Horticultural  Institution  at 
Merton, England. (Incidentally he, with his colleague J. C. Newall, 
devised the John Innes Composts; see page 32.) Lawrence  became 
convinced that it was far more sensible to orientate greenhouses  east-west. 
He was able to show that  a greenhouse so orientated  transmitted at  least 
27 per cent more of the winter light. He was by no means satisfied  with this 
and went on to prove that by having a greenhouse with an uneven span  (see 
Fig. 7) the light transmission could be increased  by  63 per cent. In spite of 

20ft 

his great enthusiasm  the uneven span houses never really caught on, 
because it was found  to be easier to construct houses with higher eaves (see 
Fig. 9), and get almost the same advantage. Orientation east-west, on the 
other hand, is now universally accepted wherever it is possible and is 
considered essential for propagating houses. The cautionary  words 
'wherever possible' are put in because the commercial grower who has 

15 

Fi». 8: winter  light 
transmission through  the 
south wall of an  east-west 
oriented greenhouse.  For 
every 4. units of width  the 
south wall should be one 
unit  high in order to make 
best  use of the winter 
sunshine. 

12 

13 

several greenhouses faces a considerable problem. If he orientates  his 
houses east-west the most southerly house will shade the one behind it and 
this in its turn, the next one, and so on. This dilemma can only be avoided 
by placing the houses sufficiently  far apart to avoid mutual shading. This, 
unfortunately,  is greedy of expensive land and increases heating costs, 
both installation and running costs. This kind of difficulty  does not really 
concern the amateur who is rarely in a situation where he cannot orientate 
his greenhouse east—west. 

If you wish to have two greenhouses and do not have sufficient  room in 

the garden to site them so that no mutual shading occurs, then you are best 
advised to orientate them north-south as an adjacent  pair. 

30° mean  elevation  of sun  in  summer 

Fig. 9: sunlight  falling on 
a vinery-style  greenhouse 
oriented  east-west. 

In winter the  angle of 
incidence on the vertical 
south wall is 12°. at  which 
light transmision  is nearly 
90'..  But  the  angle of 
incidence on the 30° roof is 
48°. at which  light 
transmission  is reduced  to 
UK. 

In summer  the angle of 
incidence  is about  30° on 
both wall and  roof, at 
which  light transmission  is 
nearly 90%. 

Light  transmission  in 

winter can  be improved  by 
raising the  height of the 
walls. 

12° mean  elevation 

of sun in  winter 

30ft 

If the best possible greenhouse has been bought and orientated  east-west 
with an unobstructed view of the southern sky, all the gains can be brought 
to nothing if the glass is allowed to become dirty. In urban areas, in spite of 
smoke abatement  measures, glass will have become sufficiently  dirty 
within about six weeks for 10 per cent of the available light to be lost, and 
in twice this length of time the loss could have reached  20 per cent. 

It all starts with dust settling on the glass. This happens very quickly 

and after  a few days it starts to bond together onto the glass to form a skin 
which requires the physical effort  of wet brushing to remove it. In  urban 
areas, effluent  from  chimney and car exhausts adds to the dust an oily 

14ft 

Dirty  glass 

16 

Diffused and 
direct light 

ingredient (like traffic film) making the deposit even more difficult  to 
shift. In the country the problem is by no means absent. The dust  settles 
just the same and very soon forms a surface on which algae can take hold to 
form a green film, and where the glass abuts to the glazing bar and  water 
lingers even moss will start to appear. This 'country dirt' is just as opaque 
as 'town dirt' and as difficult  to shift. The only cure, albeit a temporary 
one, is to scrub the glass clean with a stiff  brush or broom. (Detergent  may 
be needed for town dirt.) Prevention is by far the best answer, and can be 
achieved by frequent  hosing down of the glass before the dust has had  time 
to stick firmly to it. 

Keeping the inside of the greenhouse clean is less important  for light 

transmission,  but is a task that  will be done regularly by the  conscientious 
gardener. 

The 'doubting Thomases' may well say that  their greenhouse  is obstructed 
to the south and the glass is not all that clean, yet there is still plenty of 
light in it. This is perfectly true because they are talking about diffused  or 
reflected  light which comes in through the glass from all parts of the sky. It 
has never been possible to say precisely to what extent diffused  light 
assists the plants to  grow. It certainly does not give the leaves anything like 
the same amount of light energy as direct  light, as can readily be 
demonstrated  by bringing a plant from where it can receive direct 
unimpeded  light into a well-lit room in a house, and watching its 
deterioration. All the evidence we have confirms  beyond doubt that it is 
direct sunshine which is all-important in making plants grow, and  the 
greenhouse gardener who grows plants under glass must make this the first 
article of his faith. 

• 

Chapter 3 

Types of small  greenhouse 

Timber 

Greenhouses were traditionally constructed  from selected well-seasoned 
softwood. This was cheap, plentiful  and readily machined  to give lengths 
of timber with variable cross-sectional shapes (see Fig. 10). Two kinds of 
timber proved themselves superior for the purpose: the first,  Baltic 
Redwood, is the wood of the Scots Pine (Pinus  sylvestris),  but comes from 
continental  Europe; and the second, British Columbian  pine 
(Pseudotsuga  taxifolia),  comes from  Canada. 

Baltic Redwood is of even grain, easily nailed without splitting and with 

good strength-to-weight  ratio, enabling load-bearing members to have 
relatively small cross-sectional  areas. British Columbian  pine has the 
disadvantages that  it splits easily when nailed, has a lifting grain  when 
planed and does not readily absorb preservatives, but its great  advantage 
is that  it can be obtained in long straight-grained lengths. A common 
joinery timber that should be avoided because it has a very low durability 
is deal or whitewood, the timber of Norway Spruce 

(Piceaabies). 

Timber is now very expensive, but its main drawback  is that  being an 
organic material it will rot, or in modern jargon is biodegradable,  unless 
carefully  preserved and protected. Wood for greenhouses is usually 
protected  by means of painting. The first coat, or primer,  is of a paint 
made of linseed oil and white lead which is well worked into all  surfaces 
and joints. It is the most important  coat and provides a seal round  the 
timber to protect it both from rot-causing fungi  and from absorbing  water. 
After  the primer, an undercoat is applied to provide the correct colour base 
for the topcoat. In the case of greenhouses the topcoat will be white in order 
to give maximum reflection  of light, but even so it is usual to tint  the 
undercoat  slightly so that any areas missed when applying the topcoat will 
readily show, and enable an even cover to be obtained. Many  modern 
priming paints are not lead-based but they appear to be equally or even  

FI*. ioaom««ion.o( 
some common  limber 
members of an  English 

jin 

glazing bar 

ridgeboard 

more satisfactory. Topcoats have a gloss finish which makes them  water-
repellent. 

Paints are themselves biodegradable, and after three or four years they 

crack and flake and so need rubbing down and repainting to protect the 
priming underneath. Paint is only effective  so long as it provides a seal and 
failure to maintain  this quickly leads to deterioration of the wood. 

To guard against the shortcomings of paint  it is highly desirable  that 

softwood  is given preservative treatment before painting commences. The 
amateur is restricted to brushing or spraying wood with a  copper-based 
preservative. This must be applied liberally, particularly to the ends of all 
pieces before they are erected. When the preservative is dry the  painting 
can begin. However, it is possible to purchase worked timber  impregnated 
with fungicidal  and insecticidal preservatives. Such wood is described as 
having been 'pressure-treated'. It has a very long life particularly if 
subsequently painted. If pressure-treated  timber is sawn the ends must be 
dipped  in a copper  preservative. 

Western Red Cedar  (Thuja  plicata),  although  now expensive, is 

popular  for small  greenhouses. It is known  as cedarwood,  is of  attractive 
appearance  and does not need  painting or preserving. It is a weak  timber 
and consequently  unsuitable for  large houses. It splits easily and as it will 
remain  unpainted  only non-corrosive nails or screws should  be used.  The 
same applies to teak  except that  its cost is such that  its use is virtually 
extinct. 

There are two styles of modern greenhouse: the first is often described as 
an English greenhouse, and the second is known as a Dutch light  house. 

The English greenhouse usually stands on low brick walls, its woodwork 

is painted white and glazed with overlapping sheets of glass set in putty 
and secured with sprigs. Provided it has sheets of glass 600 x 600 mm  (2 ft  x 
2 ft)  it has much to commend it, except the disadvantage of having to 
paint  it inside and out every third  year. 

Aluminium-alloy greenhouses are constructed in the style of the  English 

greenhouse. Their advantage of high light transmission has already been 
stressed  but the fact that they do not require any painting makes them 
highly attractive. The overlapping sheets of glass usually rest on plastic 
cushions and are secured by stainless-steel clips or metal clamping strips. 
They are mass-produced and are, therefore,  highly competitive in price. 

18 

Styles of 
greenhouse 

Two ell-metal  English-
style greenhouses  in an 
amateur's  garden.  These 
are full  of plants, all 
arranged  in a tidy  fashion, 
and  the whole is 
scrupulously  clean  in  the 
interests of good  hygiene. 

19 

The second style is the Dutch light house which is of less pleasing 

appearance. It is usually assembled from  prefabricated  frames of 
pressure-treated timber glazed with sheets of Dutch light glass and all 
supplied  as a kit. Precast concrete slabs are usually included and form  the 
base on which the house stands. The sheets of glass slide into the wooden 
frames and are secured by wooden cleats, nailed onto the frame  with 
galvanised nails. Putty is not required. Dutch light houses are very 
serviceable. The pressure-treated  timber never requires painting and  has 
a known  life of thirty years. Also it is a relatively simple matter to take  the 
house to pieces and re-assemble it on another site if the need arises. 

There are then three choices: English greenhouses, pleasing in 

appearance, but which must be painted both inside and out at regular and 
frequent  intervals; Dutch light houses with the advantages of relative 
cheapness, low maintenance and excellent light transmission;  aluminium 
alloy houses, easily cleaned with virtually no maintenance and good light 
transmission. The latter two have really superseded the first, but  the 
choice between them to some extent depends upon the purpose to which 
the house is to be put; the Dutch light type is highly suitable for tomatoes, 
cucumbers and lettuce grown as unheated crops, and the  aluminium-alloy 
house comes into its own if it is to be heated or if it is intended  to provide it 
with staging for plants in containers. 

Both Dutch light and metal houses can be obtained in the so-called 

'Gazebo style' (Fig. 11) which is very useful for small gardens where space 
is at a premium. A domed house in the metal range  is of geodetic design 
and is again especially useful for small areas. 

Fig.  11:  gazeho-style 
greenhouse. 

20 

The round, tower or 
gazebo style of  greenhouse 
which has  excellent 
properties of light 
transmission and  can  be 
accommodated  in a very 
small  area. 

It is impossible to give prices for the different  types of greenhouse 

because of the effects of inflation,  quality differences  between 
manufacturers  and the increasing costs per unit area the smaller the house 
becomes. Some guidance may come from some rather generalised 
statistics which have averaged the list prices of small greenhouses and 
presented them on a percentage basis. 

If the cost per square metre of a Dutch light house is taken as 100 per 

cent, then the comparisons are as follows: 

Dutch light house 
Traditional  English (softwood) 
Traditional  English  (Western Red Cedar) 
Aluminium alloy 

100% 
107', 
112'r 
93', 

These figures exclude delivery, site work, erection, painting and glazing. 
When these are taken into account the disparity between the  traditional 
English types and the others is increased. 

21 

Chapter 4 

Plastic  structures 

Plastic film is often described as a glass-substitute and to some extent this 
is true, although enthusiasts prefer to think of it as a substance in its own 
right commanding its own disciplines within  horticulture. 

The best known, cheapest and most widely used of all is, of course, 

polyethylene chloride, better known as 'polythene'. The low-density  form 
of the material which is used in horticulture is naturally  flexible,  and 
although not biodegradable it rapidly deteriorates under the influence of 
ultra-violet light to become brittle and readily torn, particularly so at 
warmer temperatures. To delay deterioration  horticultural  polythene has 
ultra-violet-light absorbers added to it during manufacture.  The fact  that 
it then no longer allows ultra-violet light to be transmitted  through it is of 
no consequence as in this respect it is comparable with glass. Another of its 
advantages is that  it remains flexible over the range of temperatures  which 
occur in temperate countries (middle latitude climate). 

It transmits about 86 per cent of the visible light and so compares well 

with glass which transmits about 90 per cent, and also allows nearly 80 per 
cent of the radiant  heat from the sun to pass through it. Unlike glass it 
allows the long-wave radiation from the ear th to pass through it readily, so 
that on clear nights the temperatures in polythene houses drop rapidly 
and on occasions a lower temperature has been recorded inside the house 
than  the air temperature outside. This fact,  while it is a  considerable 
disadvantage when it comes to frost protection, also means that  the 
greenhouse effect  is reduced so that  'poly-houses' do not get as hot  as 
glasshouses in bright sunshine and thus can manage with less ventilation. 

Finally polythene has the special properties of being permeable to 

oxygen and carbon dioxide and almost impermeable to water. It is these 
qualities which make it such a useful  material for covering seed trays, 
sealing grafts, air layers and beds or boxes of cuttings. 

Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is also a well-known material. It is a rigid 

\  /^ 

\, 

The interior of a walk-in 
polythene  tunnel, which  in 
this case is being used  for 
erowing-on  nursery stock 
but  could  equally  well be 
used  for the  production of 
lettuces,  tomatoes, or 
other food crops. The 
circular hole in  the 
polythene  is for 
ventilation. 

\ 

'  >"*'.'  ',< 

material but can be plasticised to produce a flexible film. Like polythene it 
deteriorates under the influence of ultra-violet light and if used as a 
cladding material for plant houses has to have ultra-violet  absorbers 
added during manufacture.  It has a longer life than polythene, some 
claiming it to be twice as long. It transmits light marginally better  but 
transmits radiant  heat to a much lesser extent. Because of this the long(cid:173)
wave heat radiation from the soil it covers is largely held back thus giving 
much warmer conditions at night, particularly on clear nights. It  is only 
slightly permeable to oxygen and carbon dioxide and is, therefore, of much 
less use to the propagator. PVC is more expensive than polythene and has 
not seriously rivalled  it. 

There are a number of other clear plastic films with  interesting 

properties but it is beyond the scope of this book to describe them as they 
are still subject to trial and experiment. At the moment it seems unlikely 
that  polythene will be superseded. 

When polythene was first used as a glass substitute it was on structures 

of more or less orthodox greenhouse design where it performed  well enough 
except that it was very prone to deterioration where it passed over wooden 
supports and could become very warm in sunshine. As time went by the 
small plastic cloche, or tunnel, which had achieved considerable success, 
was enlarged into the 'walk-in' tunnel. This was originally a semi-circle 4.3 
m (14 ft)  wide and half as high, but is now available in a variety of widths 
up to 9 m (30ft).  Such tunnels are covered with 500 or 600 gauge polythene 
and are available from  many  manufacturers. 

Walk-in tunnels are used in commerce for the production of lettuces 

22 

Fig.  12: walk-in  plastic 
tunnel. 

23 

(sometimes throughout  the whole year), tomatoes, peppers and  other 
crops, and by nurserymen  both for propagation from  cuttings and  for 
raising young plants in containers. For the amateur gardener a walk-in 
tunnel is not without its attractions for use as an unhealed structure  for 
growing tomatoes or any plant  that  might otherwise be grown in a cold 
greenhouse. There is the attraction of the low capital cost compared  with 
glass and the ease with which it can be erected on a fresh site in order to 
avoid soil problems. The possibility of heating is not ruled out but, on the 
other hand,  it runs somewhat counter to the low-cost production  concept 
by which tunnels are characterised. The modern tunnels can be fitted  with 
ventilation  provision, proper doors and so  on. The life of the cladding does 
not normally exceed  18 months, and its replacement should really be 
regarded as an annual maintenance  routine. 

One interesting idea for plastic houses was the 'bubble' house, 

consisting of a single large sheet inflated  with air by means of a pump. 
Several were constructed for trial purposes but proved to have 
shortcomings which eventually  led to their abandonment.  Other 
sophistications are double-skinned  houses where a layer of air between  the 
two skins acts as an insulator and reduces considerably the radiation  and 
conduction losses. In some versions the two skins are kept apart  by tension 
of the film over separators, and in some sophisticated designs by 
pressurised air from a pump. 

The plastic house or structure  is still in the developmental stage, and it 

is possible that further  advances will be made. It is difficult,  however, to 
see how the curvilinear tunnel with its excellent  light-transmitting 
properties could be improved  upon. 

Trials are now in progress to evaluate the use of rigid plastic sheets as an 

alternative to glass on greenhouses of permanent and  conventional 
construction. The cladding is fabricated  in the form of panels consisting  of 
two or three sheets of rigid plastic (polycarbonate)  sealed all round  their 
edges to provide condensation-proof  and dust-proof double or triple 
glazing. Greenhouses so cladded  have extremely good properties of heat 
retention when compared with those using glass, which compensates  for 
their higher costs of construction: so their ultimate success will depend 
upon the lasting qualities of the plastic in respect of light and 
temperature. 

Polythene film is available as follows: 

1.  600 gauge  (150fim)  containing an ultra-violet-light inhibitor and  used 
for tunnel houses. Sizes of sheet normally quoted are: 

6.5  x50m  21.3 x  164 ft 
7.5  x50m  24.6x  164ft 
9.25 x 40 m  30.3 x  131.2ft 
11.25 x 40 m  36.9 x  131.2ft 

2.  500 gauge  (125 nm)  containing an ultra-violet-light inhibitor and used 
for the same purposes as 600 gauge, which has now largely superseded  it 
because of its greater strength and longer life (two years). 
3.  150 gauge  (38nm)  used for a variety of purposes, e.g. covering seed 
containers and cuttings. It is available as clear, opaque, green and  black 
film; one type used for greenhouse lining is treated  to reduce  condensation. 
4.  200 gauge  (50nm),  dense black, used for blacking-out plants for day-
length control. 
5.  Bubble polythene, a film containing air bubbles and used for lining 
greenhouses for fuel saving in winter. 

'J-I 

Chapter 5 

Heating and  ventilation 

Heating greenhouses makes it possible to extend the range of plants grown 
as well as making their yields earlier and greater. The advantage,  however, 
is one for which a fairly  high price has to be paid. Tables in Appendix I 
show comparisons of estimated  heating costs using different  heat sources. 
In the United  Kingdom gas is the cheapest, oil and solid fuel are more 
expensive and electricity has become too expensive to be considered. Oil 
and gas systems have advantages over solid fuel: they are more convenient 
to manage, and have a very rapid response to automatic controls. It is, of 
course, possible to heat greenhouses from  an extension of a domestic 
central-heating system, a method which avoids the cost of a separate 
boiler and boiler house. 

Heat can be supplied to the greenhouse in various  ways. When using 

fossil fuels  (coal, oil, gas) it is usual to burn the fuel outside the greenhouse 
in a furnace,  known as the boiler, and to convey the heat  produced, or as 
much of it as possible, into the house by means of hot water or steam.  The 
heat then passes into the atmosphere of the greenhouse through the walls 
of the pipes which carry the water or steam. The steam will condense  back 
into water and will be returned  to the boiler, or the water will return to be 
re-heated. 

Fig.  13: diagrammatic 
representation of a 
hot-water heating  system. 
The  height  of the header 
tank  above the  boiler 
determines the  water-
pressure  in the system. 

air bleed  valve 

25 

A direct  gas-fired 
greenhouse  heater. In auch 
heaters combustion  is 
complete, there are no 
toxic waste products,  and, 
because  the heater is 
inside the greenhouse  and 
does not  have a Hue, the 
efficiency  is extremely 
high. 

The size of the pipes through which hot water circulates has a  profound 
effect  on the properties of the heating system. The 100 mm {4 in)  diameter 
cast-iron pipes which were used almost universally until the  1950s give a 
system with what is called 'high thermal inertia'. This means that  the 
system contains a large amount  of water which takes a long time to heat 
and an equally long time to cool down, and is thus slow to respond to 
automatic control. Modern systems use small-bore pipes made of mild 
steel with diameters of 38 mm  (1\ in) or  less. Such systems hold a small 
amount of water and heat and cool rapidly, that is to say they have a low 
thermal inertia and are thus highly responsive to automatic  control. 
Because of the greater viscous resistance that small pipes offer to the flow 
of water, an electric pump is essential to bring about  the rapid  circulation 
of the water required. Small-bore systems are usually described  as high(cid:173)
speed hot water systems and are very similar to modern  central-heating 
systems. 

Another method  is to circulate the air in the glasshouse through a heater 

by means of a fan. In large commercial glasshouses the air is sometimes 
circulated  through ducts made with plastic film from  which it escapes at 
intervals through holes along their lengths. Air heating systems, using fan 
electrical heaters, have been used in garden greenhouses but because of 
the higher cost of electricity their popularity is in decline. 

An attractive alternative to heating systems which require the 

installation of heating pipes is that of natural-gas heaters. These stand  in 
the centre of the greenhouse, and are chimneyless. They require no 
connections other than to a gas main. Pilot  flames  ignite the gas when the 
thermostat indicates that heat is required. The gas burns completely, 
producing carbon dioxide and water as the combustion  products. The 
former assists the plants in efficient  photosynthesis, and the water vapour 
increases the relative humidity. Condensation may be an  inconvenient 
consequence when the temperature falls. There is negligible danger  from 
phytotoxic waste products of combustion such as carbon monoxide or 
sulphur dioxide. Householders with gas central-heating systems who 
benefit  from  special tariff  arrangements  will find natural gas an 
attractive  proposition. Before committing  yourself to a direct  gas-fired 
heater,  however, you  would be well advised to check that  the cost of the 
heater is less than  the cost of extending your domestic  heating  system 
into the  greenhouse. 

Bear in mind also that some efficiency  is lost at the lower end of the 

greenhouse temperature range—below  10°C (50° F)—because  of the pilot-
jet gas consumption. 

Various units are available with different  ratings. The  3 kW {10,000 

Btu)  is the most widely supplied. 

Propane heaters are worth considering in areas where natural gas is not 
available. The gas cylinders require to be fitted with a  pressure-regulating 
valve. 'Bottled' gas is much more expensive than natural gas, but 
competitive in price compared with  electricity. 

Great caution must be exercised in the use of any chimneyless  paraffin 

heater which burns inside the greenhouse, because unless the  burner 
mechanism  is such that total combustion of the fuel takes place the plants 
will be killed by carbon monoxide poisoning. Only the highest grade of 
paraffin  can be used, in which the sulphur  content  is low enough  to 
prevent  the formation  of levels of sulphur  dioxide sufficient  to be 
phytotoxic  (poisonous to plants). 

26 

Heat loss 

Thermostats 

The heat that is released into the greenhouse by the heatingsystem  is lost 
to the outside atmosphere by convection of the warm air through  the 
overlaps in the  glass. This loss is greatest when it is dry and windy and 
least when it is wet and sti  11 because then water tends to seal the gap where 
the sheets of glass overlap. Losses also take place by conduction of the  heat 
through the shell of the house, a loss that is roughly proportional to the 
difference  between the inside and outside temperatures. Finally heat is 
lost by radiation, which is greatest during clear nights and least  during 
cloudy ones. 

The total heat loss from the house per hour represents the amount of 

heat which must  be put into it in order to maintain a steady temperature. 
There are simple methods for calculating heat requirements and these are 
explained  in Appendix I. 

During the daytime when the house needs to have as much  light 

entering it as possible nothing very much can be done to reduce heat 
losses, other than  the creation of some kind of shelter to reduce  windspeed. 
Cold winds greatly increase heat loss, and shelter belts of trees and  hedges 
acting as a windbreak  have a considerable effect  in reducing heat loss. 
They must not, however, intercept the light from the sun or any gain 
provided in fuel saving is lost by the shade they cast. At night the erection 
of a screen a few inches away from  the glass brings about a very substantial 
reduction  in heat loss. Much effort  is being expended  by engineers to 
devise effective  means of installing thermal screens, as they are called, 
which can be put automatically into position at dusk and  similarly 
removed at dawn. Polythene and other plastic film, and special  fabricated 
plastic cloths, are all effective  but plastic film is the cheapest. It is not too 
difficult  for the amateur to install a thermal screen of plastic film 
suspended over his crop during the hours of darkness, at times of the year 
when heat losses are high. 

It is very necessary these days because of the high cost of all fuels  to have a 
heating system that is controlled automatically so that as soon as the 
desired temperature is reached  the burner is shut off until heat is required 
again. Therefore it is necessary to install a thermostat to control the  boiler. 
This is simple enough if oil or gas boilers are being used but is rather  more 
difficult  when solid fuel is used, for the simple reason that a coal fire 
cannot be switched off and on like gas or oil burners. It must be allowed to 
die down but given enough fuel  and air to keep it alight and hot enough to 
prevent  corrosion of the boiler. 

Thermostats must  be positioned carefully  so that they control  the 

temperature of the greenhouse where the plants are actually growing, but 
more important  is the necessity of protecting them from  radiation  effects. 
During the daytime an unprotected  thermostat is receiving radiation  from 
the sun which may cause it to become warmer than the surrounding air by 
as much as 6 C ° (10 F°),  thus shutting off the heat supply before  it should; 
but, much more seriously, at night-time it is radiating heat itself and so 
may become much colder than the surrounding air, thus bringing on the 
heating system before it is necessary. Not only does this prove expensive, 
but it results in incorrect temperatures in the greenhouse. 

This difficulty  is avoided by housing thermostats and thermometers  in 

what are called aspirated screens (Fig. 14). An aspirated  screen is an 
insulated  box, covered with metal or foil to reflect  radiation.  A small 
electric fan sucks air out of the box, which enters it through a louvre at its 

hardboard 

aluminium  sheet 

/ 

27 

M air-How 

expanded  polystyrene 

Sff  a 
thermostat  I 

day 

I 
v^. 

JS 

other end so that  a sample of the greenhouse air is flowing over the 
instruments. These are then able accurately to measure  ambient 
temperatures. Aspirated screens suitable for amateurs are available. 

Much mystery used to surround the subject  of ventilation of greenhouses, 
but the facts are quite simple. Ventilators exist for the sole purpose of 
providing openings through which excess heat in the house can be 
dissipated. The other advantages which follow are purely incidental  but 
nonetheless  useful. 

When a ventilator on the ridge of a house is opened the more buoyant 

warm air floats up through it and its place  is taken  by colder air  from 
outside. This air has to come in through the overlaps in the glass and  round 
the edges of doors, or sinks in through the ventilator opening past  the 
warm air which is going out. 

If as well as having ventilators at the ridge of the house there are also 

ventilators in the walls as low as possible, then the warm air escapes 
through the ridge vents and the cool air comes in through the side ones, 
creating what is called the 'chimney effect'  and making the whole 
ventilation process much quicker and more  effective. 

Fig.  14: aspirated  screen, 
lo protect  the  instruments 
from  receiving or emitting 
radiation.  Larger  models 
can house a  thermometer 
and  thermograph.  Because 
of the electricity  supply 
(not shown) to the  fan  and 
instruments, the  metal 
exterior of the screen  must 
be earthed. 

Ventilation 

Fig.  15: modern 
greenhouses  have 
continuous  ventilators 
which open  through  60° 
and  which give a  larger 
total  aperture than  single 
vents. 

In designing a greenhouse the provision made for ventilation needs to be 

sufficient  to cool the house to within a few degrees of the outside 
temperature on the hottest summer days. In a large commercial 
greenhouse this means enough ventilator openings to permit the entire 
greenhouse atmosphere to be changed completely once every minute  (see 
Appendix IV). To achieve the same degree of cooling in a very small house 
the rate has to go up to as much as once every three-quarters of a  minute 
because the smaller the house the more ventilation it requires to achieve 
the same result. Ideally the greenhouse should be built with ventilators 
each side of the ridge running the entire length of the roof with a number of 
side vents in both side  walls. As few houses are built with such generous 
provision, amateurs are urged to provide extra ventilation by securing the 
doors in an open position in hot weather. Sliding doors are particularly 
useful  for this purpose. Ventilation, in many ways, is the opposite of 
heating: ventilation  has to be designed to cope with the hottest  weather 
and heating with the coldest. 

As most of the excess heat which ventilation  is designed to dissipate 

comes from solar radiation, i.e. sunshine, and this tends to  fluctuate 
throughout the day, ventilators need to be constantly adjusted.  In  practice 
this is not possible and has led commercial growers to invest in automatic 
ventilation equipment. Automatic ventilation controls are available for 
small greenhouses and are well worth considering. 

Before the need for adequate ventilation became properly understood  in 
the early  1950s, greenhouses were built with totally inadequate  ventilation 
and to prevent over-heating in sunny weather shading the houses with 
whitening was the rule. This was unsatisfactory  because the shading 
excluded the light essential for proper development of the  crop. Shading is 
nowadays regarded by the professional gardener as something required 
only by plants which naturally grow in shade or by cuttings in the process 
of rooting. 

The incidental advantages of ventilation  must be understood. The  first 
of these is that  the air contains a small amount of carbon dioxide (0.03 per 
cent or 300 parts per million) which  is essential for plants if they are to 
photosynthesise at the maximum  rate possible in the prevailing light 
intensity and temperature level. When the air is still the carbon dioxide in 
the atmosphere surrounding the leaf becomes depleted  and 
photosynthesis slows down. The movement of air through the  foliage 
caused by ventilation  maintains the concentration at the normal level. 
Commercial growers even go to the extent of enriching the atmosphere of 
their houses with carbon dioxide from artificial  sources. 

Ventilation  also has the effect  of reducing relative humidity in the 

greenhouse to a level close to that  of the external atmosphere  (but only 
when the latter  is lower than that of the house). This lowering of relative 
humidity is desirable because it can prevent the condensation of water on 
the internal surfaces of the house should the temperature suddenly drop. 
The existence of still moist air around the plants is ideal for the 
germination of fungus spores, but this will not occur when ventilation is 
taking place. 

Ventilation  is quite a problem for the amateur gardener and tedious to 
monitor, but the golden rule is to err on the side of generosity  throughout 
the  summer. 

29 
Chapter 6 

The greenhouse soil 

Soil  sickness 

A symphilid 
(magnification  xl00> — 
a soil pest of  heated 
greenhouses, which  is 
controlled  by soil 
sterilisation.  Symphilids 
may  be present  in  comp 
made  from  unsteritis 
loam. 

If a greenhouse is built on an area of soil not previously used for such a 
purpose it is invariably found that no matter what  is grown in it the  first 
year's crop is magnificent  but subsequent ones deteriorate until  they 
become totally unacceptable. This decline in soil fertility  is called  'soil 
sickness' or (by tomato growers, who were the first to experience it) 
'tomato sickness'. 

For many years the cause of this problem was a mystery and  ingenious 

theories were advanced to account  for it. The mystery is now fairly well 
solved; the trouble does not have a simple cause; it is a combination of a 
number of factors of which some or all may apply. 

The soil is a medium  that teems with life, both animal and plant,  most 

of it microscopic; a population so varied and so well balanced that it is 
difficult  to imagine. This population  of soil micro-organisms performs a 
number of functions,  most significant  among which is the total  destruction 
of all dead organic matter. This matter is finally resolved into simple gases 
and soil minerals, in the course of which process all the plant  nutrients 
such as nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium are re-cycled for use by 
subsequent generations of plants. 

Among this vast multifarious soil population  it is not surprising to find a 

few out-and-out rogues and some others normally law-abiding but in 
circumstances of great temptation  liable to undesirable conduct. The 
former are called plant  parasites and the latter facultative  parasites. 
While the term 'parasite' is familiar enough, that of'facultative  parasite' 
needs explaining. They are organisms which normally live on dead  organic 
matter but possess the ability in certain circumstances to attack  living 
plants. 

In normal circumstances all the species of soil micro-organisms are in 

such a state of competition for available resources that their  numbers 
remain in a state of reasonable balance. As soon as a glasshouse is placed 
over the soil, conditions cease to be normal. To begin with, the 
temperature becomes higher; a crop such as tomatoes will be planted  to 
the exclusion of all else giving a high density of a single kind of root; the 
addition of optimum quantities of fertilisers and manure and  regular 
watering will all provide conditions which encourage a high rate of activity 
on the part  of the soil micro-organisms. The high density of tomato roots 
encourages any parasites of their roots to multiply and the increased  rate 
of activity  may encourage the facultative  parasites to turn from  their 
normal  harmless state to being harmful.  We are mainly talking about  root-
attacking fungi, although the same applies to various animal foes such  as 
certain eelworms, insects and  slugs. The second year in which the same 
crop is grown the process is repeated, and the effect  is cumulative, so after 
a few years the plant's roots are destroyed faster than they can be produced 
and it has difficulty  in surviving. Although the problem was  first 

30 

These almost  microscopic 
pests are known  as 
nringtails or 
Co/km 6ofa. They  can  be 
present  in vast  numbers 
and cause serious  damage 
to plants growing in  the 
soil or in  soil-based 
compost. They  are  readily 
destroyed  by soil-
sterilising  procedures,  but 
when these are not 
available  chemical 
methods  may  be  used. 

encountered  with tomatoes it applies to any plant repeatedly grown as a 
crop on the same site; the technical term is 'monocropping'. 

The tomato grower originally overcame the problem by removing all the 

soil in the greenhouse to a depth of a foot and replacing it with fresh.  This 
tedious and expensive expedient was ultimately replaced  by a process 
known as partial steam sterilisation. To accomplish this, steam is injected 
into the soil so that the top 380 mm (15 in) is heated  to a temperature of 
100°C (212°F),  then allowed to cool down. This drastic treatment has a 
remarkable effect on soil fertility  which leaps back to a level even  higher 
than  it was originally. The effect of heat  is to kill the entire population of 
soil animals, most ofthe  soil fungi and bacteria  and all weed  seeds. Certain 
soil bacteria do survive, and prominent among these are the  ammonifying 
bacteria which play a vital role in the nitrogen cycle because they are the 
agents responsible for converting the nitrogen in organic matter  into 
inorganic ammonia.  Unfortunately,  after steaming re-infection  causes soil 
sickness to return quite rapidly, necessitating annual repetition  ofthe 
treatment if high yields are to be maintained. As the cost of fuel  and  labour 
rose the tomato grower became desperate to devise techniques whereby he 
could abandon the soil totally as a medium  in which to grow his plants, as 
the cucumber grower had done from the very beginning, although for 
different  reasons. The answer eventually came with the peat  bag on  the 
one hand, and with sophisticated  hydroponic techniques, such as 
'nutrient film technique' and 'rockwool beds', on the other. On the way to 
reaching this recent answer chemical sterilisation was often  used as an 
alternative to steaming, but always had the disadvantage that it took a 
greenhouse out of commission  for longer than  the commercial grower 
liked. Methyl bromide clears rapidly from  the soil but it is so dangerous 
that it can be used only by qualified  contractors. 

Where in all this does the amateur gardener stand? He wants to use his 
greenhouse for growing tomatoes and lettuces, or anything else normally 
grown in the soil as distinct from a container. There is little doubt that  he 
can start off in the soil, but after a couple of years, if he does not want  to 

change the soil or move the greenhouse to a fresh site, the peat  bag is his 
answer and at the present time it is difficult  to see how a better or more 
convenient method could arise. Chemical treatment is one answer he 
might wish to keep in mind; the only substance which he can use being one 
called 'dazomet' which is sold under a number of proprietary  names. 
Household disinfectant  has many adherents among an older generation of 
gardeners but has a very limited range of troubles against which it is 
effective. 

Soil sickness, though mainly a response to monocropping, can be 
compounded by twoother problems which though distinct are related. 
The first is soil moisture content. The driest parts of the British Isles enjoy 
an annual rainfall  of about 560 mm of rain per year (22 in) of which  about 
half percolates down through the soil to drainage. In most of the rest of the 
UK the quantity is greater. This percolating water not only charges the soil 
with water to a considerable depth but also removes soluble  materials 
from its surface levels to lower ones and perhaps out of it altogether  into 
the drainage system. In the greenhouse rainfall does not occur, so in order 
to recharge the soil with water to the depth which roots will inhabit, it is 
necessary to apply substantial  amounts of water when preparing it for 
planting, to ensure that this occurs. For rough and ready reckoning it can 
be assumed  that 25 mm of water (/  in)  is sufficient  to wet the soil to a depth 
of 255 mm  (Win)  and that five times this amount should be applied,  which 
is about  125 litres per square metre (24 gall per sq yd);  a surprisingly  large 
amount when it comes to applying it. It is, of course, most easily done by 
means of an irrigation system or at least a hosepipe with a sprinkler. The 
flow  rate of the hosepipe should be checked first by noting the time  taken 
for the sprinkler to fill a bucket and then calculating the time it will take  to 
deliver the required amount of water. Use the  formula: 

Time taken to fill bucket  (in minutes)  x amount of water required 

which will give the answer in minutes. 

capacity of bucket 

The second and related problem is that of the concentration  of soluble 
salts in the soil moisture. Although its significance  was not realised  until 
the early  1950s it had undoubtedly been responsible for many  previously 
unexplained  crop failures. It simply means that  the quantity of nitrates 
which has accumulated in the top spit of the soil  is such that the plants' 
uptake of water and nutrients other than nitrogen is impeded and  certain 
unmistakable symptoms of ill health become apparent. The  concentration 
of salts was first measured on a scale known as the pC scale ('p'  indicates 
that it is logarithmic and  'C stands for conductivity) and later by one 
known as the CF scale VC   = conductivity and 'F' = factor)  and ever since 
greenhouse growers have referred  to the pC problem or the CF  problem. 
Amateurs are just as likely to encounter the problem as  professionals 
but they can avoid it completely if they practise flooding, as described 
above, before planting a crop, and do not apply fertilisers  at a rate greater 
than that recommended. Incidentally,  lettuces, tomatoes and  cucumbers 
are very sensitive to high soluble-salt concentrations (see Appendix V). 

Moisture 
content 

Soluble salts 

32 

Chapter 7 

Seed and potting composts 

Gardeners have been growing plants in pots and boxes for a long time and 
they soon learned that garden soil was not satisfactory  for the  purpose 
unless it was considerably modified. To begin with, ordinary garden soil is 
not sufficiently  open to allow water to percolate through it at the required 
rate. This meant that some gritty material like sand had to be added. 
Next, when wetted its water-holding capacity  (container capacity)  is 
insufficient  and this has to be increased by adding some spongy material ol 
an organic nature, like leafmould,  decomposed manure or peat. Even with 
these additions the mixture, or compost as gardeners call it, is not 
satisfactory  unless the soil selected has certain characteristics: it has to be 
one in which none of its mineral component parts, i.e. sand, silt and clay, 
are present, in such quantities that one or the other stamps its presence too 
strongly; soils of this equable type are described as loams and so the soil 
component of a compost is always referred to as loam. When loam,  sand 
and peat are mixed together the compost is still unlikely to have a 
sufficient  reserve of plant  nutrients and these must finally be added. If the 
compost,  now complete, is put in a container and watered it will produce a 
crop of weeds which will compete and interfere with the germinating seeds 
or whatever has been planted so carefully,  while at the same time soil-
borne pests and diseases will be attacking everything that  grows. This 
state of affairs can only be avoided by sterilising the loam in which these 
troubles are  located. 

This was the case in the 1930s when little or no scientific work had been 
undertaken to establish the optimum quantities of compost  ingredients 
and the most suitable forms of each of the disinfecting procedures  that 
should be undertaken. The task was tackled for the first time by Messrs 
Lawrence and  Newall at the John  Innes Horticultural Institution  which 
was situated in Merton,  England. After some years of painstaking work 
they were able to make recommendations for the preparation of 
standardised composts, which still hold good forty years later.  Although 
details of these composts are readily available no apology is given for 
repeating them here. There are two composts, one for small and  medium 
seeds, and one for large seeds and  plants. 

Seed Compost 
Sterilised loam 2 parts by volume 
Horticultural  peat 1 part by volume 
Sand  (Sharp 3 mm grist)   1 part by volume 
To each 100 litres (bushel)  is added  117 g (H  oz) of superphosphate 
and 58gv} ° 2) of ground  limestone. 

NB: These metric and imperial  quantities are not  equivalent. 

33 

Potting  Compost 
Sterilised  loam 7 parts by volume 
Horticultural peat 3 parts by volume 
Sand  (Sharp 3 mm grist) 2 parts by volume 
To each  100 litres (bushel)  of the potting compost is added 310 g (4 oz) 
of John Innes base and  58 g (} oz) of ground limestone to make what is 
called J I P 1. 
If the quantities of base and chalk are doubled  the compost is called 
JIP2andiftrebledJIP3. 
The point of having three strengths, so to speak, is to allow for varying 
types of plant and seasons, e.g. JIP1 is for slow growing plants at any 
time of the year and for other plants in the winter, JIP  2 is for spring 
and summer use for more vigorous plants, and JIP  3 for vigorous 
plants in the summer. 

When amateurs read that the loam has to be sterilised  they may feel  that 
making 'John Innes' lies beyond their ability. This is not the case, 
however, because it is a relatively simple matter to make a steriliser  that 
will sterilise small quantities of loam quickly and effectively  (see Fig. 16). 
The greatest difficulty  is likely to be that of obtaining suitable loam  and, 
in many parts of the country, coarse sand, free from  lime. Fine sand 
beloved of old time gardeners is not suitable for John Innes. John  Innes 
base is a mixture which consists of: 
Hoof and horn meal (14% N) 3 mm grist 
Superphosphate  (18r
Potassium  sulphate  (48c

2 parts by weight 
2 parts by weight 
1 part  by weight 

(' soluble phosphoric acid) 

f  K 20) 

It is widely available as a ready-mixed  commodity. 

Fig.  16: a simple soil 
steriliser can  be made  by 

Clacing a  perforated  false 

sttom  about  one-third  up 

inside the  bucket. 
Sufficient  water  is added 
— one litre per nine  litres 
of dry  loam — and  the 
bucket  is placed over a gas 
ring or similar heater. A 
plastic sheet  is tied over 
the  top, and  when  this 
balloons out with  sleam  the 
soil is sterilised. 

If the soil in your garden is neither sandy nor contains too much clay, it 

will probably make a reasonable compost. If this is not the case the 
amateur must fall back on loamless composts. The traditional  test for 
gauging the suitability of loam for compost purposes is to squeeze a 
quantity of it in the hand when it is moist, but not wet. When the pressure 
of the hand is released it should hold together but shatter if dropped. 
When  in a lump it should, if stroked with a wet thumb, show a  'greased' 
track, but  not a 'polished' one. These rough and ready tests help to assess 
the clay content  to establish that  it is neither excessive nor  deficient. 
Gardeners of an earlier generation  would cut and stack for at  least six 
months turf from old pastures, such soil usually having excellent  'crumb 
structure'. The period of six months provided an opportunity for all the 
roots and herbage to decompose. Apart from the physical  properties of a 
loam sample, it must not have too high a lime content  or this may cause 
complications later with certain plants.  A slightly acid loam is to be 
preferred. 

Although for most purposes loam-based John  Innes composts cannot  be 
beaten, especially for amateur gardeners, a vast number of plants are now 
grown in loamless composts. These were developed in the USA and  have 
been widely adopted  in Britain by growers who had difficulty  in obtaining 
suitable loam for John Innes and who wanted to avoid the chore of steam 
sterilising. In Britain loamless composts usually consist of peat or 
mixtures of peat and fine sand to which have been added a range of 
fertilisers. In the United States and Australia composts made of shredded 
bark or sawdust are in common use and give excellent results, but  where 
good peat is easily obtained  they have not made much  impact. 

Peat composts are now marketed  by many firms under their own brand 

names and their compositions are not known precisely, because the 
manufacturers  do not divulge them. Suffice  it to say that they are  usually 
peat or peat/sand  mixes to which the appropriate range of fertilisers  has 
been added. For those who want to do it themselves the Glasshouse  Crop 
Research Institute has investigated the composition of peat-based 
composts and has stated  that  a well-designed one will produce plants as 
good as in John Innes, but that  the management  of plants in them is more 
exacting. The mixtures they recommend, which are known as GCRI 
composts, are as follows: 

Seed Compost 
Granular horticultural  peat   1 part  by volume 
Lime-free fine sand (0.05-0.5 mm particles)   1 part by volume 
Toeach  100litres (bushel)  isadded:  40g (J 02) ammonium  sulphate 
80g (/ oz)  18'7  superphosphate 
40g(^o2)  potassium  sulphate 
310 g (4 oz) ground  limestone 

(calcium  carbonate) 

Potting  Compost 
Granular horticultural peat 3 parts by volume 
Lime-free fine sand (0.05-0.5 mm particles)   1  part  by volume 
Toeach  \00 Wires {bushel)  isadded:  155g(2oz)  18',  superphosphate 
235 g (3oz)  ground  limestone 
235 g (3oz)  dolomitic limestone  (calcium magnesium  carbonate) 
40g(jo2)FritNo.253A 

If the compost is to be used immediately, or within a short time, the 
following must be added: 

20g (} oz) ammonium  nitrate 
40g (i oz)  urea-formaldehyde 
80 g (1 oz) potassium  sulphate 

If, on the other hand, it cannot  be used fairly quickly then instead  the 
following are added: 

40 g (4 oz) ammonium  nitrate 
80 g (/  oz) potassium  nitrate 

The list of additives looks frightening  but, in fact, they are all common 

fertiliser  materials easily purchased either as individual materials or 
proprietory mixtures. The Frit No 253A is absolutely vital as it contains all 
the trace elements (boron, zinc, manganese, iron, copper and 
molybdenum) which are needed in minute quantities and are difficult  and 
dangerous to supply in any other way. 

When plants are grown in containers they soon exhaust the  nutrient 

reserves of the compost, a fact demonstrated  by the slowing down of 
growth, a hardening of their tissues and a paling of their foliage.  Before 
these symptoms of starvation are observed steps should have been taken  to 
avoid it, either by liquid feeding or by moving the plant into a larger pot or 
planting it out. Liquid feeding is generally the most convenient  method 
and will be discussed later when dealing with the various crops. 

All 'growing media' as composts are frequently  called must provide the 

correct physical conditions for root growth. If these are not correct no 
amount  of fertiliser treatment can compensate. Experiments have shown 
that in a compost, with a sub-standard  physical condition, the difference  in 
plant growth between a low standard  of nutrition and a high one is no more 
than  12 per cent whereas with a compost of good physical condition,  the 
difference  rises to 91 percent. 

Good physical condition  mainly refers to what is termed the  air-filled 

porosity of a compost. This is the amount of air it contains after it has been 
saturated and drained back to 'container capacity', which is holding all 
the water it can against the pull of gravity, all drainage having ceased. 
If the air-filled  porosity drops below 10-15 per cent growth is  affected 
and root-death occurs at the lower levels of the container. Above  15 per 
cent, roots can grow and function  properly. Composts made from  coarse 
sphagnum  peat alone have an air-filled  porosity of 30-40 percent  and 
made from  the finer grades an air-filled  porosity of 12-15 percent. 

Air-filled  porosity is a function  of the larger pore spaces within  the 
compost, i.e. those greater than 60 microns  (1 micron = 0.001 mm). 

It has already been stressed that  with loam compost coarse sand of 3 mm 
grist is used to increase air-filled  porosity and sand of this size can be relied 
upon always to do this, whereas finer sands reduce it. In the case of the 
GCRI loamless composts the grade of sand recommended is much  finer. 
Although its function  is to make the compost heavier in weight (which it 
does by about  400 per cent) it will inevitably reduce the air-filled  porosity 
of the peat, though not below the critical level if the correct grade of 
granular peat  has been selected. 

Whenever there is doubt  about  air-filled  porosity of a compost a simple 

test can be conducted as follows: 
1  Weigh a container and fill with compost consolidated as though it 

contained a plant. 

2  Place the container in water (weighed down if necessary) until  the 

compost  is saturated. 

3  Remove the container rapidly from  the water and place in an  empty 

bucket of known weight and  weigh. 

4  Immediately stand the container on a sand-base and allow to stand  for 

twelve hours, then weigh again. 

5  Mark the position inside the container reached by the compost,  empty 

the container and line it with a thin polythene bag. 

6  Fill the lined container with water to the level formerly  reached by the 

compost and weigh. 

7  Subtract the weight of the container from  all three  measurements. 
8  Calculate the percentage of air-filled  porosity using the  formula: 

(weight of saturated compost-weight of drained compost)  x 100 

weight of water equal to the volume of the  compost 

If  the  calculation  gives  a value  lower than  15 per cent suspicion  must  fall 
on the coarseness of the sand. 

Specifications for compost ingredients always state that  sands should 

be non-calcareous (lime-free). This is to prevent the use of materials which 
would cause the pH of the compost to rise. The pH scale describes the 
acidity or alkalinity of solutions. The letter 'p' indicates that  the scale is 
logarithmic, meaning that each point on the scale represents an increase 
or decrease by a factor of 10. Loam composts are designed to have a pH of 
about 6.5, and as little as 0.5 per cent of calcium carbonate (lime) in a sand 
used for the GCRI composts can raise the alkalinity of the compost by pH 
0.7, i.e. five times. This is quite critical because the neutral  point of the pH 
scale is pH 7 and an increase of 0.7 takes the original pH of the compost 
from 6.5 to 7.2 which is well within  the danger zone for many plants. 

37 

Chapter 8 

Plants in containers 

It is not so many years ago that to say 'plants in pots or boxes' would  have 
sufficed.  Today the range of things' in which plants are grown  is so varied 
that the more general term 'container' now has to be used to cover all 
possibilities. 

The traditional  flowerpot,  made of baked unglazedclay, has virtually 
disappeared, having been superseded  by the plastic pot. Plastic pots are 
usually rigid and made of polypropylene; they are not long lived  because 
after a while they become hard and brittle, but being light, cheap and 
easily transported they have displaced  the heavy and now very expensive 
clay  pot. 

The clay pot, being porous, has water evaporating from all of its surface 
which causes the compost in it to be slightly cooler than in a plastic pot of 
equivalent size; differences  of 1.1 C° (2F°) at night and 3.3C° (6F°) in the 
daytime having been recorded. Thus with higher temperatures and a 
slower moisture loss an overall gain in growth in plastic pots can occur. 
Traditional practice was to'crock'clay pots, i.e. broken pieces of pot 

were placed in the bottom over the drainage hole (see Fig  17). It was 
always difficult  to find out from gardeners why this was done but one was 
usually told that it aided drainage, aided aeration and  prevented 
earthworms getting into the compost. All these reasons have been shown 
to be fallacious and the practice has now died out almost  totally. 

A range of planl 
containers, both durable 
and biodegradable. On the 
right of the front row is a 
rockwool block  for 
hydroponic growing 
methods. 

38 

ompost 

fibrous 
material 
small 
crocks 

drainage 

large 
crocks 

hole 
Fig.  17: this  traditional 
method  of crocking a 
(lower-pot  is now known  to 
impede drainage  rather 
than  to assist  it. and  is 
thus no longer used  by 
modem  gardeners. 

The Jiffy  pot,  made  from 
peat  enclosed  within a 
mesh. It is bought  in  the 
dehydrated  form.the  disc 
on the  left;  after 
immersion  in water it 
swells to form  the 
container depicted  in  the 
middle of the  photograph; 
and  on the right  a young 
begonia  is seen  well 
established  in one of these. 
Peat  modules in a similar 
dehydrated  condition, 
convenient  to handle  and 
store, are now  available. 

Conversely, it is now known that crocks not only fail to assist drainage, 
they actually impede it, to say nothing of taking up space better occupied 
by compost. 

Another traditional  practice was the firming of the compost. The degree 

of consolidation varied with the subject  being grown but for all pots over 
130 mm  (5 in) diameter the compost was forced down with a 'rammer'  and 
good gardeners had a set of rammers for different  sizes of  pots. It has now 
been shown that consolidation  of the compost is unnecessary and can 
usually be brought about to the extent required by the subsequent 
overhead watering of the  plant. 

Old-fashioned  gardening practice also required the use of a large range 
of pot sizes. The range started with thumbs and thimbles and proceeded 
by way of small 60s, middle 60s, large 60s, 48s and 32s up to 200 mm  (8 in), 
225 mm  (9 in) and 250 mm (Win)  pots. Plants raised from seed were sown 
in trays or pans, pricked-out  (or pricked-off)  into trays and  then, 
according to their vigour, potted  (potted-off  was the term) into one of the 
60s range, i.e. 63 mm  (2| in), 75 mm  (3 in) or 90 mm (3$ in) diameter.  From 
this size of pot they might be planted out in the soil or 'potted-on' into 
larger pots. Potting-on normally required  leap-frogging over one size of 
pot, e.g. from a 75 mm  (3 in) pot to a  113 mm  (4\  in) one, or from  a 90 mm 
(3\  in) to a 125 mm  (5 in) one, and so  on. Gardeners liked to pot-on at the 
moment when the plant was beginning to exhaust the nutrient reserves of 
the compost. When plants were in their 'final' pot they might have to be 
'top-dressed' in order to sustain them until ready for sale or display. Top-
dressing usually meant scraping away the accumulation  of liverwort  and 
moss growing on the surface of the compost, pulling out any weeds and, if 
their presence was detected,  removing any earthworms. This done, fresh 
compost was put on the surface together with a teaspoonful  of an evil-
smelling fertiliser containing, among other things, dried blood  and 
steamed bone flour. Liquid feeding was rarely attempted,  but when it was, 
consisted of watering with an infusion  made from  manure of one kind or 
another. 

All these  methods represented  a craftsmanship  that  had  been  built  up 
over a couple of centuries or more by methods of trial and error,  coupled 
in some cases with beliefs,  never questioned,  built on  misunderstandings. 
Today economic necessity, coupled with scientific  investigation  has led 
to a greatly simplified  procedure, outlined  here. 

39 

Seed  sowing 

It is convenient to think of seeds in three simple categories: the small and 
dust-like, e.g. Rhododendron,  Lobelia;  medium-sized,  i.e. seeds which 
can be seen easily with the naked eye like Primula  and Antirrhinum  up to 
lettuce, Cyclamen  and tomato, some of which are large enough to be sown 
singly; and large seeds such as cucumber, melon, sweet pea and so on. 

The fine seeds are sown on a compost which has been sieved fairly  finely, 

but not so fine that only the finest particles of the compost go through  the 
sieve producing a material of a silty nature which will set hard on watering. 
The surface of the compost in the containers must be flat, for which a 
'presser' is needed to firm the surface  lightly. The seed is then scattered  as 
thinly as possible. Various techniques are used by different  people to 
achieve the fine scattering required, but there is no foolproof  method  that 
can be recommended above all others. The scientific approach with fine 
seeds is to assume that  ideally each seedling needs about   1 sq cm in which 
to expand its cotyledons. Then, allowing for the fact that many of the seeds 
will not germinate, it is possible to calculate what the sowing rate should 
be. With dust-like seeds trial and error  is all that is possible. Fine seeds do 
not need to be covered; they must  be sown onto a previously  watered 
compost which has drained  back to container capacity. Evaporation  from 
the surface,  which would hinder germination,  is prevented  by covering the 
container with a sheet of glass or polythene and shading with newspaper or 
cloth to prevent it being overheated  by the sunlight. 

Medium-sized seeds are sown at rates which seek to provide each with 

about  3-4 sq cm in which to expand their cotyledons. These are rates 
which are much easier to calculate and to achieve in practice than those for 
fine seeds. It is usual to cover them with a scattering of compost  sufficient 
to bury the seed completely to a depth equal to approximately its own 
dia meter. The normal reason for covering a seed is to keep it in an 
environment uniformly moist, and often  to aid the emerging seedling in 
leaving its seed coat stuck in the compost and in contact with  moisture. 
Glass or plastic covering is still needed to prevent drying out. 

40 

Left:  paper  pots which are 
glued  together in a 
honeycomb  arrangement. 
Sometimes  referred  to as 
Japanese pots from  their 
country of origin, they  are 
extremely  useful  for 
raising batches of  plants 
under protection which  are 
intended  for  subsequent 
planting out  in the  garden. 
Right:  the paper  ixils 
before they  have been 
stretched out  to their 
normal  hexagonal  shape. 

Large seeds can be sown in a coarsely sieved compost, say  10 mm  (0.4 

in),  and may be best placed in individual containers. This is to some 
extent a matter of judgement but where germination  is fairly  reliable 
individual sowing is usually highly advantageous as it avoids  pricking-out, 
always a serious check to growth. Large seeds in containers can safely  be 
watered from  overhead without  being dislodged so the practice of covering 
them with glass or plastic film becomes optional. 

Germinating temperatures vary considerably with the subject  but  15°C 

(60°F) is suitable for a wide range of hardy and half-hardy  plants; 18°C 
(65°F) suits most temperate and sub-tropical  plants and  21 °C (70°F)  is 
required for tropical plants. Maintaining these higher temperatures is 
difficult  without automatic controls, but small propagating cases known 
as 'propagators' can be used by amateurs to advantage, although they are 
rather expensive. 

Pricking-out is the act of moving a seedling into an individual  container 

or several seedlings into a tray. The time to do it is at the earliest  possible 
moment, when the seedling is large enough to be handled, which usually 
coincides with the expansion of the cotyledons, but before the  appearance 
of true leaves. Careful  observation  has shown that  early  pricking-out 
causes the plant to receive the least amount of check. The older the 
seedling the greater the amount  of root it has, and the more this is 
damaged  in the process the longer the seedling takes to recover from  the 
move. 

The container into which the seedling goes depends upon the purpose for 

which it is to be grown. If it is intended  to be a flowering pot-plant  it may 
be pricked-out  into a small pot or an intermediate size of container, such 
as a 'Jiffy'  pot. This is a proprietory  product  which is bought in a 
dehydrated compressed condition, but after soaking expands into a peat 
container.  For economy of greenhouse space an intermediate size of pot is 
still necessary while the plant  is relatively small; starvation, which was 
the problem of the gardener of yesterday,  can be completely avoided  by 
liquid feeding; but once the plants require more space, and are too large for 
their containers (top heavy), they are then moved into their final pot. 

When  plants were transferred  to larger pots it was not  formerly 

permitted for them to be watered until several days had elapsed. The 
theory behind this was that it would give the roots an opportunity to find 

41 

their way into the new compost, which they would not be encouraged  to do 
if they were watered. This strange logic may have had something to do 
with the excessive firming of the compost which reduced  its  air-filled 
porosity. If it was kept on the dry side for a few days it gave the roots an 
opportunity to grow into it, whereas, if it were watered, such air spaces as it 
had would be filled with water and new root-growth discouraged. In 
modern practice, the use of composts with the correct physical  conditions 
and the avoidance of undue compaction should enable watering to be done 
immediately after  potting-on  with advantage to the  plant. 

Seedlings intended ultimately for planting out in the soil may be 

planted  into any of a whole host of biodegradable containers  including 
'whalehide' pots which are made of special paper, peat pots, fibre pots and 
possibly best of all peat blocks. For young shrubs, black plastic bags are 
popular, and old fruit  cans once had considerable vogue, so much so thai  in 
American nurseries large plastic pots now in general use are still referred  to 
as cans. 

In container cultivation, as mentioned elsewhere, a positive choice has 
to be made between growing plants by the slow-release fertiliser  method or 
by the liquid feeding techniques. Both methods have their advantages  and 
disadvantages but the slow-release fertiliser  method wins on the score of 
simplicity and convenience. Slow-release fertilisers,  provided they are 
used in strict accordance with the makers' recommendations,  contain  all 
that  the plant  requires to sustain it for a period of  time. They are all 
proprietory compounds and it is not possible to give detailed  information 
about  them. The compound is mixed thoroughly  with the compost  before 
potting takes place. It does not, of course, last for ever and plants which are 
destined to spend a long life in pots will require ultimately to be  liquid-fed. 
Liquid feeding will be described specifically  in relation to tomatoes and 
cucumbers, but forgeneral  use with pot plants in loam composts the feed 
is as follows: 

Potassium nitrate  
Ammonium nitrate 
Water 

72 gram 
164 gram 
1 litre 

ll^oz 
26oz 
1 gallon 

This is diluted  200 times (5 ml spoonful/litre;  0.8 ft ozlgallon)  and is 

given to vigorous plants throughout the year with every watering.  Plants 
which grow more slowly can either have the dilution rate increased  to  1 in 
400 (5 ml spoonful/2 litres) or alternatively receive the feed at normal 
strength  every other watering. 

In loamless composts different  factors operate, particularly in hard 

water areas where the lime content of the compost tends to increase and 
may cause some plants to suffer from a deficiency of iron and manganese; a 
condition called lime-induced  chlorosis. A recommended  mixture is: 

Ammonium  nitrate 
Potassium sulphate 
Mono-ammonium  phosphate 
Water 

120gram 
88 gram 
13 gram 
1 litre 

19oz 
14oz 
2oz 
7 gallon 

The dilution rate, as usual, is 1: 200 and the recommendations  for 
application are the same as those given for plants in loam  composts. 

As the range of plants which can be grown in pots is so great and  their 
rates of growth vary so considerably, e.g. a chrysanthemum  grows four 
times as fast  as a cyclamen, the amateur has plenty of scope to establish 
for himself by experience what rate and strength of feeding best suits a 
particular  plant. 

When plants are watered from  above, the practice is to give  sufficient 
water to fill the space at the top of the pot. The surplus then drains away 
until the compost is left at container capacity. The faster  and more 
efficiently  this happens the better for the healthy functioning  of the roots. 

Provided the compost has the correct physical properties its  air-filled 

porosity can still be improved  if the base-material on which the  container 
is standing has pores of a similar size and range to those of the compost, 
and sufficient  depth to exert drainage pull. There must be no 
discontinuity between the compost and the base-material and the two 
must  be able to make good contact. Ideally a container should have 25 per 
cent of its base consisting of holes in order to provide maximum  contact 
between compost and base-material. Many pots and most seed-trays will 
be seen to be lacking in this respect. 

The best material for exerting a drainage pull on the compost is fine 

sand, the deeper the better, though in practice a depth of 150 mm (6 in) is 
adequate. Coarse sand and gravel drain freely themselves but cannot exert 
a drainage pull on finer grained materials, the laws of surface  tension 
acting in such a manner as to cause coarse materials to drain freely  into 
less coarse ones and so on, but not the other way round. 

Pea-gravel, coarse sand and 6 mm (j  in) granite chippings are 

frequently  used as materials for standing-down  beds but are not  as 
effective  as is really necessary. A further  word of explanation  about 
container capacity  might be helpful. When soil in the garden has ceased to 
drain, i.e. when the force of gravity has pulled down to the water table all 
the water which the soil could not hold back by surface tension, the soil is 
said to be at field capacity. This term will not do for containers because the 
compost they contain is not part of a column of indefinite  depth (as is the 
case with soil) and is not subject to the same drainage pull. This  means 
that  container capacity is not only affected  by the physical properties  of 
the compost, but also by the height of the container and the drainage 
properties of the material on which it  is standing. The greater the height of 
the container the better will be its drainage and thus its air-filled  porosity. 
Seed trays, therefore, will be poorly drained compared  with 250 mm  (Win) 
pots. This explains why gardeners of an earlier generation  insisted on 
using deep pots called 'long Toms' for plants known to grow in natural soil 
environments where the air-filled  porosity is very high. 

13 

Chapter 9 

Watering and irrigation  systems 

This subject is referred to elsewhere in connection with the cultivation of 
various plants, with the general management  of plants in containers and 
with the management of greenhouses themselves. The subject  under 
discussion here is the actual equipment  used. 

Horticulturists were very slow to come to the process of watering  plants 
by using sophisticated equipment, preferring for decades to use watering 
cans and spending countless hours carrying these cans up and down 
greenhouses. For years the favoured  method was to have a tank of water in 
the house, preferably  sunk to ground level, from  which cans could be filled 
rapidly by dipping them into the water. Invariably the water became 
contaminated with disease and led to endless problems. Watering with 
hosepipes was regarded with suspicion and was only resorted to for 
permanently  planted  crops such as tomatoes and cucumbers or plants in 
very large pots such as chrysanthemums. 

Fig.  18: Haw's  pattern 
watering  can of the 
modern  plastic  type. 

round  rose 

The type of watering can preferred  was that known as the  'Haw's 

Pattern' (it is still available), which is relatively comfortable  to carry and 
comes in many sizes. Larger cans holding two gallons were  preferred 
because they meant  less travelling up and down. In general, watering was 
most often  done without a rose on the can so that an individual stream of 
water could be directed  to each plant that  was thought  to need it. 

Watering cans may be fitted with any one of a variety of roses to enable a 

shower to be delivered instead of a jet: oval roses with small holes are for 
'damping down' and for watering seed trays and small pots; oval roses with 
coarse holes are for watering batches of plants in frames and on staging; 
round roses are convenient  for directing the spray towards one  particular 
pot. An oval rose can  be turned around so that the spray is directed 

44 

irrigation  li 

Fig.  19:  trickle-irrigation 
nozzle of the Cameron 
type. The thread  of the 
barrel  is truncated,  thus 
providing  a spiral  passage 
for the  water. 

Fig. 20: method of 
supplying  liquid feed  to an 
irrigation  system  where 
the tl< iw  rat e is too slow  to 
activate the  dilutor.  When 
the water level in the  tank 
falls tolhe  level of  the 
lower float  switch,  the 
solenoid valve opens to let 
mains water  through  fast, 
activating the  dilutor.  The 
tank fills rapidly  until  the 
upper  float  switch closes 
the solenoid  valve. 

water. 
supply 

downwards with its spread reduced or turned upwards to deliver a 
cascade. 

In the world of the commercial grower most of this watering art has gone. 
The hosepipe with or without a choke, or with a rose fitted to it, has almost 
replaced the can and whenever possible irrigation systems have replaced 
both. 

Irrigation systems are of three kinds: capillary systems (dealt with 

elsewhere), trickle systems and spray lines. Trickle systems first appeared 
in the early 1950s, for watering tomatoes. One of the first was a  proprietory 
system invented by the late Dr Blass and marketed by the then  Cameron 
Irrigation Company. It consisted of lines of thin rubber pipe with  nozzles 
inserted at intervals corresponding with each tomato plant station. The 
nozzle was most ingenious and consisted of a metal barrel with a  truncated 
thread.  Into this was screwed a small bolt, and water escaped along the 
spiral created  by the  flattened  thread onto the soil surface at rates as slow 
as one litre (0.2gallon)  per hour. The water pressure had to be matched  to 
the number of nozzles and this was achieved by the simple device of  fitting 
a vertical transparent  tube to one of the nozzles and adjusting the tap 
pressure until a column of water rose in the tube to a height of say two 
metres (six feet)  which meant the whole system was pressurised to about 
23 kN/m-' (3  psi). 

With the advent of plastic materials of every sort, trickle irrigation 

systems are now made by a whole range of manufacturers  and  the 
customer can choose whichever seems to suit his purpose best. They are 
made primarily for watering individual plants, the range now extending 
from  tomatoes in greenhouses through apples and oranges to date palms in 
the tropics. They can be modified  by replacing nozzles with  capillary 
tubes, each of which can supply water to a plant  in a pot (the point-
watering system); they can be used for irrigating capillary benches; and, 
finally,  they may be so designed that, instead of having nozzles, they seep 
water along their length, thus moistening bands of soil between rows of 
plants. 

Frequently, displacement-type liquid-feed  dilutors (see Fig. 21) are 

fitted  in-line with a trickle irrigation system so that continual  liquid 

air  vent 

i  off 
i 
i 
i 
1  on, 
l " " ~ h 
l 
i 
' 

1 
l 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
l 
i 
i 

' 
' 
' 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
l 
i 

>  float  switches 

liquid-feed  tank 

hand  stop 

valve 
T 

to 

irrigation 
system 

solenoid 

valve 

rr 

dilutor 

setting 
knob 

45 

to irrigation  system 

water 

interface 

stock 

solution 
(dyed) 

Fig. 21:  abovea 
displacement-type  liquid-
feed dilutor; above  left  the 
head  of the dilutor in  more 
detail. 

Two liquid-feed  dilutors. 
The one in the  background 
is a  large model  for 
commercial  growers,  but 
the one in the  foreground 
holds about  nine  litres 
{two gallons)  of stock 
solution, which  provides 
about  1800 litres U«J 
gallons)  of liquid  feed  to an 
amateur  greenhouse 
irrigation  system. 

46 

KiR 22: water  forms cones 
of welted soil  below 
trickle-irrigation  nozzles. 
The relatively  narrow 
cones formed  in sandy soils 
can  be broadened  if a  layer 
of peat  is spread  below  the 
nozzle. 

feeding can take place. For the amateur snags arise here. The first  is that 
the small system he is likely to require will not have a  flow-rate  sufficient 
to activate the dilutor, and so he will be forced, if sufficiently  enthusiastic, 
into using a certain amount of gadgetry. This consists of a tank  in which 
two float switches are fixed, one near the top and one near the  bottom. 
From the bottom of the tank a hose connects directly to the irrigation 
system. This tank must  be mounted about  l{m  (5 ft)  high so that  it 
provides sufficient  pressure to activate the system. (See Fig. 20.) As the 
tank discharges into the irrigation system by gravity the lower float switch 
will eventually drop and open a solenoid valve. This will allow the tank  to 
be refilled with the water which has passed through the dilutor and so it 
will, in fact, be liquid feed. When the tank has refilled, the upper  float 
switch will be lifted, and will close the solenoid valve. No garden-scale 
production  could justify  this expense, but enthusiasm  does not  necessarily 
have to be justified  in commercial  terms! 

The second drawback is that  many water authorities will not  permit 
liquid-feed  dilutors to be connected directly to the mains water supply. 

It is important to understand that when trickle irrigation is used on 

plants in the soil the water moistens the soil beneath the trickle in the form 
of an ever-broadening cone. Within this cone of wet soil the roots of the 
plant will be confined. The more rapidly the cone broadens out, the greater 
will be the volume of soil available for the roots of that plant. In light sandy 
soil narrow cones often  result, and on such soils it is advisable to spread a 
50 mm (2 in) thick layer of peat around the plant so that the trickle of 
water spreads before it percolates downwards. (See Fig. 22.) 

If the amateur is unable to incorporate liquid feeding into a trickle-
irrigation system, he must rely on the use of slow-release fertilisers for 
plants in containers, even though this may not give him the precise degree 
of control of nutrition that might otherwise be desirable. 

Spray-lines are normally used for overhead watering and in large houses 

are suitable for such crops as lettuces. The amateur can use them in the 
summer for overall watering and for flooding in winter, and if they are of 
the type which is mounted  at low level, they will send sprays of water out 
horizontally for watering cucumbers and tomatoes. Spray-lines were once 
very popular in greenhouses but have to some extent been superseded  by 
trickle systems. As they are relatively inexpensive, however, amateurs 
who use the soil for growing their plants will find them invaluable for 
winter  flooding. 

Spray-lines these days are made of rigid plastic pipes and are  usually 

suspended in the house from wire  slings. In sunny weather they soften  and 
sag unless supported  by a number of slings at one metre (3 ft)  intervals. 

trickle 

irrigation 

Chapter 

Greenhouse staging and  bench 
watering 

Solid and open 
staging 

It would seem a simple matter to decide that if you wanted to grow pot 
plants in a greenhouse and have them at a height at which it was 
convenient both to see and work with them, you could construct an 
elevated platform  on which to stand them. Like many other things in 
horticulture  it is not as simple as it might  appear. 

To begin with, the position ofthe  bench, or staging as it is properly 

called, is very important  because ofthe flow of convection currents in the 
house. In general the warm air from  the heating pipes or heater rises up to 
t he ridge ofthe  house, and as it loses heat it sinks alongside the under 
surface ofthe roof. Should the staging go right to the wall ofthe  house and 
be joined to it the cooled air will spread across the staging thus bringing 
about a temperature  lower than the average for the house. The  mean 
temperature ofthe  greenhouse atmosphere  is usually referred to as the 
ambient temperature. This name is important because it distinguishes it 
from  the temperature of any surface within the house which is receiving 
radiant  heat from  the sun and which may well have a temperature  above 
the  ambient. 

To return to the staging: it should always be fixed so that  a gap of at least 
150 mm (6 in) is left between it and the wall ofthe  house through which  the 
heavier cool air can flow downwards to be reheated. 

By the same token it follows that if the staging consists of welded  mesh 
wire or wooden slats, cooled air will also sink through it to be rewarmed  by 
the pipes below. This will ensure that the temperature on the bench is 
closer to the ambient. For all winter work and when a warm  temperature 
around the plants in the staging is required it is always recommended  that 
'open staging' be provided. In summer, on the other hand, open  benches 
can  lead to arid conditions around the pots, to the extent that some 
growers actually install overhead spray-lines so that they can spray the 
plants from time to time in order to make them moister and thus cooler. 
It has been traditional  for gardeners to construct solid benches with a 

floor of flat asbestos sheeting, or for greater strength, corrugated  asbestos 
or galvanised iron. The staging has then been covered with one of a variety 
of materials such as sand, pea gravel, granulated peat,  orsiftedclinker.lt 
is only recently, as mentioned earlier, that  the advantages of fine sand 
have become apparent. 

Solid staging, whether bare or covered with one ofthe  materials 

mentioned  is. if dry, hot in the day because ofthe  radiation  it receives from 
the sun. and conversely very cool at night because ofthe  radiation it emits. 
If the covering material is wet a cool environment  is provided around  the 
pots and containers standing on it because of evaporative cooling. When 
water evaporates from  a surface,  the heat required  to change it from  liquid 
to vapour is taken from  the surface concerned. On a solid staging covered 
with a water-retaining medium like those mentioned  above, evaporation 

takes place all the time, also from   the surface of the compost in the pots 
and other containers,  and finally from the leaves of the plants  themselves 
by means of the evaporative process botanists call transpiration.  The 
cumulative effect  of all this, plus the fact  that the cooled air has to flow 
over the side of the staging instead of through  it, explains why the solid 
stage can be a much cooler place than  the open one. In winter it may be 
very disadvantageous, but in summer it is quite the reverse for many 
plants. 

The height and width of staging is a subject to which pot-plant  growers 
have devoted a lot of attention, but the amateur usually has little room for 
manoeuvre. He has really only two alternatives:  the first, to build a central 
stage to be reached from  either side, an arrangement likely to provide 
considerable access problems in a small greenhouse; the second, to 
construct a stage on one or both sides of the central path.  A double stage 
should not exceed about  1800 mm (6 ft)  in width and a single stage should 
not exceed 900 mm (3 ft).  These widths should allow all parts of the bench 
to be reached easily by anybody of average height. The lower the bench the 
greater the reach permitted but the more the back has to be bent; and the 
higher it is the more it will be reduced by the slope of the roof. A height of 
835-900 mm (33-^36 in) is thought to be the most  comfortable and 
convenient for most people. In a small greenhouse height is often 
determined  by the height of the side walls, because if the staging comes 
above the wall, space will be lost due to the incline of the roof. It is also best 
for even circulation of heat if the heating pipes  can be mounted on the 
walls of the house rather than under the staging. When staging is properly 
installed the plants on it tend to dry evenly because the temperature 
across it is even. 

As methods of irrigating plants in pots in the greenhouse are affected  by 
the type of staging, the two should be considered  together.  Irrigation 
methods are of two kinds: first, the capillary bench where water rises  up 
into the pot through the force of capillary attraction; second, the point-
watering system where a main supply pipe has small capillary  tubes 
conducting water from  it to the surface of the compost  in each pot. This  is 
sometimes referred to as  the 'spaghetti system'. The narrowness of the 
internal diameter of the tubes causes  the water flow to be reduced to a 
trickle. 

Bench 
watering 

49 

Open staging on which a 
multi-point  watering 
system  is installed  for 
watering  individual  pots 
such  as the dwarf 
chrysanthemums 
depicted. 

Capillary systems, though all working on the same principle, are many 
and varied. First to be developed were the sand benches, which divide into 
two types. In the more simple type the bench is covered with a sheet of 
plastic film and then 50 mm  (2 in) of fairly fine sand.  A trickle irrigation 
system is then laid over the sand which is wetted until water is dripping 
out from the edges of the sand. The sand has to be wetted  frequently 
enough to keep it fully charged with water at all times and thus to prevent 
it drying sufficiently  for the roots of the plants to grow out of the pots and 
root through into the sand. When the pots are removed such plants suffer a 
check in growth, possibly a severe one. This correct irrigation is very 
difficult  to bring about  in practice, and it is only recently that a device has 
been made available which monitors the wetness of the sand and is able to 
activate a circuit which will open a valve to let water into the irrigation 
system. 

Not only is sand heavy, but it tends to become covered with algae, and is 

now often replaced  by mats made of plastic fibres which are lightweight 

tS&ati, 

Euttering filled  with  sand. 

etween  which cold air can 

Fig.  23: n staging 
consisting of lengths of 

sink. The  lengths of 
guttering  slope slightly 
pawn from  the trickle-
irrigation  line, which  can 
be left  on all the time. 

so 

and more convenient. There are different  kinds available, but none has the 
capillary properties of fine sand, which is twice as good as the best of them. 

Another development of the sand capillary bed was to make it  fully 

automatic by waterproofing  the staging completely with plastic film  and 
then introducing water into the sand by means of a plastic pipe running 
along the centre of the bench below the sand. Perforations  in the pipe every 
few centimetres allow water to seep into the sand to saturate  it to a level 
just  below its surface. This is carefully  controlled by a float  valve in a 
header tank which receives the water supply. A proprietory version of this 
'do-it-yourself system' has the water level controlled  by a device similar to 
a carburettor float chamber. The fully automatic sand bench (now 
adaptable to capillary matting) offers  many attractions to the  amateur, 
particularly  in the summer time. 

plastic sheet  liner 

Another variation which attempts to combine the advantages of the 

capillary  bench with those of the open bench is to construct a  framework 
which supports parallel lengths of asbestos cement guttering filled  with 
fine sand. The sand is wetted by a trickle irrigation system and the spaces 
between the lengths of gutter allow cool air to sink past the  plants. 

One notable disadvantage  with capillary bench irrigation systems is the 
difficulty  of liquid feeding the pot plants without introducing a  liquid-feed 
dilutor into the irrigation system, which would be expensive for the 
amateur. With fully automatic sand capillary benches, the flow of water to 
the bench is insufficient  to activate a liquid-feed  dilutor and  complicated 
arrangements are needed to overcome this  drawback. 

When we turn to point-watering systems we find  that  we are confined  to 
using them for larger pots, because there are not sufficient  capillary  tubes 
available on a harness for a batch of small pots standing close together. 
Another limitation  is that if the pots on a staging are of different  sizes they 
will all require different  amounts of water to bring them to container 
capacity. This may necessitate taking two capillary tubes to a larger pot so 
that it receives, in the same time, twice as much water as a smaller one. 

Unfortunately this simple expedient  does not stop smaller pots drying 
more rapidly than  larger  ones. Watering may have to be done so that  the 
larger pots get enough and the smaller ones get too much; not a matter for 
concern in the summer,  but undesirable in the winter. 

It is difficult  to reconcile all the conflicting facts about staging in 

greenhouses, related systems of irrigation, and the materials with which 
staging is covered. The facts are: 
1  Staging must be so arranged that  it does not collect cold  air. 
2  Open staging provides a warmer and drier environment than solid 

staging - good in winter but perhaps too dry in the summer. It can be 
combined only with point-watering systems. It does not provide any 
assistance in draining pots and therefore  militates against good air-
filled  porosity. This does not matter greatly if composts have excellent 
physical condition with air-filled  porosity over 15 per cent, or in summer 
when evaporation is rapid. 

3  Solid staging, provided it is covered with fine sand which is kept wet, 
gives a cool and moist environment. It can be exploited for capillary 
irrigation in the summer if it is given a water-table just below its surface. 
In winter if the sand is 150 mm (6 in) deep it will effectively  drain 
containers and assist in maintaining good air-filled  porosity at a time 
when evaporation rates are low. 

4  All other materials which are used for covering staging have poor 

drainage pulling qualities in comparison with fine sand. 

5  Benches carrying a 150 mm  (6 in) depth of sand need to be very robust 

and are expensive to construct and equip. 

6  Fine sand, if kept moist, rapidly becomes colonised by green algae. This 

can be controlled  by the use of algicides. 

7  To overcome the cooler environment of a solid bench the greenhouse 
heating-system  thermostat  should be installed just a little above the 
bench. 

e r ll 

Cold  frames 

Frames have been in use for as long as greenhouses, providing for them a 
most important ancillary function.  In fact it is difficult  properly to utilise a 
greenhouse, heated or cold, without the back-up a frame provides. Some 
qualification  is required  because cold-frames  are used for a number of 
purposes such as producing early vegetables, raising the seeds of 
vegetables and flowers, and striking cuttings of shrubs and  herbaceous 
perennials. 

The cold-frame associated with the greenhouse is used for holding 
plants in containers until they are either moved out into the open or 
returned  back to the greenhouse. Traditionally the greenhouse  cold-frame 
has always had an ash base over clinker, but modern studies of water 
movements in pots and other containers require a re-appraisal of this 
practice. The cold-frame  is being discussed for the simple reason  that 
heated  frames are an expensive luxury which few can afford,  although  they 
do add a further  dimension to greenhouse growing. 

Frames can be constructed from  various materials, of which brick is 
best, but timber the more common. Whatever the material, the  frame, 
these days, is best covered with Dutch lights: first because they are the 
cheapest,  and second, because they admit  more light into the frame  than 
any other kind. The Dutch light consists of a wooden frame  measuring 
1500 mm  x 780 mm  (4 ft  11 in x 31 in)  (some manufacturers  make a Dutch 
light 810 mm wide (32 in))  into which a single sheet of glass 1420 mm  x 730 
mm  (56in  x 29in)  is slid and is secured top and bottom by wooden cleats 

Fig.  26:  non-reversible 
Dulch  light.  The 
dimensions shown are  the 
precise British  standard. 

Fig. 27: standard 
reversible Dutch  light, 
butt-jointed  and  nailed. 

fixed  with galvanised nails. The standard  reversible Dutch  light is butt-
jointed  and nailed,  but, at slightly  more cost, versions are available  with 
comb and feather  joints, glued together with waterproof  glue, and with the 
top rail grooved so that the glass  is supported in grooves along three of its 
sides. The standard reversible light is adequate for most  purposes. 

1470mm  (58in) 

63 

450mm 
(18in) 

150mm 

Fig. 28: single-span cold-
frame using a  Dutch  light. 
The protruding nails are 
used for securing  the  light 
against  wind. 

plastic 

membrane 
lo exclude 

worms 

\ 

perforated 
rigid  PVC 

drainage  pipe 

Whatever version is bought, it must be pressure-treated to preserve the 
wood (see page 18). 

When using Dutch lights it is possible to construct either a single frame 

or a span  frame. A single frame consists of a high back wall and a lower 
front  one. The exact height of each is a matter of convenience related to the 
size of plant  to be accommodated. One reasonable arrangement   is a back 
wall 450 mm (18 in) high and a front  one 150 mm (6 in) high giving a fall of 
300 mm {12 in).  Such a frame would have an overall width of 1470 mm (58 
in) (see Kg. 28). 

A span frame  is more economical and convenient with regard to 

utilisation of space. It is also cheaper to construct per area covered; but 
cannot, of course,  bebuiltasalean-tostructureagainstthegreenhouse.lt 
consists of a ridge board  100 mm (4 in) wide and 25 mm  (/  in) thick 
supported  on uprights driven into the ground at one metre (3 ft)  intervals. 
Nailed along the centre of the ridge board and on its upper face is a ridge-
fin 25 mm  x 25 mm  (/  in x  1 in). The two side walls should not be less than 
150 mm (6 in) high with the ridge 550 mm (22 in) high. Such a frame  would 
be 2700 mm (9 ft)  wide overall. If the side walls are required  to be higher 
the ridge should be raised by an equal amount. If timber is used  for 
construction  it should, for preference,  be pressure-treated,  otherwise 
painted  liberally with a copper preservative such as Cuprinol. 
(See Fig. 29.) 

The frame, single or span, obviously can be of any length, but if it can be 

about  the same as that of the greenhouse it accompanies, it will normally 
be adequate. 

ridge  capping 

ridge  board 

n 

9ft  Sin 

Fig. 29: double  Dutch-
light span  frame. 

54 

A careful  experiment at Stockbridge House Experimental  Horticulture 
Station,  Cawood, Yorkshire, in the early  1950s, showed surprisingly  little 
difference in the winter growth of lettuces in span frames orientated in 
various directions. This being the case, a frame  can be placed in the garden 
in the most convenient  position, provided, of course, that it is not in the 
shadow of buildings or screens. A popular idea in the past was to construct 
a frame as a lean-to on either side of a north-south greenhouse or on the 
south side of an east-west one. This is a satisfactory  arrangement  with 
houses that  have base walls of sufficient  height. 

Frames made from  Dutch lights are not elaborate structures and  the 

methods for securing the lights against wind aresimple. Lights on single 
frames have a nail driven  halfway  into the middle of each end rail and  two 
others similarly into each wall in a position directly below those in the 
light. Galvanised  wire wrapped  around each pair of nails will hold the light 
down. With span frames, nails are driven halfway  into the upper surface of 
one end rail of each light and halfway  into the edge of the other end rail of 
each. When the lights are placed on the frame each pair is hinged  together 
with wire wrapped around the nails protruding upwards from the end  rails 

Fig. 30:  fixing  Dutch 
lights on frames  to secure 
them  against  wind. 

/ 

t 

galvanised 

nails 

ventilating 

chock 

telephone 

cable 

and across the ridge. (See Fig. 30.) They are secured at their lower ends to 
the side walls in exactly the same way as with single  frames. 

One of the great advantages of cold-frames  is the facility they provide 

for giving plants increasing ventilation until they can withstand  full 
exposure to the normal climate - the process known as  hardening-off. 
Lights are propped up with wooden chocks to provide ventilation: a piece 
of wood measuring 50 mm  x 100 mm  x 150 mm (2 in  x 4 in  x 6 m) will 
provide three positions. If greater ventilation  is required than this chock 
provides, then the time has come when the light can be removed  altogether 
during the daytime. Dutch lights can easily be lifted  by one person and 
when removed must be carefully  stacked  and  secured. 

A single-span  Dutch-light 
frame  being used  for 
hardening-off  bedding 
plants in an  amateur's 
garden. The  frame  in the 
middle is covered  with a 
plastic-mesh  shading 
material  which  can also  be 
used  in frosty  weather  to 
provide  further  protection. 

65 

V 

Plants in  containers 
standing on a  base 
material which  is provided 
with a capillary  watering 
system. The wire hoops are 
for  placing  polythene  film 
over the area, either  for 
protection  from  weather or 
to provide a  propagation 
environment. 

In winter time, protection extra to that provided by the glass may be 

needed, for which purpose the frame is covered with heavy-grade hessian 
fabric. At one time reed mats were made specifically  for the purpose of 
covering frames. These, like hessian, are now difficult  to obtain. The 
plastic fabrics used for thermal screens might provide a modern  substitute. 

Plants being hardened-off  in frames are sometimes in danger of being 
scorched during periods of bright spring and early summer sunshine. To 
prevent this the glass of the light is sprayed with a shading material. This 
must be washed off before the lights are brought back into service in the 
autumn. 

As previously stated, it was the practice to remove the soil to a depth of 

150 mm (6 in) or so, put down a bed of clinker and cover this with ash to 
form  a base on which the various containers could stand. The  'standing-
base' for containers, as it is now called, has been shown to be almost as 
important as the compost in which the plants are growing. It has the 
function  in summer of supplying water to the containers by capillarity  and 
distributing it evenly over the whole standing area. In winter it has the 
function  of draining the compost in the containers to maintain its  air-filled 
porosity. 

Nurserymen are being recommended to construct special standing-

bases or standing-down  beds for their container-grown  plants. This bed 
was designed at the Experimental Horticulture Station of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food at Efford  in  Hampshire. 

The bed is made of fine lime-free sand at least 50 mm  (2 in) deep, and 

preferably  150 mm  (6 in). It is lined with 500 gauge black polythene which 
is brought over the retaining walls and ends.  A perforated  25 mm (/  in) 
alkathene pipe runs along the bed, under the sand, to act as a drainage 
channel to remove all surplus water to a soak-away. 

56 

levelling sand or shingle 
timbersideboards 

a 
b 
C  500g black  polyt hene enclosing  bed 
d  firmed,  clean,  sharp sand  (50mm  depth) 
e  25mm  plastic pipe with 5mm drainage  holes 
/  porous material  to prevent  pipe silting up 
g  soakaway  trench 
h  outer pathway  slab 
i  access pathway  (if required) 

There  is no reason why such a bed could not be adapted  to provide the 
base for a cold frame.  (See Fig. 31.) A frame is, after all, no more than a 
standing-down bed, with removable glass cover. 

Hardening-off  has already been described as a process of 

acclimatisation from one environment  to another, for which the cold-
frame is particularly suitable, but it may be helpful  to enlarge a little more 
upon it. If plants are suddenly subjected  to a change of environment  which 
involves a lowering of temperature and exposure to a much more turbulent 
atmosphere, the soft tissue they will have developed previously will  suffer 
considerable damage before their natural  powers of adaptability have had 
time to bring about the necessary changes. Plants can often survive within 
quite a wide temperature  band, but grow at different  rates at either end of 
it, producing softer  tissues at the higher  end and harder ones at the lower 
end. The hardening-off  process in frames is a procedure for bringing about 
these temperature-induced  changes gradually  in a situation  sheltered 
from atmospheric turbulence, where protection from sudden extremes of 
temperature  is also available. Meanwhile the environment outside the 
frame  is gradually improving. After a few weeks the adaptation of the 
plant and the improvement  in its intended environment have reached  the 
point of coincidence, where acclimatisation has been  achieved. 

57 

Chapter 12 

Pests and  diseases 

Green plants directly and indirectly provide the food for most other living 
things including, of course, man. When other living things are in direct 
competition  with man for a particular plant or crop they are referred  to as 
pests, diseases, parasites and the like. Technically any life form  attacking 
a plant is, in plain language, a pest and in scientific  language a pathogen, 
and causes the plant to be diseased. For convenience  horticulturists 
categorise pathogens into pests  which are invertebrate animals, mostly 
insects and mites, and diseases,  which are caused by fungi,  bacteria  and 
viruses. In addition  plants may be in a state of ill-health without  any 
pathogen  being responsible. Such conditions are referred  to as 
physiological disorders, and are caused by an abnormality in the 
environment, e.g. waterlogging, nutrient  deficiency,  chemical  damage 
etc. Finally, vermin such as mice, squirrels and rabbits may cause havoc. 
No one would hesitate to call them pests, though strictly speaking they are 
vertebrate animals as opposed to the more common  invertebrates. 

Plants under glass may be diseased through any of the preceding causes, 

some of which attack anything whereas others are more selective in their 
choice of host. The subject of pests and diseases and their control is the 
source of an abundant  literature, some of which is very academic. In Great 
Britain the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF)  produces 

The red spider  mite, which 
is a serious and  common 
peat of plants in 
greenhouses,  particularly 
heated greenhouses.  It is 
almost  impossible to avoid 
attacks  from  this pest 
sooner or later,  and 
pesticides  have to be  used 
to control  it.  (The 
biological  control by 
means of a  parasite used 
by commercial  growers is 
impracticable  for 
amateurs.) 

58 

annually a book entitled Approved  Products  for Farmers  and  Growers 
which is regarded as a standard work of reference and which lists all the 
products approved for general use in agriculture and horticulture; it gives 
the name of each pesticide by which it is internationally known; the 
purposes for which it may be effectively  used; the limitations to its use, 
e.g. plants which are damaged  by it, if any; pests which may  develop 
resistance to it and any hazards attendant upon its use together with the 
precautions which should be adopted; it then lists the manufacturers  and 
the proprietory names under which they sell it. In another section it gives 
information  on the pests and diseases of various important  plants and  the 
chemicals which control them. It is well worth the cost, and in spite of the 
new products which continue to come onto the market, one edition 
remains sufficiently  up-to-date for two or three years. 

Should the gardener use the above book he can find which chemicals are 

available for use for a specific problem, but he will not know whether the 
product is available in suitable small packs. To guide him through  this 
difficulty  the MAFF produces another very useful  publication  entitled 
Chemicals  for the  Gardener.  This lists the chemicals available for the 
amateur and gives brief but accurate information on the identification of 
the more common pests and diseases. Lastly the MAFF also produces a 
series of Advisory  Leaflets,  each on a specific pest or disease; they are 
continually updated  and give the best advice available on the subject at a 
very modest cost. A catalogue is published annually by Her  Majesty's 
Stationery Office listing, with their prices, all the publications  available. 
Another source of information  is to be found  in the booklets produced by 
the pesticide firms, which often contain a vast amount of technical 
information  in condensed and tabulated  form. 

Application of 
pesticides 

Pesticide chemicals can be applied in greenhouses in a number of  different 
ways. The most familiar  method is high-volume spraying which  is where 
the chemical is dissolved in a large amount of water and then applied  as a 
drenching spray all over the crop. Next and equally familiar  is  fumigation 
which is when a chemical is vaporised in the greenhouse, usually by heat. 
Fumigation  has to some extent been superseded by the use of smokes 

which are pyrotechnic devices on which a fuse  is lit to produce dense smoke 
which carries particles of the chemical to all parts of the house. Aerosols 
work on a similar principle. It is now possible to purchase electric devices 
whereby a very low-volume spray is distributed so that  minute droplets of 
the fluid reach all parts of the plant. The last method, and the  least 
popular, is dusting. 

It is difficult  to say which is the best method of application  because it 

depends on the problem that is being dealt with, the size of the house and 
so on, but a light plastic pneumatic sprayer or similar  hand-operated 
knapsack sprayer is really indispensable for the application of high-
volume sprays. If the substance to be applied can be obtained as a smoke 
or aerosol, so much the better, and if an electric atomiser can be  afforded 
then the armoury will be quite  formidable. 

All parts of the plant are susceptible to attack by pathogens, the roots as 
much as the aerial parts. Soil-borne pathogens have already been 
mentioned in Chapter 6 as well as their eradication  by heat sterilisation  by 
means of steam. This remains an extremely effective  way of dealing with 
them and, although it cannot penetrate deeply enough to deal  completely 
with tomato mosaic virus or certain wilt-causing fungi, nothing has 
superseded  it. Notwithstanding this, in the last few years  effective 
chemical sterilants have been developed for disinfecting the greenhouse 
soil, the compost for containers and even the soil round individual  plants 
in the greenhouse. The more important of these are: 

Metham-sodium. This can be purchased as a liquid preparation  under 
the names of' Vapam' or 'Sistan' or as a solid prilled* material under the 
name of 'Dazomet'. It is used as a chemical sterilant for the greenhouse soil 
or for sterilising compost loam. After application  the soil has to be covered 
with a plastic sheet to stop the methyl isothiocyanate vapour it gives off 
escaping. After three weeks of fumigation  the soil is uncovered  and 
cultivated three times at fortnightly  intervals to rid it of residual  fumes 
which are phytotoxic (injurious to plant tissues). 

Drazoxolon. This is a fungicide  sold under the name of'Milcol' and is 
used against the damping-off  disease of seedlings  (Pythium 
debarryanum).  Containers ready for sowing can be treated  before the seed 
is sown (or afterwards  if there is no danger of the seed being washed away) 
and also when the seedlings have been   pricked-off. 
Etridiazole. This is available under the trade names 'Truban',  'Terrazole' 
and  'Aa terra'. It is effective  against the damping-off  disease of seedlings 
and  footrot  (Phytophthora  species) and is now very widely  used for  this 
purpose. 

Cheshunt Compound. This mixture has been in use for over fifty years 
and is very effective against the damping-off disease of seedlings. 
New materials or mixtures of existing ones with a broader spectrum of 
activity are being developed or are under trial. 

The common pests of greenhouse crops, the appearance of which sooner 
or later is inevitable, are aphids, known as greenfly  (although they may be 
all sorts of other colours), red spider and whitefly. All are very difficult  to 
control because of their ability to develop resistant strains to new 
pesticides. As it is impossible to give specific recommendations for the 
control of the first two, you should purchase two or three  different 

pesticides recommended for the control of each of these pests and use them 
in turn. For red spider and whitefly commercial growers of tomatoes and 
cucumbers use 'integrated control', which is a careful  blend of chemical 
and biological control. Unfortunately  it  is quite beyond the resources of 
the amateur. 

Biological control means the introduction of a parasite which will 

reduce the population  of the pest to a point where its effect can  be 
tolerated. It was thought  at one time that  it would prove the answer to the 
problem for amateur and  professional  alike, but in the event  it proved 
impossible to maintain  the parasite population  in small  greenhouses. 

A fairly recently developed group of pesticides (e.g. Resmethrin) is thai 

known as the synthetic pyrethroids. These are proving very  successful 
against whitefly, and are now available in small packs for  amateur 
gardeners. 

Since the advent of peat composts and capillary beds, sciarid fly or 

fungus gnat has become a serious pest of plants in containers. The small 
Hies are seen on the surface of the compost but the damage is caused by the 
maggots which feed on the roots of the plants.  A sharp look out should  be 
kept for this pest and if it is seen Diazinon should be used as a drench. 

Another general pest of pot plants is the tarsonemid  mite,  sometimes 

called the cyclamen mite. It is waxy white or light  brown in colour and 
hardly visible to the naked eye. The leaves of pot plants are attacked  and 
become brittle and curled. Their surfaces may become purple and dark 
with a cracked appearance. An effective  control is to spray the plants with 
dicofol  (sold under the trade name of Kelt hane). 

Turning to fungal diseases, we have as general troublemakers the powdery 
mildews. There are many different  species concerned, but the  symptoms 
of their damage are white spores which look like powder and which cover 
the leaves and stems of the host plant. Benomyl  (sold as Benlate)  has 
proved very effective  against the powdery mildews. It is a systemic 
fungicide  and can be used as a root drench as well as a spray. It has 
prophylactic effects as well as curative ones. It  is effective  against  many-
other fungal diseases in addition  to the powdery mildews. Incidentally, 
powdery mildews are active in dry conditions whereas the downy mildews 
as a general rule require very damp and moist environments. The  dreaded 
tomato leaf mould  {Cladosporium  fulvum)  is similar to the  powdery 
mildews, but  brown in colour, and  is also controlled  by Benlate. 

The downy mildews which attack grapes, lettuce and some pot  plants 
have to be controlled by protective sprays based on copper  compounds, 
sold under such trade names as Colloiclox, Fungex, Cuprokylt  and 
Perenox. Such sprays are most effective  if applied  before the disease 
appears and in anticipation  that  it will do  so. Do not delay until  symptoms 
appear. The dilhiocarbarmate group, of which zineb is most  readily 
available to the amateur, is effective  against downy mildews as well as 
other diseases. 

Perhaps the most common fungus seen under glass is the grey mould 

fungus  (Botrytis  cinerea).  Normally  it does not attack healthy tissues  but 
confines  itself to dead plant tissue on which it forms the common, ever 
present, grey fluff  of decay. It can, however, pass from  dead or dying tissue 
into living tissue; if, for example, tomatoes are de-leafed  so that  stumps 
are left on the stem to die, Botrytis  can establish itself on them and  then 
pass into the stem and kill the plant. If this is seen to be happening and  can 

m 

be taken  in time, a dab of creosote on the lesion will save the plant.  A dab 
means a very small amount -  if the creosote is put all round the stem  the 
plant will die. Botrytis  attacks tomato fruits where they are attached  to 
the stalk causing them to fall to the ground. In cold greenhouses it also 
causes spots to form on the fruits. Strawberry fruits are sometimes 
attacked, but spraying with Renomyl or Captan will give good control. 

Virus diseases attack most  plants grown under  glass. The two most 
common viruses are tomato mosaic virus (TM  V), originally called  tobacco 
mosaic virus, and cucumber yellow mottle mosaic. The latter has a very 
wide range of hosts. A number of viruses attack chrysanthemums and 
carnations, and, in fact,  it is difficult  to find  any plant of importance  which 
does not have some virus enemy. Viruses are spread  mainly by sap-sucking 
insects, among which winged aphids are by far the most important, so that 
aphid control is an indirect  method of virus control. Viruses rarely kill 
their host, but they weaken it and  may make it unsightly and  perhaps 
unusable. The most common symptom  is mosaicingof the leaves, 
sometimes distortion of the leaf or flower, and a characteristic  spotting 
called Ringspot. Virus diseases can be eradicated from  stocks of plants by 
special propagation  techniques known as meristem culture or micro-
propagation (see Appendix VII). The principle underlying this practice is 
to propagate the plant from a few cells excised from  the growing tip of a 
stem before the virus particles have had time to enter them. This method 
has provided us with virus-free  stocks of many plants,  particularly 
carnations and  chrysanthemums. 

Virus diseases 

The tomato provides a number of examples of physiological disorders. 
Blossom end rot is one that  plagues amateur gardeners. It is characterised 
by a dark brown hard sunken lesion at the point of the fruit  where the 

Physiological 
disorders 

petals were originally attached. It is thought  to be caused  by the plant 
having undergone water stress coupled with calcium deficiency at some 
time. Plants in peat modules are very susceptible if the modules are not 
watered frequently enough. Blotchy ripening and greenback of the  fruits 
are other physiological disorders with rather more complicated  causes; 
magnesium deficiency  is due to potassium  levels in the soil being too high 
in relation to magnesium. Shanking of grapes (see page 100) is a 
physiological disorder,  probably connected  with moisture stress in the 
plant, and so probably is tipburn of lettuces which is a constant  anxiety to 
the commercial grower. 

The avoidance of physiological disorders is simple in theory, because all 

that  is required  is to ensure that  there are no imbalancing factors in the 
plant's environment. In practice every experienced grower knows that  the 
more sophisticated  the cultivation of a crop the greater becomes the risk of 
physiological disorders occurring. 

For further  information  on pesticides see Appendix  III. 

175 

Appendix I 

Heat requirement for  greenhouses 

In order to maintain a given temperature in a greenhouse the heat input must at all times 
equal the rate at which the house is losing heat. Heat loss is constantly changing, the 
determinants being windspeed, the clearness of the night sky, and whether the glass overlaps 
are sealed by moisture. Any estimate of heat loss must allow for the most extreme conditions 
which could occur, and then strike some compromise between them and what  is probable. 

This is done by dividing the country into regions with similar climatic patterns  and 

deciding upon an outside base temperature. This is the lowest outdoor temperature  in that 
particular region likely to persist for a protracted period of  time, rather than for only two or 
three hours. In England,  for example: 

Southern England 
London and the East 
South-west 
Yorkshire and  North-east 
North-west 

°C 
-4.5 
-5.5 
-1 
-6.5 
-5.5 

°F 
24 
22 
30 
20 
22 

Check for your own locality by consulting the local horticultural advisor of the Agricultural 
Development  and Advisory Service (ADAS) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, in 
Great Britain, or similar advisory bodies in other countries. 

Once the outside base temperature has been determined it must then  be decided what is 
the lowest temperature required to be maintained  in the greenhouse. This is best referred  to 
as the minimum night temperature,  because if it can be maintained  at night, when there is no 
assistance whatever from the sun, it can easily be maintained during the day. If the outside 
base temperature is subtracted  from  the greenhouse minimum night temperature, we have 
what is called the temperature  lift. 

The heat loss through the surface of a greenhouse is estimated as being 

8 watts per metre squared per C ° difference  between inside and outside  temperatures 
(1.4 British  thermal  units  per  hour per square foot per F° difference  between  inside  and 
outside 

temperatures) 

To obtain the total heat loss per hour it is necessary to calculate the surface area of the 
greenhouse. As this includes the brick wall on which the house may stand the area of the wall 
is divided by half to allow for its lower thermal transmission. The total figure is called  the 
equivalent glass area. Calculate it as follows: 

176 

area of roof plus glass walls 
= 2 x (height of glass walls (a) + roof slope (6)) x length (c) =  
area of gable ends plus end glass walls 
= (height of glass to ridge (d) + height of glass wall (a))  x width (e) =  
half area of brick  walls 
= height of brick walls (g) x (length (c) + width (e))= 

x 

y 

z 

If we give values to the dimensions, e.g. 

a  —  1 m 
b  =  5m 
c  =  30 m 
d  m  3.5 m 
e  =  9m 
g  =  0.5 m 

3\ft 
17 ft 
100 ft 
ll\ft 
30ft 
lift 

en the equivalent glass area of the house  in Fig. 40 would be: 

Area of roof and glass walls 

=  2 x ( l + 5 ) x 30 
OT2X(3\ 

+ 

17)X100 

Area of gable ends + end glass walls 

= (3.5 +  l ) x9 
o r ( H | + 3 $)  x30 

Half area of brick walls 

= 0.5 x (30+ 9) 
or 1} x (100 + 30) 

= 360m2 
= 

= 40.5 m2 
= 

=  19.5 m2 
= 

4100 sq ft 

450sqft 

195sqft 

420 m2 

4745 sq ft 

The heat requirement of the house is 

equivalent glass area in m 2 (sqfi)  x temperature lift in C° (F°)  x F 
where F, the conversion factor, is 8 x 10 _ikW/m2/C°  (1.4Btu/sqft/F°/hr). 
calculation gives the answer in kilowatts, and the imperial calculation gives the answer in 
British thermal units per hour. 

The  metric 

Suppose that the greenhouse used as our example is in Yorkshire, where the outside base 

temperature is -6.o°C  (20°  F). If it is to have a heating system which will maintain a 
minimum night temperature of 15.5°C (60°F),  we can calculate that the temperature  lift 
required will be: 

15.5° + 6.5° = 22C° 

(60°-20°=40F°) 

and its heat requirement will be 

420 x 22 x 8 x 10"" = 74 kW 

(4745 x 40x1.4  =  265,720Btu/hr). 

MAFFBulletin NaTis. 
Commercial  Glasshouses. 

If this amount of heat is to be provided  by a solid-fuel  boiler it is usually necessary to have a 

boiler with a heat capacity one-third greater than the heat  requirement of the greenhouse. 
This allows for the various unavoidable losses of heat normally referred  to as boiler 
inefficiency. 

Thus the boiler capacity required would be 

74 x 1.33 .  99 kW 

(26.5,720x1.33 = 354,293  Btu/hr) 

Boilers are, of course, made in discrete sizes, and the one suitable would have a capacity 
not less than that  required  - say 400,000 Btu/hr or 120 kW. If oil or gas boilers are used  the 
efficiency  may be higher. Professional  advice is required before purchase is made. 

The next step in installing a heating system is knowing how much pipe of any  particular 

diameter is needed to deliver the amount of heat  required  into the house. The  thermal 
transmission of metal pipes depends upon their diameter, the temperature of the water or 
steam  inside them  and the temperature at which the house is kept. In a hot water system it is 
usual for the heat to leave the boiler, when the system is working to the full, at a  temperature 
of 82°C (180°F) and return at one of 71 °C (160°F) giving an average temperature of 76.5°C 
(170° F).  At this temperature the thermal emission of various pipes is as follows: 

177 

100 mm (4 in) cast iron 
50 mm  (2 in) mild steel 
37 mm (7 J in) mild steel 
31 mm (1\  in) mild  steel 
25 mm  (/  in)  mild steel 

277 watts/metre 
174 watts/metre 
129 watts/metre 
104 watts/metre 
93 watts/metre 

288Btu/ft/hr 
180Btulft/hr 
134Btu/ft/hr 
107Btu/ft/hr 
96Btu/ft/hr 

These figures have to be adjusted  up or down slightly if it is intended to maintain higher or 
lower temperatures in a greenhouse, but the difference in the amount of pipe required in a 
small greenhouse is neither here nor there. 

The amount of pipe required is the heat requirement of the house divided by the thermal 

emission of the pipe. Thus in the example chosen the amount of pipe required would be: 

100 mm {4 in) cast iron 
50 mm  (2 in) mild steel 
37 mm  il\  in)  mild steel 
31 mm {l\in)  mild  steel 
25 mm  (1 in)  mild steel 

metres 
267 
425 
574 
712 
796 

feet 
923 
1476 
1983 
2483 
2768 

As can be seen, for smaller diameters of pipe a considerable length has to be  accommodated 
within the house, e.g. 31 mm  (i{ in) pipe would have at least twelve flows up the house and 
twelve returns. To reduce the amount of such pipe, gilled pipe, which has a much  greater 
thermal emission per unit length, is often  used. 

Fuel required to maintain a minimum temperature of 7°C (45°F)  throughout the year in 
small  greenhouses 

Size 

1.8 x 2.4 m 
6x8  ft 
2.4 x 3.7 m 
8 x 12 ft 

2.4x4.6m 
8 x 15 ft 

3 x 3.8 m 
10xl2\ft 
3 x 4.6 m 
10 x 15 ft 
3 x 5.3 m 
10xl7\ft 
3 x 6.1m 
10 x 20 ft 

3 x 7.6 m 
10x25  ft 

3x9.1m 
10x30  ft 

3.7x6.1m 
12 x 20 ft 

3.7 x 7.6 m 
12 x 25 ft 

3.7  x 9.1m 
12x30  ft 
4.6 x 9.1m 
15 x 30ft 

Coal 
(kg) 
(70%  efficiency) 

Oil 
(litres) 
(80%  efficiency) 

Electricity 
(kW-hr) 
(100%  efficiency) 

Natural  gas 
(therms) 
(100%  efficiency) 

Bottled gas  (propane) 
(cu ft) 
(100%, efficiency) 

158 

226 

330 

308 

399 

448 

495 

599 

690 

559 

666 

773 

103 

146 

213 

199 

260 

291 

323 

383 

446 

360 

432 

496 

860 

1227 

1796 

1674 

2162 

2426 

2689 

3218 

3746 

3037 

3615 

4193 

30 

42 

62 

58 

74 

83 

92 

110 

128 

104 

124 

144 

1174 

1675 

2452 

2284 

2951 

3312 

3670 

4392 

5113 

4145 

4934 

5727 

869 

560 

4713 

161 

6433 

178 

Fuel required to maintain a minimum temperature of 15°C (60°F)  during March, April, 
May and June in small  greenhouses 

Size 

1.8 x 2.4 m 
6x8 

ft 

2.4 x 3.7 m 
8 x 12 ft 
2.4 x 4.6m 
8 x 15 ft 

3 x 3.8 m 
10 x  12\ft 
3 x 4 . 6m 
10x15  ft 
8 x 5.3 m 
10xl7\ft 
3 x  6.1m 
10 x 20 ft 
3 x 7.6m 
10x25  ft 
3 x 9.1m 
10 x 30 ft 

3.7 x 6.1m 
12 x 20 ft 
3.7 x 7.6 m 
12x25  ft 

3.7 x  9.1m 
12 x 30 ft 

4.6 x  9.1m 
15 x 30 ft 

Coal 
(kg) 

312 

446 

689 

653 

785 

882 

977 

1169 

1361 

1103 

1313 

1523 

1712 

Oil 
(litres) 

Electricity 
(kW-hr) 

Natural  gas 
(therms) 

Bottled gas  (propane) 
(cuft) 

202 

288 

444 

421 

507 

568 

630 

754 

877 

711 

847 

982 

1105 

1693 

2416 

3733 

3541 

4257 

4777 

5295 

6336 

7376 

5986 

7118 

8257 

9282 

58 

83 

128 

121 

146 

163 

181 

217 

252 

205 

243 

282 

317 

2311 

3298 

5095 

4832 

5810 

6520 

7227 

8648 

10067 

8170 

9715 

11270 

12669 

The cost ratio is, very  approximately, 

coal 
oil 
electricity 
natural gas 
propane 

18 
38 
100 
21 
54 

(based on UK fuel costs at November 1981). 

Fuel required to maintain 
in small greenhouses 

a minimum temperature of 18°C (65°F) throughout the year 

179 

Size 

1.8 x 2.4 m 
6x8  ft 

2.4 x 3.7 m 
8 x 12 ft 

2.4 x 4.6 m 
8 x 15 ft 

3 x 3.8 m 
10x12$  ft 
3 x 4 . 6m 
10 x 15 ft 

3 x 5.3 m 
10xl7\ft 
3 x 6.1m 
10 x 20 ft 

3 x 7.6 m 
10 x 25 ft 

3 x 9 . 1m 
10x30  ft 

3.7 x  6.1m 
12 x 20 ft 

3.7x7.6m 
12 x 25 ft 

3.7 x  9.1m 
12x30  ft 

4.6 x 9.1m 
15 x 30 ft 

Coal 
(kg) 

Oil 
(litres) 

Electricity 
(kW-hr) 

Natural gas 
(therms) 

Bottled gas (propane) 
(cuft) 

1825 

2604 

3075 

2908 

4589 

5149 

5707 

6830 

7950 

6446 

7673 

8900 

10004 

1178 

1680 

1985 

1876 

2960 

3323 

3683 

4408 

5131 

4160 

6302 

7309 

8717 

9904 

14132 

16686 

15780 

24719 

27944 

30974 

37066 

43147 

34981 

41641 

48302 

( 5 4 2 96  

) 

" " • — • —i  

—* 

338 

483 

570 

539 

844 

954 

1057 

1265 

1473 

1194 

1421 

1649 

1853 

^- 

*-" 

13517 

19288 

22774 

21537 

33737 

38138 

42274 

50588 

58888 

47743 

56832 

65923 

( ^ 7 4 1 04   ~) 
^*—-  —^ 

180 

Appendix II 

The preparation of liquid feeds 

1.  The preparation of liquid feeds, as opposed to the purchase of ready-mixed  preparations 
either as powders or solutions, offers  three advantages: 
a.  It is considerably  cheaper. 
b.  Any nutrient ratio can be achieved. 
c.  Any concentration  of feed can be obtained from  a standard dilution rate. 

2.  In the past, various dilution rates for stock solutions have been used, but the  Glasshouse 
Crops Research Institute has long advised a standard  dilution rate of  1 in 200, varying the 
concentration  of the stock solution accordingly. All the calculations that follow are based on 
this procedure. 

3.  The concentration of liquid feeds is expressed in terms of parts per million of nutrient 
(ppm). To give an immediate impression of the concentration of a particular feed, the  total 
nutrient  concentration  is frequently  stated together with the nutrient ratio. For example: 

A widely used feed for vigorous pot plants contains 
500 ppm of nutrient with N and  K 20 in the ratio of 2 :1 
p p m o f N = 5 0 0 x$  = 333 
ppm of K 20 = 500 x \  = 166 
N = Nitrogen  K 20 = Potash  K 20  x 0.83 =  Potassium. 

4.  The fertilisers used for liquid feeding must be soluble and free from  insoluble  impurities. 
It may be necessary occasionally to strain stock solutions through fine gauze to remove any 
insoluble impurities. Those in normal use are as follows: 
a.  Potassium nitrate  (KN0 3)  13%N : 46% K 20 - the most widely used potassium source and 
one which will not affect the pH of the compost. 
b.  Potassium sulphate  (K 2S04)  48% K 20. This is a single source of potassium. Its sulphate 
ions will lock up calcium as calcium sulphate, and reduce the amount of exchangeable  bases 
in a compost, so preventing its pH rising under the influence of hard water. It is the  preferred 
form for loamless composts. 
c.  Ammonium  nitrate (NH 4NO:j) 35%N. This is the normal substance used for  increasing 
the nitrogen  content of a feed without  adding any but ammonium  and nitrate ions. The 
nitrification  of its ammonium  ions leads to the removal of two calcium ions. 
d.  Urea (CO(NH 2)2) 46%N. This may be regarded as a straight alternative to ammonium 
nitrate in all respects. It must be guaranteed  free from  the phytotoxic impurity biuret. It is 
less readily obtainable, and now has been more or less superseded  by ammonium  nitrate. 
e.  Ammonium sulphate  ((NH 4)2S04)  21% N. This is generally used for feeds for tomatoes, 
whose flavour it is said to improve. Its nitrification  can immobilise four calcium  ions, and  its 
use may be advisable for increasing the nitrogen content of feeds for use on loamless composts 
and where hard water may cause the pH to rise. 
f.  Mono-ammonium  phosphate (NH 4H2P04)  11%N: 48% soluble P 2Os. This is used  for 
providing phosphate to a feed on the comparatively rare occasions when it is needed. 
NB The ammonium  metallic phosphates such as Magamp have no real use in the 
preparation of liquid  feeds. 
g.  Magnesium sulphate (MgS0 4) 20% Mg. This may be needed to prevent  magnesium 
deficiency,  particularly for sensitive crops such as those of the family  Solanaceae,  e.g. 
tomato, pepper etc. 
h.  Aluminium sulphate A1 2(S04)3. Used for the 'blueing' of hydrangeas. 

5.  In order to prepare a stock solution, the quantities of the various fertilisers that must be 
dissolved in one litre (one gallon)  of water must be calculated. 
a.  In grams for preparing stock solutions in litres using the  formula 

ppm of nutrient required  x 20 

percentage of nutrient in  fertiliser 

to prepare a stock solution for a liquid feed containing 166 ppm  of potash (K 20)  using 
potassium  nitrate 

166 x 20  „ n 
—— 

,. 

= 72 grams (to nearest gram) are required  per litre 

4 

. 

, 

,., 

b.  In ounces for preparing stock solutions in gallons using the  formula 

ppm of nutrient required  x 16 

5 x percentage of nutrient in  fertiliser 

181 

—  =  Hi  oz of potassium nitrate (to nearest joz) are required per gallon 

5  x46 

c.  When it is necessary to use fertilisers like potassium nitrate which contain two nutrients, 
i.e. in this case nitrogen and potassium  (K 20), it is necessary to calculate first the amount  of 
potassium nitrate needed to provide the correct amount of potash as in (a) or (b) above and 
then to calculate the ppm of nitrogen this will provide. This amount of nitrogen must then  be 
subtracted from the total amount of nitrogen required in ppm if this is greater than  the 
amount already provided by the potassium  nitrate. 

For grams use the  formula: 

percentage of nutrient in fertiliser  x amount of fertiliser 

20 

from example (a) above 

13 x 72 

=  47 ppm of nitrogen  (to nearest  ppm) 

are provided by 72 grams of potassium  nitrate 

For ounces use the  formula: 

percentage of nutrient  in fertiliser  x 5 x amount of fertiliser 

16 

from example (b) above 

=  47 ppm of nitrogen  (to nearest  ppm) 

16 

are provided  by 11 j  oz of potassium  nitrate. 

6.  A worked example illustrates the method of calculation: 

Using potassium nitrate and ammonium  nitrate, calculate to the nearest gram (£ oz) the 
quantities of each to be dissolved in one litre (one gallon)  of water to make a stock  solution 
which when diluted 200 times will contain 333 ppm of nitrogen and  166 ppm of potash  (K 20) 
Amount of potassium nitrate required = 
166x20 

„ n 

or  166 xl6 
M  166x16 
or 
or  ———-  = 
5x  46 

, ,,  M 
ll\oz 

-  72grams 

46 

This will provide 
13 x 72 
—— 
20 

=  47 ppm nitrogen 

IS x5 > 23 

i2L£2LZL±2-  =  47ppm  nitrogen 

16 x 2 

ppm of nitrogen still required = 333 -  47 = 286 
Amount of ammonium nitrate required = 
286x20 

. „. 

——  =  164 grams 
35 

or 

286x16 

5x35 

=  26 oz 

72 grams 
164 grams 
1 litre 

So the quantities required are: 
Potassium nitrate 
Ammonium nitrate 
Water 
7.  The same method may be used where three nutrients are required, as in the  following 
example: 
Calculate in grams per litre {ounces per gallon)  the quantities of ammonium  nitrate, 
potassium nitrate and  mono-ammonium phosphate required to make a stock solution  which 
when diluted 200 times will provide a feed containing 600 ppm of total nutrient  with 
N: soluble P 20 5:K 20  in the ratio 2:1:1. 

ll\oz 
26oz 
1 gallon 

ppm of N  =  600  x  |  x  300 

ppm of soluble P 2 0 s  =  600  x  |  =  150 
ppmofK 20  =  600  x  |  =  150 
Amount of potassium nitrate required = 
150 x 20 

c , 

—  =  65 grams 

46 

This will provide 
13x65 

=  43 ppm  nitrogen 

20 

Amount of mono-ammonium  phosphate 
150 x 20 

63 grams 

48 

This will provide 
11x63 

20 

35 ppm nitrogen 

ppm of nitrogen still required = 
300-(43+  35) = 222 
Amount of ammonium nitrate required  -
222x20 

127 grams 

35 

150 x 16 
or  5x  46 

10\oz 

13 x5xl0\ 

16 

43ppm  nitrogen 

or  150 xl6 
or 
5> 48 

10\oz 

11  X  5xl0\ 

16 

36ppm  nitrogen 

or  300-(43+  36)  =  221 

...  221 x 16 

5x36 

20 oz 

So the quantities required are: 
Ammonium  nitrate 
Potassium  nitrate 
Mono-ammonium  phosphate 
Water 

127 grams 
65 grams 
63 grams 
1 litre 

20 oz 
10\oz 
10\oz 
1 gallon 

8.  With the concentrations normally used for stock solutions, solubility problems are rarely 
encountered. If they do occur the quantities of fertilisers required should be dissolved  into 
two litres (2 gallons)  of water and the dilution rate set at 100  times. Potassium nitrate is 
soluble to the extent of about 0.22 kg per litre ( 2| lb per gallon)  in cold water. The other 
chemicals have greater  solubility. 

9.  Nutrient ratios in common use range in simple proportions from  1N:3K 20 to 2N:1K 20. 
Feeds applied to crops in soil usually range from  1N:3K 20 to 1N:1K 20, while for plants in 
containers ratios with N in excess of  K 20, e.g. 2N:1K 20, are common. This may be explained 
by the fact that in soil large amounts  o f N O^   (nitrates) would lead quickly to high 
conductivity (high soluble salt concentration)  resulting in restriction of plant growth, 
whereas in a container leaching of nitrates prevents high  conductivity. 

10.  Total nutrient concentrations may be as low as 300 ppm for slow-growing plants in 
winter, and as high as 800 ppm for container-grown shrubs in summer. 

11.  Liquid feeding when growth is fast  (at the nutrient concentrations mentioned in (9) 
above) should be continual, i.e. with every  watering. 

12.  Investigation of the nutrient needs of plants in soil or containers have been thorough for 
all the crops covered by the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service  (ADAS) 
'Blueprints', but for others, gardeners need to be guided by experience and only general 
recommendations can be given, e.g. vigorous pot plants in summer N2:K 201 total nutrient 
300 ppm; these concentrations possibly reduced in winter, although as watering is then less 
frequent care to avoid malnutrition is necessary. 

13.  With loamless composts in hard water areas pH values tend to rise and result in lime-
induced chlorosis and to counteract this liquid feeds which lock up calcium as calcium 
sulphate or cause it to be leached as calcium bicarbonate are necessary. Potassium  sulphate 
and ammonium sulphate are used for this purpose. 

14.  Trace elements are included in many proprietory feeds, but are superfluous if a micro-
nutrient frit has been added to the  compost. 

Some common liquid feeds (dilution always  1 in 200) 
1.  Potassium  nitrate 

Water 
Nutrient content =  105 ppm nitrogen, 335 ppm potash  K 20. 
Nutrient ratio =  1N:3K 20 
Used for newly planted tomatoes in soil. 

150 grams 

l\lb 
1 litre  1 gallon 

183 

2.  Potassium nitrate 

Ammonium nitrate 
Water 
Nutrient content =  170 ppm nitrogen,  335 ppm potash  K 20 
Nutrient ratio =  1N:2K 20 
Used for tomatoes and other plants in soil through the main part of the growing season. 

150grams 

l{lb 
38 grams 
6oz 
1 litre  1 gallon 

3.  Potassium nitrate 

Ammonium nitrate 
Water 
Nutrient content =  225 ppm nitrogen,  335 ppm potash  K 20 
Nutrient ratio = IN:  1|K 20 

150grams 

l^lb 
70 grams   11 oz 
1 litre 
/  gallon 

.  4 
4.  Ammonium nitrate 

u . 

62  grams 

• 

f0  oz 

Water 
Nutrient content =  110 ppm nitrogen 
Used on cucumber on straw bales for first three weeks after  planting. 

1 gallon 

1 litre 

5.  Ammonium  nitrate 

Water 
Nutrient content = 230 ppm  nitrogen 
Used on cucumbers on straw bales for second three weeks after  planting. 

132grams  21 oz 
1 litre 
/  gallon 

6.  Potassium nitrate  

Ammonium  nitrate 
Magnesium sulphate 
Water 
Nutrient content =  191 ppm nitrogen: 58 ppm potash K 20:25 ppm  magnesium 
Nutrient ratio =  7.5N:2.5K 20:lMg 
Used on cucumber on straw bales from  six weeks after  planting to end of season. 

25 grams 
4oz 
lOOgrams  16oz 
25 grams 
4oz 
1 litre 
1 gallon 

7.  Potassium nitrate 

Ammonium  nitrate 
Water 
Nutrient content =  333 ppm nitrogen:166 ppm potash  K 20 
Nutrient ratio = 2N:1K,0 
Used as a liquid feed for vigorous pot plants with every watering. Used at half strength  for 
slow-growing plants. 

72 grams 
164 grams 
1 litre 

ll\oz 
26oz 
1 gallon 

8.  Ammonium  sulphate 

' 

Potassium sulphate 
Mono-ammonium phosphate 
Water 
Nutrient content =  271 ppm nitrogen:30 ppm phosphate P 2O8:203 ppm potash  K 20 
Nutrientratio=1.3N:0.15P2O5:lK2O 
Used  for  pot  plants  in peat-based  loamless  composts. 44 g (7 oz)  of magnesium  sulphate 
may be added. 

i20grams  Woz 
88 grams  14 oz 
13 grams 
2oz 
1 litre 
1 gallon 

184 

Appendix III 

Pesticides 

Name 
acaricide 
aphicide 
bactericide 
fungicide 
herbicide 

1.  'Pesticide' is a general term which describes all chemicals used for the control of pests and 
diseases and for the destruction of weeds. Pesticides can be categorised according to their 
principal use, though relatively few have only one specific purpose. The following terms are in 
common use and  in most cases their meaning is obvious: 
Pest controlled 
spider  mites 
greenflies 
bacteria 
fungi 
weeds (herbicides have a  sub-classification 
of their own) 
insects (including  aphids) 
slugs and snails 
nematodes  (eelworms) 
eggs of insects and  mites 

insecticide 
moluscicide 
nematocide 
ovicide 

2.  It is usual to speak of controlling pests and diseases rather than curing or eradicating 
them. Control means limiting the incidence of the pathogen to an acceptable level. 
Nevertheless, it is often possible to prevent an attack from occurring, and sometimes possible 
to eradicate  a pest from a crop for an extended period of time. 

3.  Almost all pesticides are freely available, but, for many, special precautions in their use 
must by law be observed under the appropriate regulations. Some compounds require  full 
protective clothing to be worn by those using them, and others require a lesser but still high 
degree of protection for the user. These substances are taken out of effective  reach of the 
amateur by the simple fact that they are not marketed in small enough packs to reach the 
garden centre and retail shop outlets. Some pesticides are scheduled as poisons and are, 
therefore, only obtainable on signature. 

Although the amateur gardener will not normally be concerned with these regulations, you 

should, nevertheless, regard all pesticides with caution, and ensure that the instructions on 
the pack are observed to the letter. Manufacturers  always give directions as to use, and  the 
dilution rates they recommend have been established  by intensive trial and  investigation 
and must be adhered to. It is always dangerous to 'exceed the stated  dose'. 

4.  Many pesticide chemicals fall into groups of related substances which tend to control the 
same categories of pests. The most important of these groups are: 

The dithiocarbamate group  These are fungicides used to control a wide range of fungal 
diseases including both downy and powdery mildews. Zineb, Maneb and Thiram  are the best 
known and are used as protectant sprays. Thiram is also a valuable seed-dressing substance. 

Copper fungicides  These include the oldest effective  fungicides we have, such as Bordeaux 
mixture (copper sulphate and calcium hydroxide), Burgundy mixture (copper sulphate  and 
sodium carbonate), and  Cheshunt compound  (copper sulphate and  ammonium  carbonate). 
The two former are still used, although colloidal copper sprays have to some extent 
superseded them. Copper sprays are particularly useful  against downy mildews and are used 
as protectants. 

Sulphur and organo-sulphur compounds  Sulphur on its own is no longer much used 
except for fumigating empty greenhouses. This is done by burning sulphur candles. 
Lime-sulphur has been used for many decades as a fungicide by the fruit grower. It is not, 
however, used under glass. The organo-sulphur  materials are very useful  modern  safe 
fungicides.  Captan is one of the better  known. 

Mercury compounds  Mercuric oxide and mercurous chloride have been in use for a long 
time for seed dressing and for clubroot control in the cabbage family. Under glass, organo-
mercury compounds were used for tomato mildew control and for other fungicidal  purposes, 
but they have been superseded by new materials and will not be used by the  amateur. 

185 

Appendix IV 

Ventilation 

Systemic fungicides  New fungicides  within the last decade have been  increasingly 
successful  and further  developments are likely. These are the systemic fungicides,  of which 
benomyl is the best known.  A systemic substance is one which is absorbed by the foliage or 
taken up by the roots of a plant and spreads throughout the whole organism. 

The organo-chlorine group  These were formerly  called chlorinated hydrocarbons  and 
include such well-known substances as DDT, BHC, aldrin and dieldrin. Because many are 
persistent chemicals and get into the food chains of birds and animals, their widespread  field 
use is now restricted. Under glass the hazards to wildlife do not apply and smokes based on 
DDT and gamma BHC (Lindane) are still valuable insecticides and  acaricides. 

The organo-phosphorus group  A very large number of these substances have been 
developed, mainly as acaricides and aphicides. They are mostly very poisonous. They 
include several systemic materials and are, unfortunately,  substances to which aphids, red 
spider mites and white flies seem to develop resistance. Few are available to the amateur,  but 
malathion is very valuable as an aphicide, acaricide and general insecticide under glass. 

Carbamates  These are mostly persistent chemicals used as wormkillers, nematocides  and 
moluscicides but also as general insecticides. The only one likely to come the way of the 
amateur is the moluscicide draza; it is an excellent  defence against slugs and snails. 

Derris and pyrethrum  These are plant  derivatives which have for long been safe and 
reliable insecticides, particularly for the amateur. Active research and development is now 
directed  towards the production of chemicals which have many of the properties of 
pyrethrum; these are called synthetic pyrethroids. They are expected to increase in  number 
and to be approved for wide use as insecticides, particularly under  glass. Resmethrin is the 
best known at the present  time. 

1.  Natural  ventilation 
Ventilation is the process whereby warm air within a greenhouse, because of its lower density, 
floats upwards and escapes into the external atmosphere through the overlaps of the glass 
and any other  aperture. 

In new, well-designed greenhouses, when the doors and ventilators are closed, this leakage 

of air brings about total replacement of the atmosphere within about two hours. In general, 
and especially in older houses, the rate will be about twice as fast, i.e. one complete change in 
one hour. 

By providing ventilators along the ridge of the house the rate of air-change can be greatly 
increased, and if low-level side and end ventilators are provided also, the entry of external 
cooler air can be greatly facilitated  by increasing what is called the 'chimney  effect'. 

2.  Measurement of ventilation 
The easiest way to think of ventilation is in terms of the number of air changes per hour 
(ac/h), but a more precise determination  is to think in terms of air-flow. 

If it is imagined  that a fan, at one end of a greenhouse, were extracting air from  within it, it 

is quite easy to picture the air flowing along and agree that this could be measured as the 
volume of air passing over a square metre (square foot)  of  floor-surface.  It also follows that  the 
taller the greenhouse, the greater the volume of air it would enclose and the faster this air 
would have to flow to bring about an air-change within the same compass of time as would be 
the case were it a lower house, enclosing less air. 

The ventilation rate is thus stated as cubic metres of air per square metre of base area per 

hour {cubic feet  air/square 

foot/hour). 

3.  Ventilation  requirement 
This cannot be stated precisely but there is general agreement that to provide  efficient 
cooling in hot and still summer weather, air-flow rates of from  140-l80m :l/m2 of base 
area/hour are needed (450S00  cu ft/sq  ft  of base   area/hour). 

The lower rate is appropriate for large houses, i.e. with an average height greater than 3 m 

186 

For further details see 
MAFF Bujletin  No. 115. 
Commercial  Glasshouses. 

Appendix V 

(10 ft),  and the higher rate for small  ones, i.e. with an average height less than 3 m (10   ft). 

Flow-rates can be converted to air-changes per hour, by dividing flow-rate by average 

height. Thus for a garden greenhouse with an average height of 2.05 m (6 ft  9 in) the air-
change rate would be (180/2.05) -  88  ac/h. 

4.  Ventilation  provision 
There is no formula for calculating ventilator provision from  air-change rate. 

Experience indicates that in larger houses, with side and end ventilators, effective  cooling 
can be obtained with ridge ventilators providing an opening equal to  15 per cent of the base 
area of the house. Where there is no side or end ventilation the provision has to be doubled  to 
30 per cent of base area. 

For garden-size greenhouses there is no stated recommendation but 30 per cent of base area 

with side and end ventilation  is assumed to be adequate. 

In practical terms this would mean that a garden greenhouse measuring 2.4 m x 3.7 m (8 ft 
x 12 ft)  requires on both sides of its ridge 1.3 m 2 (14\  sq ft)  of ventilator opening, which could 
be provided by ventilators on each side of the ridge, running its whole length and 0.36 m (15 
in) wide (or deep). 

To be effective  these ventilators would need to open through 60° so that the opening 

provided is equal to the area of the ventilator. 

5.  Forced-draught or fan-ventilation 
Positive ventilation can be provided  by means of extractor-fans installed at one end, or side, 
of a greenhouse, with louvres at the other end, or  side, which open, proportionately with  the 
speed of the fan, to admit the replacement air. Fans and louvres are controlled by 
thermostats. The systems work effectively  but are not really appropriate for  amateur 
gardeners. The fans are noisy and the systems are dependent on an electricity supply which 
must be backed up by standby generators in case of power failure. 

Soil sterilisation 

1.  As the temperature of the soil is raised there is a progressively more lethal effect  upon  its 
teeming population. 

Thermal death points of soil organisms 

Temperature 
Temperature 
°C 
°C 
55  130 
55  130 

°F 
°F 

63  145 

82  180 

88  190 
100  212 

127  261 

Organisms killed or inactivated 

All soft-bodied  animals, e.g. earthworms, eelworms, 
slugs, protozoa; most weed seeds;  nitrifying 
bacteria, and most plant  viruses 
Most of the fungi causing plant diseases, 
particularly root rots; all weed seeds 
Fungal wilt diseases of plants,  particularly 
Verticillium  and  Fusarium 
Tomato mosaic virus (TMV) is inactivated. 
Ammonifying  bacteria form resistant spores and 
can survive quite long exposures 
All living organisms 

Lower temperatures for longer periods can have the same effect  as higher ones for short 
periods, e.g. 43°C (110°F) for 10 minutes has the same effect as 63°C (145°F) for seconds. 

2.  The soil can only be heated effectively  by causing steam to condense within  it. 
(a)  It takes 112-118  g of steam to raise the temperature of  1 litre of dry soil to 100°C (7-8  lb of 
steam  per  cu  ft). 
(b)  Dry soil can absorb steam at the rate of about  345 grams per litre per hour  (21  Ib/cuftlhr); 
thus at this rate of injection, it takes about 20 minutes to bring the soil to 100°C  (212°F). 

3.  The normal procedure of heat-sterilisation with steam   is to raise the temperature of the 

187 

soil to boiling point  (100°C/212°F)  which is indicated by steam issuing from the soil surface. 
The soil being steamed  is covered with a plastic sheet, which is weighed down around  its 
edges. When this balloons-out with steam, the desired temperature will have been reached. 

4.  Amateurs sterilising small quantities of soil in steamers made from  buckets or oil drums 
(see diagram) must allow one litre of water to about 7 litres of dry soil  (1 pint  of water  to 7 
pints  of soil) and always add  25% more water to prevent the container boiling dry. A small 
sheet of plastic film must be tied over the top of the container. When this balloons, the 
container is removed from the heat source, or this is switched off and  unplugged if an  electric 
kettle or immersion  heater is used to boil the water. 

5.  As heat 'sterilisation' does not bring about complete sterilisation, but allows the 
ammonifying  bacteria to survive, the process is only one of partial sterilisation or 
'pasteurisation'. 

6.  Chemical effects of heat sterilisation 
a.  The survival of the ammonifying bacteria and their subsequent rapid increase leads to 
higher levels of ammonia and ammonium compounds. These do not decrease until re(cid:173)
infection  with nitrifying  bacteria enables the ammonia to be converted to nitrate. The 
accumulation of ammonia is highest in soils containing a high level of organic matter, or 
those that are too moist, before  steaming. 
b.  There is an increased availability of the major nutrients, phosphorus and  potassium. 
c.  There is an increased availability of many minor and trace elements, but manganese is the 
only one likely to cause trouble. This is most likely if the pH of the loam was too low. 

7.  Physical effects  of heat  sterilisation 
After heat sterilisation, loams have a somewhat higher field capacity (and thus container 
capacity). 

8.  After heat sterilisation to 100°C (212°F) soils and composts are very vulnerable to re(cid:173)
infection  by pathogens, particularly fungal ones, because of their reduced  biological 
competition. To compensate for this commercial horticulturists use lower temperatures  -
66-71 °C (150-160°F)  - to pasteurise soil. This is accomplished  by using mixtures of air and 
steam. The apparatus is sophisticated  and beyond the reach of the amateur. This lower 
temperature is applied for 80 minutes and succeeds in destroying most fungal  pathogens, but 
leaving many of their competitors alive. Re-infection  is much slower in soils so treated. 

9.  Amateurs steaming their own loam for making composts should ensure that: 

It is dry. 
It has a pH in the range 6-6.5. 
Whenever a sample comes from a different  source, it should be tested by sowing some 
antirrhinums which are highly sensitive to any toxic levels of ammonia or manganese. 

Appendix VI 

Soil conductivity 

1.  It is all too easy for excessive amounts of soluble salts to accumulate in greenhouse soils 
and growing-media. Originally chlorides, sulphates and nitrates were all thought to be 
involved, but now only nitrates are considered to be responsible in most cases. 

2.  As the concentration of soluble salts in a solution increases, its electrical  resistance 
decreases, and thus provides a straightforward  means of measuring this  concentration. 

3.  For convenience the resistance of a standard soil solution is given as its arithmetic 
reciprocal, or conductance, which is 1/resistance (in ohms). The reciprocal of an ohm was 
formerly  called a mho, but is now known as a Siemens, and the conductance of a standard  soil 
solution is expressed in micro-siemens. The standard  solution is made by shaking air-dried 
sifted  soil (below 2 mm grain size) with two-and-a-half times its own weight of a saturated 
solution of calcium sulphate, and its conductivity is measured  with a Mullard  conductivity 
bridge. 

188 

4.  The Agricultural  Development and Advisory Service of the M AFF has now produced a 
scale as follows: 
Conductivity 
(micro-siemens) 
1900-2200 
2210-2400 
2410-2500 
2510-2600 
2610-2700 
2710-2800 
2810-3000 
3010-3500 
3510-4000 
over4010 

ADAS Index 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 

5.  Interpretation of ADAS  Index 
Light soils 
0 
0 
1 
2 
3 

4 

5 

6 

5 

6 

7 

Other soils (or light soils with high levels of organic  matter) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 

Normal range for outdoor soils. 
Greenhouse soils with low nutrient levels. 
Safe level for lettuces and flower crops. 
Safe level for tomatoes. 
Danger level for lettuces and  chrysanthemums 
which will show restricted  growth. 
All crops likely to show some restriction 
of growth; and sensitive crops, seriously so. 
Root damage and growth restriction on 
all crops. 
Cropping impossible. 

Drenching the soil with water will always lower the  conductivity. 

6.  Earlier literature expresses conductivity on the pC scale, which was logarithmic and 
where a low numerical figure represented a high concentration, or on the CF scale where high 
figures represented high concentrations. Both are superseded  by the ADAS Index. 

Appendix VII 

Micro-propagation 

1.  Micro-propagation  has been developed from  the long-established technique of botanical 
research called tissue culture. Some prefer to call it in-vitro  propagation, and in view of the 
fact that it is a laboratory process and the propagules are kept in glass flasks, this is probably 
the best term. Micro-propagation,  however, is the term which seems to be most  popular. 

2.  Tissue culture was developed before the First World War by botanists, not with  thoughts 
of propagation  in mind, but for studying plant nutrition and  many related processes. Small 
pieces of plant tissue are excised from the plant and usually placed on agar jelly,  previously 
impregnated with a solution containing all the nutrients required by the tissue to continue its 
existence and to multiply. Kept thus, in completely sterile conditions, and provided  the 
nutrients supplied are the right ones and in the right concentrations, the tissue can be kept 
alive almost  indefinitely. 

3.  Micro-propagation developed from tissue culture when it was discovered that  introducing 
hormones into the nutrient jelly could, in a reasonably controlled  manner, cause excised 
meristems to multiply and form roots and thus new plants, which can be established in a 
normal  environment. 

4.  As micro-propagation  has developed  it can now be seen to have three distinct functions  to 
fulfil: 
a.  to provide a means of propagating plants vegetatively which  are difficult  to propagate  by 

189 

other means. Epiphytic orchids, e.g. Cymbidium,  provide a good example. 
b.  to provide a rapid  multiplication method for plants otherwise intolerably slow, e.g. a new 
Narcissus  culti var would take, by natural multiplication,   16 years to provide 1000 bulbs,  6 to 
7 years by the relatively new horticultural technique of twin-scales, but only  12 to 18 months 
by  micro-propagation. 
c.  to establish new stocks of virus-free  cultivars in plants normally propagated  vegetatively 
and  having severe virus problems, e.g. potato, strawberry, apple. 

5.  Micro-propagation is a sophisticated technique, requiring sterile laboratory facilities. It 
lies beyond the normal resources of amateurs and most nurserymen, though not necessarily 
all; but in view of its probable far-reaching  consequences for the future, no apology is required 
for this brief  description. 

6.  The tissue used as a source of propagules for micro-propagation  may be: 
a.  Axillary meristems: These are the growth points found normally in plants in the axils  of 
leaves (in buds) or at a more developed stage at the tips of shoots. The meristem is stripped of 
all its surrounding leaves until only the flat dome of the growing tip with two or three leaf 
primordia remain. This tip is then excised, probably under  a dissecting microscope, to form 
the propagule, known in this case as an explant. The explant is sterilised and placed on a 
sterile nutrient  base within a flask, where in due course it increases in size to form a small 
shoot. The hormone cytokinin is then introduced and causes the shoot to branch and form  a 
cluster of shoots. If rooting hormone is then  introduced, the shoots form roots and  in due 
course the young plants can be established in a normal environment. Explants prepared  in 
this fashion  are known as meristem tips and are the kind used for attempting to raise virus-
free stock, because whilst virus diseases are systemic and pervade the whole of the plant,  the 
newly forming cells at the tip of the meristem are frequently  not  affected. 

Shoots of  Callistemon 
citrinus  'Splendens' 
(Crimson  bottle brush) in a 
sterile flask. The  apical 
meristem  has  proliferated 
on a medium  rich in 
cytokinin. It will soon be 
forming  roots and  will  then 
be broken  into single 
plants and  carefully 
rehabilitated  into a  normal 
atmosphere. 

190 

Shoot-tip culture differs only from  meristem-tip culture in that the growing point  is not 

stripped of its leaves to quite the same extent and may be a few millimetres in length, even a 
centimetre, compared with the meristem tip which is only about 0.5 mm in length. 

In the early days of micro-propagation  shoot tips were often obtained  from  plants which 
had undergone 'heat therapy'. This was a process whereby the stock plant was placed in a 
very high temperature for several days before the shoot tips were excised. It was believed  that 
the high temperature slowed down virus activity, but speeded the growth of the plant so that 
the shoot tips were growing faster than the virus could reach them. Little is now heard of heat 
therapy as this belief has proved to be almost certainly  fallacious. 
b.  Adventitious shoots. Some plants do not produce axillary shoots at all, e.g. many  palms, 
or else too few, e.g. Narcissus  bulbs. In such cases it may be possible to use parts of plant 
organs, other than axillary meristems, in the hope that adventitious meristems will develop 
in vitro  This is the case with the bases of the scale leaves of Narcissus  bulbs, the leaf tips of 
orchids and small leaf sections of Begonia  and Streptocarpus,  all of which form  explants 
capable of giving rise to adventitious meristems. 
c.  Callus. When pieces of plant organ are subjected to tissue culture, they often, if hormone 
levels are increased, give rise to masses of the undifferentiated  tissues called callus. Callus 
can be multiplied and sub-cultured quite extensively and, in some cases, hormones can  cause 
it to produce plantlets reliably. This is the case with Freesia and  Citrus. 

The possibility exists that callus when dispersed into minute, single-cell pieces to form a 

suspension in a liquid could be induced  regularly to form thousands of plantlets. 

.

.. 

7.  Adventitious meristems to some extent and callus to a greater extent give rise to  mutated 
plants or sports, most of which are aberrant and not worth keeping. However, this raises the 
possibility of a fourth  function  for micro-propagation; that of producing new cultivars. 

8.  Micro-propagation  is a relatively new technique which will become more precise and 
certain as time goes by, and holds out exciting and far-reaching possibilities in many fields of 
horticulture and agriculture. 

