<4 

The Food and Heat Producing Solar Greenhouse 

Yanda 

Fisher 

ALBERTA  RESEARCH  COUNCIL  LIBRARY 

11315  - m \\  MEMJE 

EDMONTON,  ALBtRiA,  CANADA 

T6G  2C2 

Copyright©  1976,  1980 by Bill Yandaand Rick Fisher 
Cover Copyright ©  1980 by Peter Aschwanden 

Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 79-91276 
ISBN 0-912528-20-6 

Published by 
John Muir Publications. Inc. 
P.O. Box 613 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501 

Sixth Printing, Revised and Expanded 

Printed  in the United States of America 

All Rights Reserved. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 

CHAPTER I 

The Greenhouse Biosphere 

CHAPTERII 

The Dependence Cycle 

CHAPTER III 

Principles 

CHAPTER IV 

Exterior Design 

CHAPTER V 

Interior Design 

CHAPTER VI 

Construction 

CHAPTER VII 

The Greenhouse Garden 

CHAPTER VIII  The State of the Art 

APPENDICES 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

INDEX 

7 

9 

11 

12 

21 

36 

51 

78 

101 

167 

197 

203 

INTRODUCTION 

7 

First, a definition is in order because there is some confusion  created by the term '' solar greenhouse.'' 
The  confusion  is  understandable  because  all  greenhouses  are,  in  fact,  solar.  However,  traditionally 
designed greenhouses have rarely been concerned with the most effective  use of the sun's energy. Those 
described in this book are. We have incorporated four basic elements in the design and operation of each of 
our greenhouses: 

1.  The most efficient  collection of solar energy. 
2.  The storage of solar energy. 
3.  The reduction of heat loss during and following  collection periods. 
4.  Zone layout for the particular light and temperature requirements of various plants. 

Attention  to these elements produces the following  benefits: 

1.  Surplus  thermal  energy  produced  in  winter  can  be  used  immediately  in  an  adjoining  struc(cid:173)

ture or stored  for later use. 

2.  Independence  from  mechanical heating and cooling devices powered by fossil  fuel. 
3.  Fresh food  and colorful  flowers right through the winter. 

This book, the designs and the benefits derived from  it, all come from a basic concern with people's 
relationship to their environment. One basic environmental problem is centered around misuse of energy. * 
We realized that while many people wish for alternative systems, me success of such systems is dependent 
on the individual's commitment to the system coupled with an understanding of what makes it work. And 
we want you to know exactly what's involved  in building and maintaining your own solar unit. 

In the following pages, we've shown methods that can be used to make an appreciable addition to the 
quality of your life through a closer involvement with your food chain (fresher and cheaper vegetables), a 
free  source of partial heating for your house, a more realistic integration  with the cycles of the sun, the 
seasons and the weather,  and independence from  corporate energy  and food games. Whether or not you 
actually build a greenhouse depends on many factors: space, economics, appropriateness to your location, 
and  determination,  to  name  a few.  But  even  if  you  don't  build,  reading  this  book  will  enlarge  your 
understanding of your environment and your relationship with it. 

This book grew out of the Solar Sustenance Project begun  in  1974. It was a modest demonstration 
project to determine if attached greenhouses could supplement homes in eleven high-elevation locations in 
the  Rockies  with  fresh  food  and  heat  throughout  long  and cold winters. The work has evolved  into an 
educational process that has worldwide relevance. The solar greenhouse is unique in that it can satisfy two ^_ 
basic human  needs, food and shelter.  With other beneficial  side effects,  such as water conservation and 
distillation,  the potential  for greenhouse application  is just beginning to be understood. 

When  we  began  the  project,  many  engineers  and  architects  insisted that our simple  greenhouses 
wouldn't  lengthen  the  growing  season  even  a week.  We were  told  by  others  that  the 90-degree  heat 
produced  by  the  units  was  virtually  useless.  Fortunately,  we  didn't  listen  to  them.  Balancing  the 
negativism  of the cynics, we had the support of many people  in the field: Keith Haggard and Peter Van 
Dresser of Santa Fe, T. A. Lawand of the Brace Institute in Quebec, Dr. Francis Wessling of the University 
of New Mexico, and several of the people mentioned in Chapter VIII. Now, competent professionals  from 
all  over  the  world  are  eagerly  exploring  the  solar  greenhouse  field,  and  their expertise  will  certainly 
advance the state of the art. 

An  important  aspect  of  solar  greenhouses  is  that  the  principles  of  design  can  be  applied  at  any 
economic level. The  $7.00 recycled lumber and polyethylene greenhouse slapped to the south side of a 

8 

INTRODUCTION 

dilapidated  dwelling  can  be just  as  important  and  valid  a  solar  application  as  a  $200,000  new  solar 
greenhome  under  construction  in a nearby  resort community.  We*ve tried to show  the whole  range of 
greenhouses  in this book and let you make the decision about where you want to jump in. 

Our work on the project and on this book is founded on two principles: the first is that food production 
should be a low-energy process. The process is begun by growing as much as you can at home, avoiding 
anything  requiring more units of energy to produce  than it contains. For that reason, highly  controlled, 
close  tolerance  food  production  techniques  relying  on outside  energy  sources to maintain them  are not 
stressed  here. 

The second principle  is that greenhouses and other habitable structures should be designed to make 
maximum  use of natural energy  flow  and to make minimum use of fossil  fuels.  This means designing a 
"passive" structure with proper orientation, thermal mass and good insulation. This is not a new idea, but 
it is being re-examined  today  in the light of present technological capabilities.  While a passive structure 
delivers obvious benefits,  it also demands more thought,  design work,  labor and care  in building. 

In many ways the passively designed structure is in direct opposition to the current American mode of 
living.  It's not temporary by nature. The structure itself has a "thermal momentum" that is much like the 
physiological  processes  of  a  human  body,  charging  and  discharging,  inhaling  and  exhaling.  Most 
importantly,  a well-designed  passive structure doesn't  depend on a constant supply of energy to keep it 
livable. The building uses the sun as the earth does, only  better. 

Since  our  initial  work  was done,  thousands of  passive solar greenhouses  have been  built.  Recent 
computer simulation studies and advanced technical reports have shown these to be feasible in any climate 
that has heating needs and some winter sunlight to capture and store. We'd like to think that the first edition 
of  our book did  a great deal  to stimulate  scientific  interest  in and examination  of the potential of  solar 
greenhouses. Weknow from experience that this book has been widely applied.  Itisauser'sbook;youwho 
buy it will most likely be building a greenhouse or solar application shortly. Depending on where you live, 
you may need to increase the performance of your unit through modifications in design or addition of more 
sophisticated heat collection and storage systems. For those to whom this applies, we've presented a wide 
range of such improvements in Chapters IV, V and VIII. 

The solar greenhouse field has been blessed with many innovators who are also superb teachers and 

lecturers. The calm confidence of Doug Balcomb, the lucidity of Susan Nichols, the aesthetic impeccabil(cid:173)
ity of David Wright, the humor and directness of Jack Park, the patient explanations of Doug Taft,  and the 
work of many other talented  individuals has done far more to promote solar usage than any government 
feasibility  studies or private advertising campaigns.  People like these have contributed  immeasurably to 
the growing use of solar energy. 

When you decide to build and operate a solar greenhouse of your own, you will be joining a group of 
experimenters  in what  is still  an infant science.  You do not need to be a scientist to participate.  All the 
principles involved are elementary and logical. Their simplicity makes the benefits derived from becoming 
an active member of the solar community easily  accessible to you. Welcome. 

CHAPTER  I 

THE GREENHOUSE BIOSPHERE 

The concepts of environment and ecosystem have been around for a long time, but only in the past few 
years  have  these  ideas  become  part  of  the  public  awareness.  Many  of  us  only  realized  the  profound 
implications of  these concepts when we saw the first photographs of  the earth  taken  from  space by the 
astronauts. The earth is indeed a closed system, one that must sustain itself through a harmonious balance 
of its elements. 

When you build your greenhouse, you will be creating a very special space, an earth in microcosm. 
You will control the character of me space to a great extent. Your imagination and design will determine 
how well the natural  life  force  sustains itself and what you derive from  it in return.  You are,  in  effect, 
producing a living place that will grow and evolve with a life force of its own. 

The special environment that you will create is a biosphere. Webster's definition  of a biosphere is: 
"A part of the world in which life can exist.. .living beings being together with their environment." As a 
living  being, you  are an essential  element  in maintaining your biosphere.  Sowing seeds,  nurturing the 
earth,  watering,  fertilizing  plants  and  soil,  and controlling  the temperature  and humidity  will  be your 
contribution  to the  biosphere.  The greenhouse  will  reward  you  with  the  personal  fulfillment  of  living 
within the cycle of growth. 

Figure  1 

Solar greenhouses vary greaUy in the number of dieir components and life systems, depending upon 
the interest,  time, and energy  invested  in them. A simple, easily maintained example would consist of a 
small structure wiui a few  planting  areas. Closely  related,  hardy  varieties of vegetables and/or  flowers 
would be chosen for cultivation. As their needs are similar, they would not require a great deal of time or 
attention. You may, however, prefer maintaining a complex unit containing a variety of lift  forms. Some 
experimental greenhouses of this type combine plant growth (soil or nutri-culture) with the production of 

10 

CHAPTER I 

animal protein in the form of fish and rabbits. These 
systems  attempt  to  achieve  a  symbiotic  balance 
between  the  various  organisms,  using  the  by(cid:173)
products and waste of each to support the other. The 
more complex environments may also employ wind 
generators  to  power  independent  heat  collectors, 
sophisticated 
other 
improvements  (Chapter VIII). These  systems obvi(cid:173)
ously demand much more time, attention and strong 
interest in experimentation. 

facilities 

storage 

and 

As a living  space,  your greenhouse  will  grow 
and  affect  things  around it.  If  it is attached  to your 
house  or  another  structure,  an  interaction  between 
the two will occur. The conditions that develop in the 
greenhouse will be shared with an adjacent  room or 
building  in the  forms  of heat,  humidity,  and the exhilarating  fragrance  of growth.  In addition  to pure 
sensuous delight, there can be economic benefits through a reduction in heating costs and food bills. The 
changing moods of the life system will soon become evident, and you may find yourself reacting to them 
much as you would to a human personality. 

Figure 2 

Along  with  the  rewards  are  the  health  benefits  that  you  will  enjoy.  Greenhouse-fresh  produce, 
especially  if  it  is organically  grown,  can be far  superior to its supermarket counterpart.  Commercially 
produced foods may contain harmful chemicals, and in many cases lose much of their food value during 
the days they are in transit and on the shelf. Not only will your body welcome the added nutrition of home(cid:173)
grown produce, but you will also experience an unbelievable increase in flavor from the fresh  vegetables. 
The  environment  of  the  greenhouse  can  also  produce  a feeling  of  well-being  and  tranquility.  It  may 
become a spiritual refuge  from  the outside world. 

Perhaps the most dynamic aspect of your newly created biosphere is its relationship to the life  force 
outside of our earth's environment—the sun. Solar energy affects every facet of life and change on earth. 
The sun produces movement in the atmosphere, water and land masses. It acts upon the earth's orbit and 
seasonal  changes.  Its waves  of  visible  and  invisible  energy  are the basis  of  all  growth  and  life.  This 
awesome force will be the medium through which you work. You will collect its energy, contain and store 
it, alter and direct it in the way most beneficial to the support of your biosphere. The sun will combine with 
air, earth and water to produce the fifth essential element in the greenhouse, plant life. In the management 
of your greenhouse, your role will be to complete this five-sided cycle. 

CHAPTER  II 

THE DEPENDENCE CYCLE 

The  mass-market age  is the mass-dependence  age. Dangerous aspects of the dependence cycle are 
self-evident.  Dependence is addiction. Whether it's a dock loader's strike in Philadelphia or a twenty-cent 
jump in the per-gallon price of gasoline, the result is the same. Changes are made in your life, usually for 
the worse, without your having any say in the matter. Urbanization  is part of this cycle; specialization in 
employment is as well. Everyone in this country has felt the effects of this situation and suffered  some of 
the consequences. When those consequences affect basic life functions, it becomes a serious problem. The 
question  is,i^How do you  break the dependence cycle?"\ 

v^- Going back to the land is one method, but for the majority of people, those who live and work in urban 
areas, this isn't a viable alternative. Rural life isn't everyone's dream and it's difficult,  to say the least, to 
turn a 40'  x 80' city  lot into a self-sufficient  farm.  But one doesn't need to be entirely dependent on the 
system.  A  greenhouse  makes  it  possible  to grow  a substantial  amount  of  food  in  a  very  small  area. 
Moreover,  it lengthens the growing season tremendously  in most parts of the country and protects crops 
from  damage by hail, wind,  and animals. 

In order to prevent trading dependence on one part of the cycle for another, a basic rule of thumb is to 
make  a  careful  examination  of  how  much  energy  goes  into food  production  from  seed  to table,  then 
compare that with the amount of energy that comes out of the food to an animal or person. Think about how 
much energy it takes to grow, harvest, pack, store, and ship the lettuce in your salad and you'll quickly see 
what  that  means. Consider gasoline and oil for tractors and trucks, energy expended  to drill that oil, to 
transport roughnecks to the oil fields, to generate the electricity used in supermarket freezers and lighting, 
and  so on.  And on.  It adds  up. Obviously  a thoughtful  long-range  food/energy  view  takes production 
techniques into consideration, giving top priority to "low-energy-in,  high-energy-out"'  approaches. 

Again  we  come  back  to the  family  or community-operated  greenhouse.  It's  hard  to find  a better 
example.  It shortcuts the entire process. The family  that grows a head of lettuce realizes a measurable 
petrochemical savings. Shipping costs are eliminated. Food is eaten fresh from the earth; no processing or 
packaging costs are involved. And it is produced by human labor without machine (purchase, operation, 
and  maintenance) expenses. 

Aside from economic benefits, the pleasure of raising your own  fresh, flavorful  food ecologically and 

a feeling  of self-reliance  are additional rewards. 

For all the above reasons, private greenhouse sales have increased tremendously.  But the problem 
with buying prefabricated  greenhouses or plans is that they were designed without regard for the specific 
climate and solar conditions in your region, and they weren't planned for your site or your house. In fact, 
the majority  of prefab greenhouses are designed as freestanding  structures which demand additional fossil 
fuel  in winter.  Rather than adding heat to your home, they  actually  increase your consumption  of  fuel. 
While we obviously  haven't been able to see your home or your site, we've provided enough basics 
along with design modifications and information on how to use them, that you'll be able to use this book, 
save some money, understand why your greenhouse is working, and best of all,  end up with a life support 
system  custom designed for your home. 

CHAPTER  III 

PRINCIPLES 

The principles involved  in the dynamics of a solar greenhouse are shared by all solar applications. 

Here are some of the factors  that apply specifically  to the solar greenhouse. 

Solar Radiation.  Energy from the sun strikes the earth constantly and is called radiation or insolation. It 
is in the form of direct, diffuse, and reflected rays. Direct radiation occurs in clear sky conditions.  Diffuse 
is  caused  by  cloud  cover,  atmospheric  conditions,  or  manmade  conditions  such  as  smog.  Reflected 
radiation  is bounced from  objects,  snow, water, clouds, or the ground itself. 

The two major components of solar radiation will both be used in the greenhouse. The visible range is 
used by the plants for photosynthesis: the  conversion of light, carbon dioxide, and water into food for the 
plants.  Thermal or infrared radiation is heat. It is created when the visible light strikes objects  inside the 
greenhouse. 

Light Collection 

Light Energy for Plants. The amount of time a plant receives light determines the amount of food it can 
manufacture.  The photoperiod  is  the  relative  lengths  of  light  and  darkness  and  their  effect  on  plant 
development.  Plants fall  into three categories in terms of their light requirements: short day or winter (a 
few  flowering  plants),  long day  or summer  (fruiting  vegetables),  and  neutral  or year-round  producers 
(leafy greens). Factors such as location of plants in the greenhouse, their arrangement, and the number and 
placement of reflective interior wall surfaces are important for promoting good plant growth. Plant growth 
rate is determined by the intensity of light and the length of time light is available. Different plants require 
different  intensities of light, but usually photosynthesis occurs adequately at one quarter of the maximum 
potential  light  intensity.  The  greenhouse  designs  in  this  book  have  enough  clear  surface  to  provide 
sufficient  light for photosynthesis. 

Percent  of Possible Sunshine. The amount of sunshine that reaches the ground in a particular place is 
expressed  as  a percentage  of  the total  amount  that  is possible  in a year.  The  following  list gives  this 
information  for five major  cities in the United States: 

Albuquerque  76% 

Denver 67% 

Chicago 59% 

New York 59% 

Seattle 45% 

In planning  a solar greenhouse,  a knowledge of monthly or seasonal trends is as important  as the 
annual  solar  percentage.  For  instance,  mid-Michigan  has a pattern  of  extremely  cloudy  weather  from 
October through  December.  In January,  although the temperatures are colder than  in the fall,  the solar 
conditions  improve  greaUy  and  supplementary  heating  from  an  attached  greenhouse  is  more  readily 
available  than  in October.  Monthly  or daily  technical  data  on solar  availability  is most valuable  when 
supported by personal experience.  (For seasonal percentage of sunshine see p.  180.) 

Solar  Collection.  Because the glazing of the greenhouse traps a certain amount of the sun's energy, we 
can think of die greenhouse as a solar collector. It is a solar collector for itself and also for the structure it 
adjoins.  How  much  solar  energy  it  collects  at  various  times  of  the  year  and  under different  weather 
conditions is dependent on many factors.  Building orientation  is one of the important ones. 

The majority of the clear glazing in a solar greenhouse must face a southerly direction, because in the 

northern hemisphere the sun is in the southern sky throughout the cold winter months. 

Because the sun  spends the winter  in the south, that is the direction  from  which  most of the solar 
energy  is coming. (Of course, the earth is orbiting around the sun, and the tilt of its axis accounts for the 
change in seasons, so the sun doesn't really go south in the winter. The position of the sun, as we describe 
it, is actually apparent movement from  a fixed location on earth.) By facing south, the greenhouse is able 
to capture the maximum  amount of winter sunlight. 

PRINCIPLES 

13 

The following chart compares solar transmission through east and west, southeast and southwest, and 
due south-facing vertical glass walls. The amount of solar energy coming through one square foot of glass 
is given in B.T.U.s (British Thermal Units). One B.T.U. is the heat energy required to raise one pound of 
water one degree Fahrenheit. For now, let's say that you need hundreds of thousands of them daily in order 
to have substantial heat for your home. 

As you can see from  this chart, due east and west clear surfaces are very poor winter collectors, but 
excellent for solar gain in summer (as you have probably noticed if you have a large west-facing window in 
your home). However, surfaces that face as much as 45° to the east or west of south receive approximately 
two-thirds  of  the  winter  direct  sunlight  of  south-facing  vertical  glass.  This  gives  you  a great  deal  of 
flexibility  in design (see Greenhouse Configurations,  p. 25). 

SOLAR  TRANSMISSION  THROUGH  VERTICAL  DOUBLE  GLASS 

AT THREE  ORIENTATIONS 

Ground Reflection  Assumed  at .2 
In BTU/square foot per day 
Orientation 
to South 

90° to East or West 

Dec. June  Mar. Sept. 

45° to S.  East or S.  West 
Dec. June  Mar. Sept. 

0° South 

Dec. June  Mar. Sept. 

Latitude 
North 

Latitude  36° 

463  1056 

882  842 

1083  818 

1153  1100 

1527  446 

1146  1102 

Latitude 40° 

393  1083 

858  816 

1007  883 

1183  1126 

1435  527 

1243  1191 

Latitude  44° 

307  1116 

829  787 

895  968 

1206  1144 

1292  628 

1324  1263 

Latitude  48° 

237  1144 

795  753 

777  1044 

1218  1151 

1130  740 

1387  1317 

A 

B 

Table  1. 

C 

Angle of Incidence to the Collector. With the greenhouse oriented  to the south, we can begin examin(cid:173)
ing  what  happens  to  solar  energy  when  it  reaches  the  glazing.  The  sun's  rays  are  most  effectively 
transmitted through a clear material when the angle of their intersection with the surface of the glazing is 
90°. This perpendicular is called normal (Fig. 3). Because of the earth's rotation and orbit, the sun's rays 
are normal to any fixed collector surface, like the greenhouse glazing, for one or two moments a year. At 
all other times of  the day and the year the angle of  incidence is not normal, or less than optimum.  To 
average the angles of incidence for optimal solar collection using the altitudes of the sun at solar noon, see 
The Charts (Appendix B). You need to know the latitude of the site; the  altitude, or the height of the sun 
from  the  horizon,  and  the  tilt,  or  angle,  of  the collector  measured  from  the horizontal.  The  angle of 
incidence is the difference between the intersection of the solar angle and normal (Fig. 4). 

In solar greenhouse design, it is important to get 
the most energy through the glazing in the winter and 
to reduce the solar gain in the summer. You can do a 
great deal to control the heat in the greenhouse by the 
tilt  of  the  glazing.  The  chart  on  p.  14  illustrates 
energy  transmitted  through  double  south-facing 
glass  at  various  collector  tilts.  At  every  latitude, 
winter collection  is optimal and summer is minimal 
at the steeper tilts (75° and vertical, Fig. 4, p. 14). 

Figure 3 

14 

CHAPTER III 

SOLAR TRANSMISSIONS THROUGH TILTED DOUBLE 

SOUTH-FACING GLASS ON A CLEAR DAY 

Ground  Reflection  Assumed at .2 
Numbers are BTU/square  foot per day 

Tilt 

30° 

45° 

Solstice 
Dec. June 

Equinox 
Sept. March 

Solstice 
Dec. June 

Equinox 
Sept.  March 

Latitude 36° 

1386  1910 

1859  1938 

1591  1630 

1854  1936 

Latitude 40° 

1216  1971 

1811  1890 

1426  1719 

1838  1922 

Latitude 44° 

1026  2022 

1748  1829 

1229  1799 

1806  1894 

Latitude 48° 

835  2062 

1671  1753 

1026  1868 

1759  1849 

Tilt 

75° 

Vertical 

Solstice 
Dec. June 

Equinox 
Sept. March 

Solstice 
Dec. June 

Equinox 
Sept.  March 

Latitude 36° 

1661 

816 

1475  1539 

1527  446 

1102  1146 

Latitude 40° 

1535 

940 

1527  1598 

1435  527 

1191  1243 

Latitude 44° 

1362  1062 

1563  1641 

1292  628 

1263  1324 

Latitude 48° 

1173  1178 

1581  1666 

1130  740 

1317  1387 

Table 2. 

Transmittance  through  Multiple  Glazings.  The  number  of  glazings  that  cover  a  collector  is 
extremely  important.  Each time you add a glazing to retain heat, you lose a substantial amount of light. 
Most of the glazings used in greenhouses transmit 80-90% of the light that strikes their outer surface under 
ideal conditions. 

100% of the light strikes surface. 

1)  90% transmission  rating through one  surface 

June Sun 

2)  90% through  2nd layer 
X.90  transmission  rate 
81 % transmission through two surfaces 

3)  80% 
X. 90 
72.9% transmission  through three  surfaces 

4)  72.9% 

X.90 
65.61%  transmission  rate through  four  surfaces 

Figure  4 

I 

PRINCIPLES 

15 

In actuality, even less light than this will get through four surfaces but you can see what's happening; 

add more layers and you won't have enough light left to grow a mushroom. 

Considerable  research has been done to determine the proper number of glazings for a solar green(cid:173)
house.  The general consensus is that two is the best in most instances. One layer is appropriate in very 
warm  climates,  like  the  southern  United  States.  Three  is  often  justified  in  very  cold  climates  where 
constant snow cover is the rule in winter, because the snow makes up in reflection  what the third glazing 
loses  in transmission.  However,  there are exceptions to this rule. For instance,  if movable  insulation  is 
planned,  fewer  layers of glazing may be appropriate. 

Reflection of Light.  As the north wall of an attached greenhouse is solid and does not transmit light, it is 
necessary to reflect  (or bounce) some light from  it in order to duplicate the naturally diffused  light that a 
plant  would  receive  outdoors.  If this is not done, the 
plants  can  become  abnormally  phototropic,  or  light-
seeking, and will not exhibit healthy growth patterns. In 
a freestanding greenhouse, the north wall can be tilted to 
reflect  more light to the plants. 

Reflectance of 

Dark  and  opaque  surfaces  combined  with  heat 
storage  are  required  in the solar greenhouse to absorb 
and  conserve  heat,  while  light  and  clear  surfaces  are 
essential for healthy plant growth. The solution to these 
conflicting  needs is a compromise.  Some surfaces will 
absorb while others will insulate and reflect. The reflec(cid:173)
tive areas can be placed directly behind the plants on the 
north  side  of  the  greenhouse.  Table  3  shows  the 
reflective properties of various building materials in the 
visibile light range. 

Commonly Used Building Materials 
Material 

Reflectance  (Percent) 

W H I TE  P L A S T ER 

M I R R O R ED  G L A SS 

M A T TE  W H I TE  P A I NT 

P O R C E L A IN  E N A M EL 

P O L I S H ED  A L U M I N UM 
A L U M I N UM  P A I NT 

S T A I N L E SS  S T E EL 

90 

80 

75 

60 

60 

60 

55 

9 2% 

-  9 0% 

9 0% 

9 0% 

-  7 0% 

7 0% 

6 5% 

Table 3 

Heat  Use 

The  Greenhouse  Effect.  When  solar  radiation  in the  form  of  short waves passes or  is transmitted 
through the clear glazing of the greenhouse the energy hits objects inside. The short waves are changed to a 
longer wavelength (Fig. 5). This longer wavelength does not readily return through the glass; it is blocked. 
This is called the greenhouse effect and the result is 
heat.  If this principle isn't clear, think of your car on 
a clear winter day. If you leave the windows rolled up 
and  go  shopping  for  an  hour,  when  you  return  the 
interior  air  temperature  and  the seat covers  will be 
warm. 

By the way,  temperature is not energy.  It is a 
measure of the effect of energy on a substance. It is 
quite  relative  to  other  temperatures.  For  instance, 
imagine  the temperature of a 50° room in winter. It 
seems cold, doesn't it? Now picture yourself walking 
into  that  room  after  having been  out  in  a  sub-zero 
blizzard  for  an  hour. The  image,  and the  reality, is 
warmth.  This  is an  important  concept  to  remember 
when  we  discuss  how  heat  supports  life  in  a 
greenhouse. 

Long  Waves  Reradiate 

Figure  5 

16  CHAPTER  III 

Passive  and  Active  Solar  Applications.  A passive solar energy  system  is one in which  all heat is 
distributed by natural means. An active solar system uses mechanical devices, such as fans or pumps, to 
distribute heat. Many of the applications you will see in this book are being called hybrid systems; that is, 
they employ some passive techniques and some active mechanisms. For an example, the greenhouse is a 
passive  solar collector,  and a fan  that distributes the heated air to the house is active. 

The Degree Day.  This is the unit of measurement used to describe the heating needs for an area. Degree 
days are obtained by subtracting the average daily temperature from a 65°F base. If the high temperature 
reached  50°  and  the  low was  20°,  then  the average  temperature  would  be 35°  (50  +  20  -r  2  =  35); 
subtracting the average temperature (35°) from the 65° base makes it a 30° day (65°— 35° =  30°). 
Degree days are totalled throughout the winter heating season and are used for determining the size of solar 
heating systems or conventional equipment. They can also be used to present a relative picture of heating 
needs in different  parts of the country. General climatic conditions can be categorized according to totals of 
winter degree days. 

0-2000  Degree Days 
2000^000 Degree Days 
4000-6000 Degree Days 
6000+  Degree Days 

Warm 
Moderate 
Cold 
Very Cold 

The degree-day measure is convenient but other seasonal factors must be kept in mind. For instance, 
both  Seattle,  Washington,  and  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico  have  about  the  same  degree  days,  4,300. 
Seattle is cloudy and wet in winter. Albuquerque is sunny and dry. The latter obviously will be a better area 
for solar applications,  if all other factors are equal (see Appendix D, p.  181.) 

Thermal Characteristics of the Greenhouse 

The Second Law of Thermal Dynamics says that, unhindered, heat will always move to a colder area 

regardless of the direction  it has to go. It is indifferent  to "up" or "down,"  "inside" or "out."  Green(cid:173)
houses lose heat in ways that are both positive and negative to overall performance. Here are some of the 
general principles of thermal dynamics which will help you to minimize negative effects  and maximize 
positive  ones—in  other  words,  manage  heat  loss.  These  three  forms  of  heat  transfer  are  occurring 
constantly. 

Conduction.  Conduction  is heat movement through a solid mass, between bodies in contact with one 
another.  This idea becomes clear when you grasp the handle of an iron skillet from a hot burner without a 
protective pad. The iron in the skillet is an excellent conductor of heat and it doesn't take very long for that 
heat to move from the bottom of the skillet up the iron to the end of the handle. Ouch! Because the element 
heating the pan is so much hotter than the pan itself, and the handle of the pan in rum so much hotter than 
your hand, the conduction of heat takes place rapidly. 

All forms  of heat loss take place at aj'aster rate when the temperature difference between the two areas 
is greater.  In the greenhouse,  heat  losses  to the outdoors  will  be less during the daytime  than  at night 
because the temperature difference  between the interior and exterior surfaces  is less during the daytime. 
The  ability  of  a  material  to  conduct  heat  is  called  its  thermal conductivity. The  overall  thermal 
conductivity of a wall section is expressed as its U-value.  In the greenhouse, the primary materials that are 
conducting  heat  outdoors  are the glazed  surfaces,  the  framing  members  and the poorly  insulated  walls 

PRINCIPLES 

17 

and  foundations.  We can  slow  down 
(but  never  stop)  the  flow  of  heat by 
lowering the U-value of a surface. The 
inverse  of die U-value  (I/U) is called 
the R-value and gives us a measure of 
resistance  to  heat  transfer.  Increased 
resistance to heat flow is accomplished 
by air pockets in an insulating material. 
The  more  trapped  air  pockets,  the 
better die insulator,  and the higher its 
R-value.  To reduce conduction  losses 
through the surfaces of the greenhouse, 
we raise dieir R-values. 

Here  are  the  R-values  of  some 
common  building materials rated for a 
one-inch  thickness: 

R per inch 

Material 
Expanded  Polystyrene 
5.26 
3.70 
Loose Cellulose 
3.17 
Bart  Fiberglass 
2.25 
Dry Earth 
Soft Wood  (framing lumber)  1.25 
.20 
Common  Brick 
.08 
Concrete 

Figure  6 

Conduction heat loss through the glazed surfaces of the greenhouse makes all die omer surface losses 
seem almost insignificant.  The U-value of a single layer of glass is 1.13, so die R is 1/1.13 or .88.  Two 
layers of glass with  1/4" air space between panes has a U of .65 or an R of 1.5. So by double-glazing die 
largest  surfaces  in  the  greenhouse,  heat  losses  through  the  glass  are cut almost  in half.  Adding  an 
insulating barrier with an R-value of only 2 to cover the glass at night produces the following  results: 

Double glass 

Insulating 
Blanket 

Air film 
between blanket 
and glass 

R 1.5 

R2.0 

R0.6 

R 4.1 TOTAL, or over four times die insulating 
value of a single layer of glass, less dian  1/4 
die heat loss of the single-glazed greenhouse. 

9^4 

Convection: Air is a fluid. (Note: as opposed to a solid, fluid is not the same as liquid.) Hot air rises and 
cold air falls; this is anodier basic principle of diermal dynamics. When a fluid (such as air) is heated, die 
distance between die molecules increases, and a given volume of die fluid will dius be lighter and will rise. 
As it cools, the distance between the molecules decreases; die fluid becomes heavier and gravity pulls it 
down. This action is called convection. 

18 

CHAPTER III 

Convection  patterns  in the attached  solar greenhouse can be beneficial  or harmful.  During  nighttime 
periods,  for  instance,  when  the  clear  glazings  are  colder  than  the  thermal  mass  of  the  greenhouse,  a 
convection  loop  is established that contributes to heat loss (Fig. 7). Warm air rising from  the thermal  mass 
is pulled  across the  glazed  surfaces  by 
the heavier  cold  air.  So the warmer  air 
loses  its  heat  more  rapidly,  through 
conduction,  to the outside. The  greater 
the  temperature  differences  between 
cool glazings and the warm objects,  the 
faster  the  convection  currents  move 
and  the  more  heat  is  lost.  Insulating 
barriers 
transversely 
mounted  blanket  shown  in  Fig.  44,  p. 
49, 
large 
two  different 
convection  cell 
temperature  zones  and  in  doing  so 
greatly  reduce  convection  heat  losses. 
Both  convection  and  conduction 
heat  losses  are  higher  when  outdoor 
convection patterns, wind currents,  are 
increased.  Wind  blowing  across  the 
surface  of  the  greenhouse  will  cause 
the  outer  surfaces  to  be  cooled  and 
more  heat  to  be  conducted  through 
them.  Wind  also  creates  a  high-
pressure  area  on  the  outside  and  low 
pressure  inside.  The  result  is faster  air  leaks  by  infiltration  through  any  cracks or loose joints you  might 
have. 

Nighttime  Air  Movement 

in  Greenhouse. 

help 

to  break  up  a 

Figure  7 

such  as 

the 

into 

Convection  of  warm  air  from  the greenhouse  to  the  adjoining  home,  on  the  other hand,  is a  major 
benefit  of the attached unit; it is partially  through  this daytime process that the solar greenhouse becomes a 
winter heating  system. The sun is the power source and the home is the lucky  recipient in this partnership. 
The  convective  loop  is  established  on  clear  or  partly  cloudy  winter  days  when  the  greenhouse  air 
temperature rises above that in the interior of the home. Through high and low openings (vents, doors, and 
windows) to the home, a natural convection cycle is created that will run as long as there is sufficient  solar 
radiation  into  the greenhouse  (Fig.  8). 

WARM  AIR 
INTO  HOME 

COOL  AIR 
FROM  HOME 

Daytime  Air  Movement 

in  Greenhouse. 

Figure  8 

Radiation. 
Radiation  is  energy  transmitted  as 
electromagnetic  waves  directly  from  one  body  to 
another.  The  energy  transfer  takes  place  without  a 
medium  until  the  waves  are  reflected  by  a  radiant 
barrier  or  absorbed  by  a  solid.  Imagine  yourself 
standing  a  distance  from  a  bonfire  on  a cold  winter 
night.  You can probably remember your 
fire-facing 
side  being  quite  warm  and  your  other  side  freezing. 
That"s  radiant  transfer.  If  you  want  to  get  warmer, 
you  either  have  to  get  closer  to  the  fire  to  capture 
more  radiation  (and  convective  heat), or rotate your(cid:173)
self  slowly. 

Radiation  is a two—way street. While all bodies 
transfer  radiant  energy back and forth,  the net  differ-
ence is from the warmer to the cooler body. So, in the 

PRINCIPLES 

19 

example just given, if there is a car close to you and its metallic surface is colder than your backside, it is 
going to receive radiant energy  from  you, even as it is giving off  radiant energy to the clear sky above, 
which  is colder than any of the other objects. 

On a winter night, radiant heat loss from the greenhouse through the clear glazings to the night sky is 
substantial,  as much as 40% of total heat loss on very clear nights. Glass and plastic glazings absorb the 
radiation and their temperature becomes higher as a result. This increases conduction losses through the 
glazing.  A simple foil  barrier  is effective  in reducing  the heat transfer  out.  In the design section,  some 
methods of slowing radiation losses are given. 

solar 

greenhouses 

Radiation  heating  is  a  primary 
principle  in  most  passive  structures, 
and 
are  no 
exception.  For  the  greenhouse,  heat 
absorbed  by  thermal  mass  within  the 
structure (water drums, masonry walls, 
soil) is radiated directly to the plants at 
night  when  their  surface  temperatures 
drop  below  the  temperature  of  the 
thermal  mass (Fig.  9). If we surround 
the plants with warm radiant  surfaces, 
they  can  tolerate  much  lower  air 
temperatures. 

through 

In  a  greenhouse-home  combina(cid:173)
tion  (see  Appendix  E,  p.  183)  heat 
the  greenhouse  can  be  con(cid:173)
from 
ducted 
the  adjoining  wall 
to  the  home  interior.  The  entire  wall 
becomes  a  low-temperature  radiant 
heater.  This  is the  best  of  all  heating 
systems because mere are no hot spots, 
no noisy  fans,  and  absolutely  nothing 
can break down. 

Figure 9 

To effectively  use radiant heating 
for the greenhouse and the home, mass 
must  be  properly  sized,  placed,  and 
colored.  Dark-colored  objects  and 
materials in the greenhouse absorb the 
energy from the sun during the day, and their temperature is raised. If these objects have sufficient thermal 
mass—the capacity to absorb, store, and distribute appreciable amounts of heat—then they will, in effect, 
capture some free energy for later use. Think about a hot-water bottle. You fill the rubber bag with very hot 
water and place it between the cold sheets of your bed. When you go to bed an hour later your toes will have 
a  nice  warm place  to snuggle. The  device  conducts  its heat to you and the bed for  many  hours. In me 
morning when you wake up, it may still be lukewarm. Heating by radiation (and conduction) with thermal 
mass in the greenhouse works on the same principles. A mass of material in the greenhouse soaks up heat 
from  the sun during the day, men slowly  releases that stored up energy back to the greenhouse or to the 
adjoining structure at night. Technical tomes have been written on how to properly size thermal mass to the 
heat loads of any particular building in any particular climate (see Bibliography). The factors used include 
conductivity, surface to volume ratio, color, mixing ability, and placement. In the design chapter we give 
you some  "rules of thumb" that apply to attached greenhouses and serve as a point of departure for the 
design  of new greenhouse-home  combinations. 

20 

CHAPTER III 

Condensation and Evaporation.The moisture content of an air-water vapor mixture, when expressed as a 
percentage, is called relative humidity. Warmer air can hold more humidity than cooler air, which is why 
the indoor relative humidity is usually higher in summer months than in winter. Although humidity can be 
a  real  benefit  in the greenhouse,  it can create some problems  because water condensation  on  different 
surfaces  contributes to their deterioration.  For example, when convection  loops (Fig. 7, p.  18) pull the 
humid  greenhouse  air  across  the  colder,  clear-glazed  surfaces,  condensation  can  occur  on the  inside 
glazings. 

In winter, humid air carried by convection from the greenhouse to the house will be appreciated if the 
unit is attached to a well-insulated room.  If the adjoining  room is poorly insulated, the warm greenhouse 
air will form condensation on the north wall of the home. Ideally, humidity in the greenhouse should range 
from  30% to 70%.  Not enough  moisture  in the air dries out plant tissues; too much  moisture promotes 
disease,  especially  in  combination  with  high  temperatures.  A  plant  must  be  able  to lose  moisture  by 
transpiration (the release of water vapor) to keep from overheating. Air movement through ventilation is 
the most effective  way to control excess humidity.  In the winter,  venting the humidity  into the house is 
helpful,  as  most  homes  are  too dry.  To control  summer humidity  and excess heat you  must have an 
efficient  system  for moving air from  the greenhouse to the outdoors. (See Appendix H,  Vent Sizing,  p. 
189.) 

When  water  evaporates,  one  pound  (a  pint)  will  absorb  about  1000  BTU's  of  heat  energy.  So 
evaporation is a very effective  and widely used form of cooling in parts of the world that experience hot, 
dry weather. With natural ventilation (no fans) the greenhouse will often act as a natural evaporative cooler 
for itself. Through transpiration the plants in the greenhouse act as so many swamp pads: air flowing past 
them absorbs the moisture and is cooled. This works quite well in the western United States through the 
summer and in most parts of die country during spring and fall. In humid locations, evaporative cooling of 
greenhouses  can  still  be effective  and  is the conventional  method  for  cooling  commercial  greenhouse 
structures.  Unfortunately,  the higher the relative humidity,  the more difficult  it is to get evaporation  to 
occur. The small home greenhouse in a warm, humid climate can use a small fan to aid in summer cooling. 

CHAPTER IV 

EXTERIOR  DESIGN 

The Site 

The  meaning  of the term  trade off will  become apparent  when you begin to select a site  for  your 
greenhouse.  All  the  conditions  are  not  likely  to be  ideal,  but  it  is important  that  positive  factors  are 
emphasized and detrimental ones kept to a minimum. 

Your first step in choosing a site is to determine how your home and property are aligned in relation to 
solar movement and other natural elements. Stand on the south side of your house. Where did the sun come 
up today? Where will it set? What will its rising and setting positions be on December 22nd and June 22nd 
(the solstices) relative to your south wall? These are the basics of solar design. This is where it all begins. 
All of the natural considerations apply  to independent as well as to attached solar greenhouses. Use The 
Charts,  Appendix  B, of this book as aids in visualizing orientation,  sun movement,  and obstructions at 
your location. 
Sun  Movement  and  Building 
Orientation.  The  sun  is  constantly 
changing  its  path  through  the  sky, 
dropping  low  on  the  horizon  in  the 
winter  and  rising  to  an  overhead 
position  in  the  summer  (Fig.  10). A 
solar  greenhouse  differs  from  most 
solar  applications  in  that  it  is  not 
necessary 
to  obtain  the  maximum 
intensity  and  duration  of  sunlight 
throughout  the  year.  It  should  be 
designed and located so that it receives 
the  greatest  possible  amount  and 
intensity  of  direct  sunlight  during the 
winter,  when  daylight  hours  are  few, 
and  less  light  in  the  summer  when 
is  a  problem.  The 
overheating 
particularly 
photoperiod 
becomes 
important  for  plant  growth 
in  the 
greenhouse during the winter. Because 
the days are so short from October to March, both the plants and the heat storage features of the greenhouse 
need every available minute of sunlight. Designing in accordance with sun movement patterns gives the 
solar greenhouse  automatic advantages over conventional  greenhouses for winter heating and  summer 
cooling. 

Figure  10 

^WINTER  S U N S EA 

WINTER  SUNRISE 

36°N.Lat. 

v>-

SUMMER  SUNSET 

SUMMER  SUNRISE 

r 

Estimating South 

1 

There are many ways to estimate south. One is to find  Polaris, the North Star, and 
place  two  stakes  in the ground  about three  feet  apart that align perfectly  with the  star. 
That line will be true north-south axis. If you can't find Polaris, consult a Scout or look at 
a star chart. 

Another old Scout trick uses a conventional wrist watch (not a digital readout). On a 
clear day, around 8 A.M. or 4 P.M., point the hour hand of the watch directly at the sun. 
Keep the watch level. Halfway between the hour hand and the  12 o'clock position on the 
watch  will  approximate  true  south.  Be sure you're on sun time—not daylight  savings 
time. 

Isogonic  Chart  shows magnetic  deviations  (or continental  US 

Figure  II 

A solar greenhouse requires at least a partially southern exposure. Find magnetic south by using a 
compass.  A  survey  map  or  the  chart  above  (Fig.  11) can  tell  you  how  many  degrees  east  or  west 
(declination) from your site true south is. Add or subtract these degrees to find true south. For instance, if 
the deviation in your area is 12°W(west), true south is 12° west of the south pointer on the compass. When 
you establish true south, determine how far from  a perpendicular to south your house wall is. This east-
west axis will be the north wall of the greenhouse and it can be as much as 45° off true east-west without 
losing an appreciable  amount of winter sunlight,  although no more than  15° is optimum. The diagram 
below shows some good orientations for attached solar greenhouses (Fig.  12). If the corner of your home 
points south,  consider a corner location (Fig.  13). 

EXTERIOR  DESIGN 

23 

Obstructions.  Anything  that  blocks  light  from  the  greenhouse  may  be  considered  an  obstruction.  In 
examining an obstruction, its orientation and size are the two most important factors. Where is it in relation 
to the south face of the greenhouse? How much of the time is it blocking the sun and during what season 
(Fig.  14)? A deciduous (leaf-shedding)  tree that partially shades the greenhouse from  the late  afternoon 
summer sun could be an asset. A twenty-foot evergreen ten feet south of the unit is a serious problem. The 
Charts  in Appendix B can help determine how much sun will be blocked at various times of the year. For 
maximum  solar  gain  the  greenhouse 
needs to be unobstructed from 9A.M. 
to  3  P.M.  during 
the  winter 
in  the  early 
photoperiod.  Shading 
morning  or  late  afternoon 
isn't  as 
costly to thermal performance as it is to 
the plants; they  need  all the light they 
can get during the short winter daylight 
hours. 

For best midwinter operation,  no 
more than an hour or so of midday sun 
can  be  lost  to  obstructions.  In  urban 
areas  the  possibility  of  a  neighbor 
planting a tree or adding another story 
to  his  home  directly  in  front  of  your 
greenhouse  is  something  you  should 
consider.  It  may  surprise  you,  but in 
most  of  the  United  States  you  don't 
have any rights to sunlight. Right to the 
sunlight  that  falls  on  your  land  is not 
considered part or parcel of rights that 
usually  accompany  ownership  of  the 
property  such  as  easement  or  access. 
Sunlight  is  generally  considered  in(cid:173)
corporeal,  or without body,  so has no 

West 

East 

South 

Figure  13 

Figure  14 

24 

CHAPTER IV 

legal  definition  under law.  Therefore,  legally  it doesn't exist.  If this bothers you,  work with your local 
solar energy  association to change things. 

Your home may present a sun obstruction on the east or west side (see Fig.  12, p. 22). While it might 
block some of the light, particularly  in the summer months, it will also be blocking the wind and acting as 
an  insulating barrier against the elements. 

The important thing to remember is that an obstruction can be a positive or negative factor.  You can 
compensate for some obstructions by proper bed layout. In other cases, exterior reflectors can make up in 
intensity for light blocked by an obstruction. Remember that whenever light is sacrificed, the performance 
of the greenhouse is altered. Try to achieve the full winter photoperiod and at least ten hours of summer 
sun. 

Local atmospheric conditions affect  the light the greenhouse receives at various times of the year. In 
many mountainous areas a winter morning is more likely to be clear than a winter afternoon.  It is advisable 
in  those  regions  to have  a greater  amount  of  clear wall  facing  east  than  facing  west.  Generally,  some 
eastern clear glazing makes sense in any locale and is usually preferable to a western one. The greenhouse 
needs these early morning rays after a cold winter night. Joan Loitz (Chapter VII) claims that morning "is 
when  the plants do their growin'.  Give them eastern  light." 

Wind. The natural flow of prevailing winds can be used to your advantage in the design of the greenhouse. 
In many parts of the country the summer-winter wind patterns will vary as much as ninety degrees. The 
southwestern United States has a pattern of winter winds from the northwest and summer breezes from the 
southwest.  By  mounting  a  low  vent  in  the southwest  corner of  the greenhouse  and  a high  vent  in the 
northeast, the prevailing summer winds are used in natural cooling. There is no national map that can tell 
you  which  way  the wind blows at various  times of the year in your neighborhood.  Local  topographical 
features,  trees, and buildings can drastically  affect  wind patterns. The best guide is local experience with 
typical conditions ("You  don't need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows."—Bob Dylan). 
In designing your unit, place the lower vents for summer cooling on the side of the greenhouse/ac/ng 
the summer prevailing winds. Also, try to locate the exterior greenhouse doorway on the opposite side of 
the prevailing winter winds (Fig. 15). In this way the entrance is partially protected from drastic heat losses 
when opened during the cold period. This is of special importance in a greenhouse that has no doorway to 
the home. 

Figure 15 

Drainage.  Adequate  drainage  away  from  the  home  and  the greenhouse  structure  is  essential.  Most 
buildings are constructed with a gradual slope away from them for runoff. When the extra roof area of the 
greenhouse is added, will this still be effective?  Be sure to check the drains and gutters from the house and 
where they terminate.  In urban locations it may be possible to connect to existing drainage lines. Try to 
have the ground runoff from the greenhouse follow the existing pattern of drainage. Some pick and shovel 
work  may  be necessary  to facilitate  this. 

EXTERIOR DESIGN 

2 5 

Percolation,  the rate at which water can flow  downward  through  the soil, is particularly  important if 
you plan to have ground beds in the greenhouse.  Although correct watering procedures would never allow 
saturation of the beds, accidents (such as leaving the hose on overnight) do happen. When soil conditions at 
the greenhouse  site  are  not conducive  to good  percolation,  you  can  add  several  inches of  coarse  sand  or 
gravel to the ground level of the unit to aid drainage. Water accumulating under the floor is not beneficial  to 
either the  plants or the thermal  dynamics of  the greenhouse.  It lessens the effectiveness  of  any  insulating 
barrier. 

Utilities. It is convenient to have water and electricity available at the greenhouse site. A water faucet cuts 
down on the manual labor involved in hauling water to the plants, but because plants in a greenhouse do not 
require  as  much  water  as  they  would  outdoors,  their needs can  be accommodated  by  hand.  If  a faucet  is 
located at the site, plan to build it into the unit. In the spring and summer you can extend a hose through  the 
door or vents for  watering  the outdoor plants.  It is also possible to get an adaptor for  indoor water  oudets 
and  run  a hose  to  the greenhouse  through  a door  or  window. 

An  electrical  outlet  is also convenient  but  not  essential.  It  is enjoyable  to have  light  for  nighttime 
work, but difficult  to justify  the expense of the electrical power needed to light the structure  in terms of the 
additional  food  it  could  produce.  Also  be  sure  to  check  the  potential  site  for  underground  utility 
connections  before  you  dig  anywhere.  Driving  your  spade  through  a 220-volt  service  wire  can  be  a 
shocking  experience. 

The main point  is this: leave or design  provisions  for  utilities if it is convenient  and not costly  to do, 

but don't  feel  that  you  have  to have them  in order to have  a successful  solar  greenhouse. 

Building Codes.  Building codes,  inspectors,  and permits are strange inventions. Originally intended to 
be  constructive,  helpful  devices,  they  can  be  restrictive,  rigid,  and  generally  oppressive  to  innovative 
design  work.  The  latest  information  in  the  code  books  about  greenhouses  was  probably  written  around 
1940. In some  regions,  greenhouses  may  be considered  "temporary"  structures  (like gospel  show  tents) 
and have  virtually  no restrictions  on  their construction.  In other areas,  they  may  be subject  to strict  (and 
obsolete)  codes. 

The biggest  problem  for attached  greenhouses  arises when  they come  in conflict with the  "light  and 
ventilation"  section  of  the  Uniform  Building  Code  adopted  by  many  states.  The problem  is an  outdated 
law that considers the attached greenhouse an agricultural building, not a habitable space. You will have to 
work with the inspector on a personal basis to convince him/her that the unit is primarily a living addition to 
the  home  and  should  be  judged  as  such.  Often  difficulties  arise  over  the  accepted  name  the  solar 
greenhouse carries in your area. You may be better off building a' 'solarium,''' 'atrium,''  "sun room,''  or 
just  "enclosing  a  porch."  By  finding  the  right  name  before  applying  for  the permit  you  avoid  problems 
and  you  may  also  qualify  for  tax  credits  or rebates  that  apply  to solar  structures  in  many  states  through 
financial  solar  initiatives. 

The best advice  is to find  a friend  involved  in construction  and check  up on the  "mood"  of the codes 
and  inspectors  in your  area. Quite possibly  the  local  inspector will  be a considerable  aid  in your  project, 
giving  valuable  advice  on  the strength  of  lumber,  foundation  footings,  and  so forth.  If you  are  in  doubt 
about the local situation,  follow  the prescribed  code to the letter rather than running the risk of violating  it. 
In the  long  run  this  will  be cheaper  than  tearing  the  structure  down  and starting  over. 

Greenhouse  Configurations 

When  you  start  planning  the  solar  greenhouse  addition  to your home  you  should  consider:  (1)  the 
overall  efficiency  of the design  in terms of the amount of heat  it gives to the home and food  it puts on the 
table; (2) the architectural  integration of the greenhouse with the house—its size and shape, as well as the 
textures and quality of the building materials used; (3) time and cost—what you can afford  to build and how 
much time you have to maintain it. The best way to make the right decision is to have a broad  understanding 
of  the options  available. 

26 

CHAPTER IV 

The model we use for an attached greenhouse is a lean-to or shed roof configuration.  It is practical, 
economical, and easy to build. In considering its exterior shape you are dealing with three primary factors: 

•  The orientation of your home to true south (see pp. 21 and 22) 

•  Obstructions (p. 23) 

•  The optimum  thermal  relationship between the greenhouse and your home—that  is, how certain 
greenhouse proportions and dimensions affect  the collection of light, storage of heat, and thereby 
the growing conditions and thermal performance  of your unit. 

Figure  16 

If your home  is well  oriented  and  the site presents  no serious  obstructions,  the best shape  for  an 
attached greenhouse is a long, rectangular shape rather than a square or '"boxy" design. A rule of thumb 
that has proven successful  in attached solar greenhouses is to allow the length to be about lx/i-2 times the 
width. A size that has been fairly standard in our demonstration units is 16 feet long by  10 feet wide. This 
size leaves plenty of growing space with some room for working and relaxation areas. If the width of the 
greenhouse becomes much greater than 10 feet and the pitch of the roof is shallow, rafters heavier than 2 x 
4's  must be used and the expense of building increases. 

A long,  narrow design also allows the home wall to receive light that would not reach it in a boxy 
greenhouse (Fig.  16). The more area of shared wall between your home and greenhouse, the better. The 
mass of the house stores heat,  some of which can be used in the unit, and in turn the greenhouse reduces 
heat  loss  from  the  home  by  acting  as  a  buffer  against  colder  outdoor  temperatures.  In  addition,  the 
greenhouse can more easily supply the home with supplemental heat as it may open onto several windows 
and/or  doors for  natural or forced  convection. The total amount of  heat available  to the home  from  the 
greenhouse is directly proportional to the total amount of south glazing in the greenhouse.  By increasing 
the  length  of  the greenhouse you  are producing  more heat  for  your  home  in the simplest,  most direct 
manner. 

Figure  17 

EXTERIOR  DESIGN 

27 

Achieving  a  symbiotic  thermal-relationship  between  the  house  and  greenhouse  is  as  important  as 
exact  orientation.  Figure  17 illustrates  combinations  that  provide  a maximum  interchange  between  the 
two.  If  you  are  lucky  enough  to  have  such  a  desirable  home  plan  for  your  greenhouse  addition,  take 
advantage of  it. In Figure  17, the center drawing shows the best possible location for a solar greenhouse in 
terms of  themial  performance.  With  this site,  the  house  surrounds  and  protects  the  unit  on  all  sides  but 
south. Heat losses from  the greenhouse are minimized because both end walls are solid and buffered  by the 
house. Solar heating from the greenhouse is optimal because of the large percentage of home wall  covered. 
The  indented  comer  greenhouses  will  also  achieve  better  thermal  performance  than  the  more  exposed 
add-on  units  shown  in  Fig.  19.  The  eastern  comer  addition  is  preferable  to  the  western  one  in  most 
locations, but both  are good. 

The only drawbacks to the three indented designs can be summer overheating and poor air circulation 
within  the  unit.  Because  the  greenhouse  is  sheltered  by  the  house,  additional  attention  must  be  paid  to 
ventilation  and  cross-circulation.  Vent-sizing  and  air  movement  should  be  double 
the  amount 
recommended  in Appendix  H,  p.  189. Solar 
heating  will  also  be  improved  when  the  liv(cid:173)
ing  space  of  the  home  has  good  convective 
communication  with  the  greenhouse  (Fig. 
18).  Large  openings  between  rooms  pro(cid:173)
mote air circulation.  Closed  doors and  solid 
walls  prohibit  the  passage  of  warm  air  be(cid:173)
tween areas. 

Mobile home owners  should follow  the 
same  principles  given  above.  Below  are 
recommended  layouts  based  on  orientation 
to true  south.  The  site  with  the  north-south 
axis on  the  left  is  the  least  preferred  of  the 
four,  as  there  is  less  collection  area  to  wall 
surface  covered. 

Figure  18 

<-

—> 

/ 

South 

Figure  19 

28 

CHAPTER  IV 

Diffuse Sky 
\  Radiation 

\ 
•\?S, 1  /  /  / 
>  <l 

Figure  20 

Diffuse Sky Radiation 

NOT 

RECOMMENDED 

Although  there are numerous disadvantages to the low angle collector, some solar 
greenhouse  publications  recommend a clear roof as a way of maximizing collection of 
diffuse  sky radiation (Fig. 20).They report a 50% increase in light in the greenhouse dur(cid:173)
ing heavily  overcast conditions.  Note, however,  that increase  in diffuse  light does not 
substantially  contribute to heating the greenhouse or the adjoining  structure, which is a 
basic premise of die designs in this book. Instead the uninsulated clear area at the green(cid:173)
house apex increases heat loss in winter and leads to overheating in me summer. In other 
words, you're  faced  with many  of the problems of conventional greenhouses. (It's not 
surprising that conventional greenhouse designs originated in die coastal, cool climates of 
northern Europe and England. In these regions unusually diffuse  sky conditions—which 
also prevail in parts of the Pacific Northwest—make the low-pitched clear roof a sensible 
design. Here die greenhouse needs the heat in summer almost as much as in winter, and 
the winters are mild in comparison to harsh inland climates.) The designs we recommend, 
which  combine  a near-vertical  front  face  for  better  winter  collection  with  a partially 
shaded/insulated roof plane, provide adequate light for plant growdi and greater thermal 
efficiency. 

The low angle collector is more vulnerable to Mother Nature's little surprises, such 
as  %-inch  hailstones  and  falling  oak  branches.  Heavier  and  safer glazing and  framing 
materials must be used to protect a tilted face aginst these possibilities. 

Despite  some  inherent  problems,  the  45°  geometry  has  been  widely  used;  in 
Chapter  VIII  are  several  successful  examples.  Just keep  in  mind  that  there  are  many 
aspects of solar greenhouse design, and maximizing the collection of diffuse  sky radiation 

• 

is only one of them. 

I

Angle  of  the  South  Face.  In the  solar  greenhouse,  you  are  working  for  maximum  efficiency  of 
collection  during the winter period  and  reduced  summer transmittance. To achieve that  means that the 
angle of the south face should be nearly perpendicular, called normal, to the average "solar noon" angle 
of the  sun during  die coldest  mondis.  In die northern hemisphere this period is mid-November to mid-
February . 

EXTERIOR  DESIGN 

29 

December 

Normal 

December 

90° 

Figure 21 

Averaging the winter solar noon angles in the contiguous U.S. shows that the optimum tilt for winter 
collection begins at about 50° in the southern United States and rises to 70° around the Canadian border. 
Remember, this is at solar noon; at other times of the day the sun is at a lower angle in the sky (see Fig. 10, 
p. 21). A formula we've  used for establishing the tilt of the south face is latitude plus 35°. You can see 
that if you live north of 45° latitude, the angle approaches vertical. To have exactly the correct angle is not 
critical. The tilt of the glazing can be as much as 50° off normal and still not lose an appreciable percentage 
of light  transmittance.  There  are charts  and  technical  references  that  can  give  the exact  percentage of 
transmission  for  various  collector  tilts  and  sun  angles  (see  Table  2,  p.  14, and  Appendix  B), but  the 
important point is that any clear glazing will transmit the majority of the light that strikes its surface until 
the angle of incidence is greater than about 50°. 

Snow or Ground 

Figure  22 

We  can  compare  a  collect  tilt  of  45°  with  a  vertical  one  (90°)  to  illustrate  the  difference  in 
transmittance between a sloped and vertical front  face  (Fig. 21). Both tilt angles will offer good winter 
collection surfaces, but there the similarity ends. The 45° face will transmit a great deal of solar radiation 
throughout the entire year. It will collect energy very efficiently right through the summer, just when you 
don't need the heat in your greenhouse. In contrast, the vertical surface collects well in winter, yet has an 
angle of  incidence of 74° off  normal  in the summer months. The result is a cooler summer  greenhouse 
because the glazing is reflecting the majority  of light from  its surface  in the warm period. 

30 

CHAPTER  IV 

Another  advantage  to the  vertical  or  near  vertical  collecting  surface  is that  it  transmits  radiation 
reflected from the ground immediately south of it (Fig. 22). The increased collection caused by snow cover 
or light-colored ground is very important. It can produce up to a 40% gain in solar energy for the collector 
on a clear day. This is sizable, particularly in severe northern climates that experience constant snow cover 
for three to four months in winter and need all the extra solar gain they can get. A vertical collecting surface 
becomes more important the farther  north you go. 

•Vr-w^. 

>t 

^ v^ 

Greenhouse  Geometries.  Once  the  orientation, 
length,  and  width  of  your  greenhouse  have  been 
considered,  you can begin to plan the geometry of the 
unit.  We  recommend  variations  on  either  of  the  two 
shedroof  geometries  pictured  (Fig.  23,  A and  B) and 
we'll explain in detail the advantages of each in this sec(cid:173)
tion.  Example  A  has  a  front  collecting  face  tilted  to 
coincide with winter sun angles. It is the model we use 
in  the  Construction  chapter.  The  vertical  face  of 
Example  B  is  appropriate  for  northern  latitudes  and 
offers  further practical advantages that will be discussed 
shortly. First, to give you an idea of other options avail(cid:173)
able to you,  let's take a quick look at some commonly 
used designs. 

Consisting  of  a  single  front  plane,  design  C  is 
perhaps  the simplest  to build.  It should  be  taken  ser(cid:173)
iously  as  a  very  inexpensive  temporary  solar  green(cid:173)
house.  This  unit  could  be  applied  inexpensively  to 
millions of  homes, turning their south  walls  into solar 
collectors.  Many  people find the 45° tilt  aesthetically 
pleasing, and it is extremely effective as an addition to a 
two-story  home. 
Its  most  serious  drawback  as  a 
permanent structure is the lack of usable space in front. 
This can be remedied by building a low perimeter wall 
around  the  base  as  described  in  the  Construction 
chapter.  Another  option  is  to  excavate  below  grade, 
perhaps to the depth of the home footing,  and construct 
a  masonry  retaining  wall  up  to  or  above  the  ground 
level. 

Figure  23 

The  "quarter-round"  D  profile  is  often  seen  in 
prefabricated greenhouse kits using curved metal for the 
framing  supports.  The  design  can  be  made  more  thermally  efficient  using  wood  framing,  but  that 
demands a knowledge of laminating or stressing lumber.  In this model  the majority  of south glazing is 
within 50° of normal to solar noon altitudes year-round. If you choose the C or D designs and live in an area 
with  warm humid summers, plan on increasing exhaust ventilation,  shading, thermal  isolation from  the 
home, or a combination of all three, to prevent overheating. 

An advantage to the C and D geometries is a large percentage of solar collection area in relation to the 
floor  and  home-wall  area  covered.  The  corresponding  disadvantage  is  devising  a  practial,  effective 
method  of decreasing  heat  loss through  all this glazing at night (see the section on movable  insulation, 
Chapter V, p. 44). 

The two geometries pictured in E and F have been used to increase winter collection in severe climates 
and for attaching units on homes that have a less-than-ideal orientation. For instance, if the south wall of 
your home is on the property line or is heavily shaded, E or F can be added to the east or west sides of the 

EXTERIOR  DESIGN 

31 

house. As you can see, both designs feature huge expanses of steeply tilted or vertical glazing in relation to 
the floor area covered. They are excellent solar collectors in winter. Note, however, that with these a fan is 
helpful in moving warm air from the greenhouse to the home; the high roof peaks contain stratified pockets 
of warm air that will  not readily  circulate to the adjoining  structure.  Because both designs have glazed 
surfaces well above the growing areas, movable insulation that isolates the upper zone can be  effectively 
and easily installed. The height of these two solar greenhouses can also be used to their benefit in terms of 
air circulation.  Exhaust vents mounted  near the apex will promote efficient  passive summer ventilation; 
the added  height  between  high  and  low  vents increases  natural  exhaust  circulation  as  is shown  in  the 
venting formula in Appendix H. Design E makes a very nice roof cover on an atrium, but we would like to 
caution the novice builder against  undertaking it. The sawtooth roof  must be built to handle runoff  and 
snowloads, and in most units of this design that we've seen, roof leaks have been a problem. 

Roof  Design.  In an attached  unit the roof slope will often  be predetermined by its tie-in point on your 
home and local snowload  requirements; you won't be able to control collection by adjusting  its angle of 
incidence.  Instead,  transmittance can be controlled  by including an insulated/shading section that takes 
both summer and winter sun angles into consideration  (Fig. 24). 

The primary  function  of the insulated roof section 
is to keep heat losses in the warmest part of the green(cid:173)
house  to  a  minimum  in  winter.  Just  as  important,  it 
blocks  the  sunlight  during  the  summer  months  by 
reducing  the  effective  collector  area  on  the  nearly 
horizontal  roof  surface.  If the entire  roof  section were 
clear, the result would be a very large collector surface 
almost  normal  to  the  summer  sun.  The  shaded  and 
insulated section at the apex keeps the wall of the home 
in shadow throughout the warmest time of the year, yet 
provides the southern two-thirds of die greenhouse with 
full light. 

The point on the rafters  where  the  insulated  roof 
stops and  die clear  roof  begins can  be determined  for 
any greenhouse design by a cross-section scale drawing 
using die  information  given  in The Charts (Appendix 
B). In an attached greenhouse in which the back wall is 
about  10 feet high and the width of me greenhouse is 8, 
10, or 12 feet,  die insulated portion of the roof will be 
the top 4 or 5 feet. With diis design, me sun is allowed to 
strike well up the wall of die greenhouse throughout die winter period. The half-clear roof can be insulated 
in winter in very severe climates widi blankets or rigid panels (see sliding roof panels. Chapter V, p. 48). 
In the greenhouse shown in Fig. 25, the sun at noon will strike no higher than point A throughout 
the winter.  You can plan to add any direct gain  storage below  and soudi of it.  A wider greenhouse (E) 
would mean that the clear area on the roof (C) would have to be increased, creating more clear surfaces for 
heat loss in die winter and heat gain in die summer. Note that on June 22nd die area north of point B will be 
in die shade during die hottest part of die day. This means mat diermal storage is out of the direct sunlight in 
midafternoon  on summer days, when you don't need or want it heated. 

Figure  24 

The solid roof area of die greenhouse  (D) will be permanendy  insulated. The result will be a more 
even temperature range in the unit diroughout the year. A partial sacrifice widi built-in shading is diat full-
light loving plants (tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers) won't do as well in the rear of me greenhouse during 
the  summer  period.  However,  most  shade-loving  houseplants,  and  low-light  vegetables  (lettuce, 
onions) will enjoy  the covered  area  of  die greenhouse.  The  loss of  a little  summer  light  is more  man 
returned in overall thermal  performance. 

32 

CHAPTER  IV 

East  and  West  (end)  Walls.  In  designing 
the end walls of the greenhouse, first consider 
what  the  ultimate  year-round  use  of 
the 
structure will be. If it is to be primarily a winter 
garden  and  used  only 
for  houseplants 
throughout the remainder of the year, you can 
make  the east and west walls of the structure 
solid (massive or insulated frame). You'll have 
less heat loss through the end walls and a more 
efficient  solar collector for supplemental home 
heat  in  the  winter.  However,  in  order  for  a 
greenhouse to have enough light throughout the 
entire  year  for  adequate  vegetable  growth,  it 
needs some sunlight from  the east and/or west 
sides. South light alone is not enough. Without 
some side lighting,  the plants  will  be missing 
the  beneficial  effect  of  longer  daylight  hours 
and blossom development will suffer.  Clear or 
partly  clear  eastern  walls  are  preferable  to 
western exposures because the eastern glazing 
helps the greenhouse  warm  up early  in the morning  after  a cold winter night,  and  the western  sun  in 
summer, combined with higher afternoon temperatures, contributes to overheating problems. 

Figure  25 

Determining  the  amount  and  location  of  east  and  west  clear  glazing  is mainly  a  function  of  the 
orientation of your greenhouse. For instance, if the main collecting area (south face) is situated 30° to the 
east of south, then you have effectively  captured the eastern (early morning) winter sunlight (Fig.  12 and 
13). You should therefore make the eastern end wall solid and the western end wall at least partially clear. 
Remember, you're trying to get the direct sunlight from 9 A.M. to 3 P.M. in winter and about ten hours of 
summer sun through the clear walls of the greenhouse. As the greenhouse becomes longer on an east-west 
axis, the end walls shade a smaller proportion of the interior space. If the length exceeds about 25 feet and 
the greenhouse is under  10 feet wide, very little glazing  is needed on the east or west walls. 

Since part or all of the end walls will be frame or massive, they can be used for insulation, storage, or 
best of all, both (insulated massive). A typical insulated wall is made of 2 x 4's, or 2 x 6's, with interior 
fiberglass or rockwool insulation,  and a polyethylene vapor barrier, then sheathed,  paneled, and sealed. 
The  advantages of  such  walls are that they are easy  and  inexpensive  to build. This  is the way the great 
majority  of  American  homes have been  built for  the last four  decades. The drawback  with a regularly 
insulated  frame wall is that if the heat is turned off for a time during the winter, the house gets cold very 
quickly. The structure is dependent upon continuous heating. 

Walls with thermal mass, on the other hand, make more sense in any structure that uses direct sunlight 
for  heat.  The  heat  is stored  in  the building  material  and  returned  to  the  structure  several  hours  later. 
Materials  such  as  the  adobe  bricks  used  in  the  Southwest  have  the  remarkable  quality  of  delivering 
maximum stored heat about twelve hours after the peak collection period, when it is needed most. The old 
rock homes with thick walls found throughout much of the United States perform the same function.  This 
natural cycle also works in summer, helping to keep the home cool in the day and warm at night. 

For massive end walls to perform  with optimal efficiency,  they should be insulated on the outside. 
When this is done, the walls become in effect  a structural  "1116111105 bottle," radiating most of the heat 
gained during the day back into the greenhouse at night. 

North (adjoining)  Wall.  It is preferable  that the north (home-adjoining)  wall have high thermal mass. 
The heat that it absorbs and stores will be reradiated  into the greenhouse and transferred through the wall 
into your home. The chart on p. 33 gives the thickness for optimum heat transfer through the wall to the 

EXTERIOR  DESIGN 

33 

Seasonal  Insulation 

For those of you  in extreme northern climates who wish to have both  an  efficient 
solar greenhouse  in  winter  and  a good  vegetable  producer  in summer,  consider  rigid 
insulating panels seasonally applied to clear eastern and western walls. You can design 
the majority of your end walls to be clear but leave provision to fit in the insulating panels 
in accordance with sun movement and cold weather. Cover rigid styrofoam  or polyure-
thane sheets with a thin sheathing and pressure-fit them between the studs on the interior 
side of the glazing.  The panels are inserted sequentially, with the one nearest the home 
being  installed  in about November,  followed  by another panel  as the sun  rises and sets 
further  to the south.  Midwinter finds you with only south-facing glazing and R-12 side 
walls. The process of removal  is reversed in February. This is a simple operation and is 
quite appropriate and cost-effective.  It solves the problem of getting both summer lighting 
and winter solar  efficiency. 

Seasonal  Insulating 

Panel 
(Installed) 

r~ 

Figure  26 

interior of the home. The thickness given takes into consideration the time lag between when the heat is 
absorbed on the greenhouse-facing  side (at  100° - 120°F) of the material and when it arrives on the home 
side  10-14  hours  later  (at  68°  -  78°).  These  dimensions  can  also  be  used  in  new  greenhouse-home 
combinations. 

Optimum Thickness of Massive Walls 

Hollow-core block 
filled  w/ concrete 

Rock 

Water 

10-12 inches 

10-14 inches 

8 or more  inches 

Adobe 

Brick 

10-12 inches 

10-14 inches 

Concrete 

12-16 inches 

It is important to remember that the greenhouse does not need to have perfect characteristics in all of 
the categories discussed to be successful.  However,  if the unit is lacking in one area, it would be wise to 
compensate for this in some way. For instance, if you decide to build simple stud walls, it is advisable to 
increase the amount  of thermal  storage in the greenhouse. 

34 

CHAPTER IV 

Attached or Freestanding 

The  fundamental  design  choice  between  freestanding  (independent)  structures  and  attached 
greenhouses seems to need clarification.  In our first edition, we emphasized the advantages of an attached 
greenhouse. They are: 

1)  Excess heat produced in the unit is not wasted by venting into the atmosphere, but is used in 

the adjacent home. 

2)  Cost of heating the home is thereby reduced since the greenhouse is either supplying supple(cid:173)

mental  heat or acting as an  insulator against heat loss through the south wall of the home. 

3)  An attached unit offers a convenient location for the operator (especially when it is attached 
to the kitchen); the benefits  of this feature  will be realized  most clearly  during  inclement 
or cold weather. 

4)  Cost  of  greenhouse  construction  is  reduced  since  one  wall—that  of  the  home—is 
already  built; wiring, water,  and drainage hookups  are handy, therefore  less expensive to 
include  if desired. 

5)  With an attached unit you have the option of utilizing home heat as a back-up system rather 

than investing in conventional  or additional solar heating. 

6)  The owner enjoys  the aesthetic and creative benefits of biosphere living more directly. 

These reasons present  a sound basis for deciding on an attached unit. 
Another,  less  apparent  benefit,  concerns  the  successful  operation  and  the  general  approach  to 
attached greenhouse gardening. With the structure as an integral part of your home, you are likely to watch 
its progress more closely than if it were located out behind the garage somewhere. You'll be more aware of 
temperature  fluctuations  and  sensitive  to  the  progress  and  needs  of  the  plants.  Problems  that  might 
develop, like harmful  insects, hoses left  on, doors left open, can be spotted and corrected quickly. 

Any style of architecture can be designed or retrofitted  with a solar greenhouse. Look over the many 

different  styles in Chapter VIII and you'll see what we mean. 

Freestanding.  It is possible that conditions at your site absolutely rule out an attached unit. Permanent 
obstructions may shade your only near-southern exposure. Perhaps your house faces south and you aren't 
quite  ready  to  have  a tomato  patch  cover your  front  door.  Or you  may  simply  prefer  to keep  the  unit 
separate from your home. Then you want to plan an independent structure. 

Here are a few  advantages to an independent greenhouse: 

1)  The unit can be oriented exacdy to true south for maximum  collection. 

2)  It can be designed to prevent phototropic plant growth and to receive some northern light that the 

home will obstruct from  an attached  unit. 

3)  Your design is not limited by the configuration  of the home. 

In an independent structure a principal design consideration is 
the configuration  of the north wall. A common approach (developed 
by the Brace Institute) is to tilt the north wall toward the front of the 
unit; see Fig. 27. The tilt of the wall is calculated to be the altitude of 
the sun at the summer solstice for the latitude of a particular site. This 
helps prevent phototropic growth by reflecting light off of the wall to 
the plants. A tilted reflective  north wall such as this can more than 
double the light the plants receive on a clear winter day. When die 
north  wall  is  well  insulated,  tiiis  design  also  has  about  half  die 

Figure 27 

EXTERIOR  DESIGN 

35 

heat  loss of  a traditional  independent  greenhouse.  The  front  face  slopes  to the ground  (A) or to a low 
"kneewall."'  In areas of heavy snowfall,  a higher vertical front  wall is used (B) rather than extending the 
front  face to the ground (see Herb Shop, p.  140). 

A variation on this design adds a vertical north wall below the tilted, insulated, north-facing roof sec(cid:173)
tion (Fig.  28). The vertical wall (A) can be built using concrete or stone to provide thermal storage. Heat 
loss is reduced by the insulated roof and by earth-berming or sinking the structure below ground level (B). 
Many  innovations are found  in the inexpensive, easy to build "A-Frame"  greenhouse designed by 
Reed Maes (see p.  139). The height of a steep A-frame  structure offers advantages in mounting movable 
insulation  above plant level, as well as reflecting  light down  to the growing  surface. 

A good combination of features is pictured in Fig. 29. Here a vertical section of the north wall (A) is 

built with concrete for thermal mass; sloping north roof 
sections  (B)  combat  phototropism.  The  south-facing 
roof  section  is  perhaps  the  key  to  the  success of  the 
design. Like the attached greenhouse roofs discussed on 
p.  31. this one is partially  shaded to cut down conduc(cid:173)
tive/radiant  losses  at  night  and  overheating  during 
warm periods. Alternating clear (C) and solid/insulated 
(E)  sections  run  the  length  of  the  roof;  movable  in(cid:173)
sulating panels are stored under the solid sections. The 
south  face  (D)  is  tilted  to  coincide  with  winter  sun 
angles  (again,  note  the  similarity  to  the  attached  de(cid:173)
sign).  For a more detailed description of a  functioning 
unit of this type, see Tyson, p.  149. Performance char(cid:173)
acteristics for these freestanding  designs are also noted 
in Chapter VIII. 

N 

Figure  28 

Diagonal Braces go here. 

*»~  -iit-

Figure  29 

C H A P T ER  V  

INTERIOR  DESIGN 

The  design  of  the greenhouse  interior is very  personal  and depends  in large  part  on your  attitude 
toward its use. Many people enjoy a greenhouse that provides space for activities other than gardening. If 
this is your feeling,  allow  plenty of  room for sitting and moving  about.  You may decide to arrange the 
planting areas around  a central living space or separate the two completely. 

Most greenhouse owners, though, prefer to make maximum use of interior space for growing plants. 

This is a more difficult  design problem that requires consideration of several important  factors. 

Access 

If your biosphere is built against a wall having an existing doorway, the door should open away from 
the greenhouse area. All exterior doors are built to open out. This will allow you more freedom in arranging 
the interior space.  It is likewise preferable  to build vents that open  to the outside or that slide. 

Provide sufficient  walking space in your floor plan for unrestricted access to all planting areas. Plants 
will  tend  to  overhang  the  beds,  so  allow  for  growing  room.  At  times your  greenhouse  may  have  to 
accommodate several  people; one expanded area of walkway will furnish  the needed capacity  (Fig. 30). 

Planting Areas 

Permanent  beds  may  be  dug  directly  into  the  greenhouse  floor.  If  additional  depth  is  desired, 
supporting sides built around ground level will hold more soil. It is important to estimate shadows that will 

INTERIOR DESIGN 

37 

be cast from plant-filled  beds. Beds located at the rear of the greenhouse (away from the sun) may be built 
above ground level to prevent their being shaded by front plantings. In the small greenhouse, optimum use 
of vertical  space  is essential.  This  can  be accomplished  by  adding  shelves,  hanging  beds, planters on 
barrels, or by building-in  tiered beds. 

Table beds used in conjunction  with ground beds will yield an even larger planting area.  However, 
take care that the front  planters and tables do not unintentionally  block direct sunlight from  those in the 
rear. 

Thermal Storage 

The use  of  thermal  storage  as  a natural  means  of  supplying heat  to the greenhouse  is one of  the 
elemental principles that distinguishes a solar design from  traditional ones. In this section we will look at 
how particular quantities and placements of thermal storage affect  greenhouse temperature performance. 
We will emphasize direct (or passive) thermal storage because it is more cost-effective,  readily  installed, 
and maintenance-free  than  indirect (or isolated) thermal storage. 

Direct storage is provided by various materials  in the greenhouse that absorb heat from the sun and 
the air and return heat to the structure after sundown when the air (and surface temperature of other objects) 
drops below  the temperature  the storage has attained  over the course of the day.  It works  primarily  by 
conductive and radiant heat  transfer. 

Capacity. Any material has a certain heat storage capacity that is a function of its specific heat, mass per 
unit volume, and density. The chart below compares some common materials in terms of how much they 
weigh  (their  mass)  and  how  much  energy  a cubic  foot  of  the material  will  store  if  its temperature  is 
uniformly  raised  1°F. 

Material 

Specific Heat Constant 

BTU/lb.  °F 

Adobe 
Brick 
Concrete 
Earth 
Sand 
Steel 
Stone 
Water 
Wood 

0.22 
0.20 
0.23 
0.21 
0.20 
0.12 
0.21 
1.00 
0.33 

Density 
lb./ft.3 

90 
120 
150 
95 
110 
490 
165 
62.5 
32 

Total Heat Storage 

BTU/ft.3/°F 

20 
24 
34.5 
20 
22 
59 
34.6 
62.5 
10.6 

Conductivity.  In examining storage materials it's necessary to have some practical knowledge of their 
conductivity, which determines the rate at which heat moves in and out of the material. For instance, steel 
is denser and has a much higher conductivity than water. A cubic foot of steel has about the same total heat 
storage capacity as a cubic foot (7.48 gal.) of water but will respond more quickly to temperature changes 
than water. If both were in a greenhouse and absorbed the same amount of energy during the day, the steel 
would  quickly  release its heat to the structure after sundown while the water would slowly give it back 
during the course of the night. 

Thermal  Momentum.  Changing the sizes and shapes of thermal mass also affects  the time lag of the 
heat released. Fifty-five one-gallon water containers will react differently  than one fifty-five gallon drum. 
Mounted  in  a greenhouse,  the small  containers  will  absorb more energy  per  unit because  they  have a 
greater  surface-to-volume  ratio  than  the  drum.  But  this  also  means  that  they  lose  the heat  they  have 
collected more quickly. Small containers of enclosed water (1,5, and 10 gallon containers) are day-to-day 

38 

CHAPTER V 

thermal storage. Large containers (25, 30, 55+  gallon containers) and massive masonry walls are better 
for  long-term  storage. They can carry  the unit through extended cloudy weather.  It's beneficial  to have 
both  types of storage in the solar greenhouse. 

Storage  Media  and  Placement.  Including direct thermal storage in your greenhouse requires added 
design considerations from  the outset.  If you plan to add a passive storage system later, allow  adequate 
space in the original  design  to accommodate it.  In terms of the interior space of your greenhouse, your 
primary  concern  is the proper  placement  of  the system.  Exposed water drums, for instance, should  be 
located  such  that  they  receive  maximum  direct  sunlight  yet  do not  shade  your  plants.  Thermal  mass 
exposed to direct sunlight is three to jour  times as effective  as mass that is shaded. 

Fifty-five  gallon oil drums full of water are a common form of "direct-gain" storage. The problem 
with fifty-five gallon oil drums is that they are ugly. It would take a design genius to make them otherwise. 
For maximum  efficiency,  the drums should be painted black,  which doesn't  improve  their appearance. 
They  are cumbersome,  usually bent, and greasy. Some suggestions: 

1)  Try buying new, shiny, undamaged drums from  the drum factory.  It's highly unlikely as the oil 
companies that own the factories choose to peddle them full or at $25 a whack, empty. Beware of 
the residual contents of drums from chemical and oil companies. Some of that stuff is absolutely 
deadly.  You shouldn't even think of having it in your greenhouse. 

2)  Find used drums at bread or candle factories. They have been filled with molasses or parafin and 

are usually  in good shape. 

3) Clean  used barrels with gunk remover, treat them with a primer, then paint them a beautiful  flat 

dark earth color instead of black. 

4)  Decorate the noncollecting  areas of the drums to 

suit your fancy  and taste. 

5)  Train  plants  around  the  sides  and  back  of  the 

barrels (Fig. 31). 

6)  Incorporate  shelving  and  planters  on  top of  the 
barrel installation. This is a good way to combine 
functions  (Fig. 32). 

7)  Add a small amount of rust inhibitor or antifreeze 
to any metal container before sealing it to prolong 
its life. 

Large drums should be placed near the back 
of  the  greenhouse  or  wherever  they  will  catch 
direct  sun  and  not  shade  or  be  shaded.  If  the 
drums  are stacked  on end, stagger them slightly 
to  allow  space  for filling and  air circulation.  If 
you have room, lay the barrels on their sides with 
the filling holes facing  up. See that the drums do 
not  touch  the  greenhouse  walls  or  they  will 
conduct heat to the walls that could be used to raise 
ambient  air temperatures. 

However  ugly  they  might  be,  the  effect  of 
water  storage  drums  on your  greenhouse  can  be 
beautiful.  If direct sunlight raises the temperature 

Figure  31 

INTERIOR DESIGN  39 

Figure  32 

of the water in a fifty-gallon  drum thirty degrees, you will have stored about fourteen thousand BTU's of 
heat energy. Water stores three to four times as much energy per pound as an equivalent amount of rocks 
and masonry. 

A variety of other water storage containers can be employed. They include water-filled  beer cans, 
glass and plastic  containers of all sizes (Fig. 33), discarded  gas tanks from  cars and trucks, rubber and 
vinyl  pillows,  open  metal  vats  and  galvanized  steel  culverts.  The  important  thing  is to check  that  no 
direct-gain  storage  unintentionally  shades  storage  behind  it.  For this  reason  various-sized  containers, 
lower to the south and higher to the north, are advisable. 

If you can't or don't want to use water containers in your greenhouse, other mass, such as masonry 
walls, planters made of stone, and the earth in ground beds can be functional and beautiful thermal storage. 
A six-inch concrete slab and/or brick added to the floor can act as a * 'heat sink" for storing thermal energy. 
The advantages of using these materials are that they don' t have to be contained like water and they all 
have different  time-lag characteristics. By combining various materials with differing  thermal properties, 
the whole biosphere benefits, aesthetically  as well as practically. Of course, all thermal storage materials 
should be a dark  color (or black) for efficient  absorption of energy. 

The following charts show approximate temperature fluctuations in a solar greenhouse in relation to 

Sizing Mass 

40 

CHAPTER V 

in 

various 

three  different 

the  amount  of  thermal  mass  within  the  unit.  The 
thermal  mass  is  sized  to  one  square  foot  of  south-
facing  glazing 
to 
operating  modes.  The 
demonstrate 
performance  estimates  assume  that  the  majority  of 
the mass is visible to the sun and that the design of the 
greenhouse  is similar to the model  used in  this book. 
No  movable  insulation  is  applied  in  any  of  these 
cases. 

amounts 

Low  Thermal  Mass.  As  indicated  by  Chart  I.  this 
operating  mode  results  in  high  temperature  fluctua(cid:173)
tions. This is what will happen to conventional  green(cid:173)
houses if they  are left  unheated  in winter.  Clear-day 
temperatures  will  exceed  100°F  while  nighttime 
temperatures  will  drop  down  close to the outside  air 
temperature. 

Figure  33 

There  are  several  operating  modes  where  little 
or no thermal storage may be justified.  One would be 
an  extremely  cold  and  cloudy  climate  like  parts  of 
Wisconsin  and Minnesota.  The attached  greenhouse 
might  be 
the 
summer  growing  season  for  very  little  cost  and  with  minimal  construction;  for  instance,  it could  be  as 
simple  as a framework  of 2 x 4's  tacked onto the south side of the house with polyethylene stretched  over 
the  frame—maybe  $100  investment.  The  greenhouse  would  still  be  a  good  solar  collector  through  the 
winter  and  deliver  perhaps  700-900  BTU's  of  heat  per  square  foot  of  glazing  to the  adjoining  house  on 
clear days.  In  practical  terms,  this would  be extremely  low-cost heat delivery.  Of  course,  the  plants  will 
freeze  by  early  November  and  the unit  won't  provide good  growing  conditions  again  until  March. 

intentionally  designed 

to  extend 

100 

A variation of this mode has been  applied in several new homes and buildings in severe climates. The 
designers build-in limited thermal mass in order to raise ambient air temperatures; the surplus heat is then 
ducted into isolated rock  storage beneath  the floor of 
the  new  home  (Fig.  34).  In  this  design  isolated 
thermal  storage can be effective  because the  reduced 
thermal  mass  in  the  greenhouse  allows  ambient  air 
temperatures  to get high  enough  to really  charge Die 
rock  bed. 

Low Thermal  Mass 

80 

/  » 
\ 
j / 
i 
i 
\ 
i 
i \ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
i 
\ 
\ 

i 
i 
/ 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
1 
1 
1 

y 
/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

1 
1 
1 
if 
*/ 

\ 

1 

\\S/ 
\ 

^k 

^r 

50' 

32-

0 

f\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 

/ 
i 
i 

s 

^\ 

/ 
/ 

* 
V-
\ ^ x ^ 
^****»*^l^~' 

is  needed 

The  deep  South  and  Gulf  Coast  region  are 
other areas of the country  in which greenhouses need 
little  or  no  thermal  storage.  These  areas  generally 
have less than 2000 degree days, so not much  thermal 
mass 
to  maintain  adequate  growing 
temperatures  in  the greenhouse.  This makes  the  unit 
easier and  cheaper to build.  The greenhouse  should, 
however, have at least one gallon of water per square 
foot of glazing to maintain temperatures above 50° in 
winter.  The surplus heat (there will be an  abundance 
of it) should  be moved by fan directly  to the house or 
to isolated  thermal  storage.  Be  prepared  also to  use 
a fan  to cool  the greenhouse  spring  through  fall. 

Day I 
Clear 

Night I 

Day 2 
Cloudy 

Night: 

Chart I 

1 

INTERIOR DESIGN 

41 

5+Gallons of Water 
or Equivalent Masonry 
per Sq. Ft. Glazing 

\ 

Day 2 
Cloudv 

Night 2 

At first glance it would seem that there is no way 
we could go wrong by adding more and more thermal 
mass until the temperatures stabilize between 55-75°. However,  it doesn't work that way. A solar green(cid:173)
house in cold climates (4000-6000 degree days) added to a frame home can be overmassed.  If the unit is 
being  used  for  supplemental  home  heating,  the  extra  mass  has  the  effect  of  robbing  heat  from  the 
greenhouse air that could be used in the home. 

Chart II 

In warm humid  climates a different  problem exists.  In regions that don't experience a consistent 
diurnal (day to night) temperature swing, such as the Southeast and Gulf Coast, this mode can cause over(cid:173)
heating problems in the summer. If the nighttime temperatures don'1 drop below 68-70° for long periods of 
time, the thermal mass has no way of cooling down. The result is that the thermal mass slowly increases in 
temperature throughout the summer and before you know it the enclosed water storage is 90° on an August 
morning. This isn't good for the plants or the adjoining  home. 

.Jw-C. 

Figure  34 

80 

Five  or  more  gallons  of  water  or  masonry  100 
equivalent.  From  Chart  II  it  is  apparent  that 
increased  thermal  mass  greatly  decreases  the  air 
temperature  fluctuations.  The  mass acts like  a heat 
"sponge,"  soaking  up  heat  during  the  day  and 
releasing  it  back  to  the  greenhouse  at  night  and 
during cloudy  weather.  This mass is recommended  50 
for independent  solar greenhouses  and  for  attached 
units  in  which  very  cold-sensitive  plants  (usually 
ornamentals)  are being  grown.  Increasing  the mass 
has  the  effect  of  giving  the  greenhouse  longer 
"staying  power'*  in  cloudy  climates.  The  storage 
capability of the massive material in this quantity can 
carry  a  greenhouse  tiirough  three  to  five  days  of 
very  cold  and  cloudy  weather  without  interior 
temperatures dropping below  freezing. 

32-

0 

Day I 
Clear 

Night I 

42 

CHAPTER V 

2-3 Gallons of Water 
or Equivalent Masonry 
Per  Sq. Ft. Glazing 

/** \ 

/ 

\ 

. 

00 
00 

so-

so-

32-

0' 

Day 1 
Clear 

Nighi I 

Day 2 
Cloudy 

Night 2 

Chart III 

Two  to  three  gallons  of  water  or  masonry 
equivalent.  This  is  the  quantity  of  mass  we 
recommend for the majority  of attached solar green(cid:173)
houses.  With  this  amount,  the  unit  will  maintain 
temperatures  25-35°  above  the  outdoor  lows  in 
winter. The storage can carry the unit through about 
three days of heavy clouds and cold weather (down 
to zero) before freezing becomes a danger. In 6000+ 
degree-day climates with 50%+  solar conditions it is 
likely  that  supplementary  heat  and/or  movable 
insulation (p. 44-48) will be needed a couple of times 
in  the  winter.  The  greenhouse  will  maintain  good 
gardening  temperatures  from  late February  through 
mid-November.  With  less mass to absorb heat than 
in  the  preceding  operating  mode,  the  ambient  air 
temperature in the greenhouse will be higher on clear 
days,  and  the  surplus  heat  can  be  shared  by  the 
adjoining  structure. 

Isolated  (Indirect)  Thermal  Storage.  Increased heating performance  can  be obtained  from  a solar 
greenhouse when excess heat in the apex is tapped and moved by a fan system to isolated rock beds or water 
storage.  This extra storage component can  be located either in the greenhouse or below  the floor of the 
adjoining  home. 

There are  three advantages to such  a system:  1) daytime temperature peaks in the greenhouse are 
lowered; 2) heat that would otherwise be wasted is moved to an area of the greenhouse or adjoining home 
where it can be used; and 3) heat storage is increased in the greenhouse or home. 

The drawbacks to isolated thermal storage are increased cost of installation, occasional difficulty  in 
servicing and maintenance, and a dependence on outside power sources (usually electricity) to drive the 
fans or pumps that move the heat. 

Passive  Solar  Associates  of  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico,  have generated  some  practical  advice  about 

planning  isolated storage used in conjunction with solar greenhouses. 

Warm air from  the greenhouse is introduced into a north plenum and is pulled or pushed through 
l'/2-2'/2" pebbles to a south plenum and back into the greenhouse. 

Rock beds charged with heated air from a working greenhouse use low-grade heat from 70°-90°F. 
Since they require larger fans, ductwork, and controls to distribute the stored heat, radiant or con(cid:173)
ductive distribution  is suggested. 

A concrete slab can cap (or top) a rock bed and become the floor of the home or greenhouse. From 
the rocks the passive heat is transfered  to the interior space up through the massive radiant floor. 
(See Unit  1, First Village, p.  119.) 

If a frame  floor covers the rock bed, the storage should allow vertical air flow. Heat enters the top 
of the rock bed and is forced through the bottom of the plenum back to the greenhouse. The heated 
rocks provide convective heat through the wood  floor. 

INTERIOR DESIGN 

4  3 

•  Rock beds must be well insulated on the sides and particularly at the bottom.  Rigid insulation is 
advised with a six-mil. vapor barrier below the low air channel. Feed air into the comer opposite 
from  where  it is taken out for even distribution  through the bed. 

Some other rules of thumb for planning a rock bed are: 

1)  Use a sufficient  air flow to move the required heat at the low-temperature differences  available. 

2)  Use a high-flow  squirrel-cage fan  to obtain high efficiency  and quiet operation. 

3)  Complete the air flow  circuit  by returning the air to the greenhouse. 

4)  Don't figure on using more than  1/3 of the net heat out of the greenhouse. 

Since accurately  sizing  a rock  bed  is contingent  on pressure  drop,  face  area  configuration  of the 
bed. face velocity and rock sizes, it becomes more complicated than this presentation suggests. If you plan 
isolated storage use the rules of thumb given here as guidelines for discussion with a competent engineer or 
designer. 

Complicated  high-temperature  hot-water  systems  cannot  presently  be  economically  justified  in 
greenhouses. Avoid  them.  Use air or low-temperature  water as the heat-exchange  medium if an active 
system  is what  you  need.  Generally  we  have  found  that passive  storage  arrangements  that  include  a 
massive north wall and well-distributed thermal mass throughout the greenhouse interior are sufficient  to 
meet most climatic situations. 

Convection and Ventilation 

A well-designed solar greenhouse has a passive convection cycle established by proper venting to the 
adjoining structure. Heated air in the greenhouse rises and flows through a high opening to the home. A 
low opening in the shared wall allows cool air from the house to enter the greenhouse for heating. Without 
any mechanical  devices this natural  cycle will  function  continuously  on any relatively  sunny  day.  The 
plants in the unit convert carbon dioxide into oxygen-rich air for the home, a definite health benefit for the 
occupants. Also, in areas of the country with very low humidity, the added moisture from the greenhouse 
will be welcomed  in the home. 

The rate at which daytime convection occurs determines how much heated air can be delivered to the 
house. The faster the airmoves the more heat is being taken from the greenhouse. It's important that the air 
movement  rate  is  correct  so the greenhouse  stays warm  enough  and  still  provides  usable  heat  for  the 
adjoining  structure.  The  rate  at which  air moves  is measured  in  cubic feet  per  minute  (cfm).  For an 
acceptable temperature range in the greenhouse and usable heat for the home, we recommend an optimum 
rate of 4-6 cfm per square foot of south-facing glazing. So in an attached solar greenhouse with 200 square 
feet of south glazing, the air should be moved to the home at a minimum of 800 cubic feet per minute. In a 
unit 16 feet long, the total volume of greenhouse air would be exchanged with the home about every two 
and one-half  minutes.  If the air were moved at a faster  rate, say two air exchanges from  greenhouse to 
house per minute, the result might be a greenhouse running at 60°F and blowing 60° air into the house, 
which wouldn't help either structure. 

Vents must be properly spaced in relationship to one another. When high  vents are located directly 
above low ones, the air circulation  pattern becomes somewhat localized rather than diffused  over a wide 
area, and the majority of the airstream will travel the shortest distance and not spread its heat well through(cid:173)
out the adjoining room. For better circulation, get the air moving over a greater distance by staggering the 
vents (Fig. 35). 

44 

CHAPTER V 

You can  also move the air with  a small  fan 
rated to move this volume of air (or slightly more 
to make up for friction  losses). It can be purchased 
through a catalog fan supplier at a low cost. 

However, many people prefer not to use any 
active machinery  in their greenhouses but simply 
let  the  sun  do  all  the  work  through  passive 
convection. 

The greenhouse  must  also  be  vented  to the 
outdoors  for  summer  cooling.  The  openings 
should  be  located  to  promote  cross  ventilation, 
preferably  one in each  end wall (or an end wall/ 
roof  combination).  As  with  the  openings  to  the 
home, it is important to have both a high and a low 
exterior  vent.  Place them  as high  and  as low  as 
your design  permits; all  venting systems (exterior and interior) operate best with the maximum  vertical 
distance between  them. 

Figure  35 

We offer  the following  general  recommendations  for vent sizing: 

When using 

to 

Windows and doors 

heat home 

High and low vents 

heat home 

High and low  vents 
and exterior door 

exhaust greenhouse 
in summer 

allow 

10-15% 

6-8% 

15-20% 

oj 

wall area covered by 
greenhouse 

wall  area covered by 
greenhouse 

floor area of green(cid:173)
house (rate door at 
1/2 actual square 
footage) 

For formulas  to calculate exact vent dimensions for any greenhouse, see Appendix H, p. 189. 

Movable  Insulation 

In a well-sealed greenhouse, the greatest losses will occur through the clear wall and clear roof areas. 
Traditional (all clear, exposed) greenhouses rank among the most energy inefficient  structures ever built. 
That is why solar greenhouse designs use clear surfaces only where absolutely necessary for heat collection 
and plant growth. Still, energy will be lost at an amazing rate through the glazing when the sun goes down. 
The best way  to  reduce  these  losses is by installing movable insulation.  With  the benefit  of this added 
insulation,  the  greenhouse  becomes  more  efficient  in  storing  energy  overnight  and  during  extended 
periods of cold weather. Because the average nighttime temperatures are higher, the greenhouse warms up 
more quickly in the morning. The warmer, more even temperatures provide a better growing environment 
for  young  plants,  increasing  both  the  rate  of  growth  and  production.  The  greenhouse  has  a  longer 
"staying"  period,  that is, it is not as dependent on a steady dose of sunlight to recharge it and maintain 
growing temperatures. The unit is also able to provide more heat to an adjoining structure since it does not 
lose as much to the outside. Movable insulation can eliminate the need for an active solar heating system, 
increased storage, or conventional  supplemental  heat. 

In many  parts of the country where the winters are very cold and where the sun does not shine with 
great  regularity  (Great Lakes area, New England), movable insulation is a necessity. However,  several 

INTERIOR DESIGN 

4 5 

the 

Check  Valve for  Upper Vent 

If  the  openings  between  the 
house and greenhouse are left  open 
in the evening, the convection cycle 
will  be  reversed.  This  is  called 
reverse  thermosiphoning,  and  its 
effect  is to take heat from  the house 
and  move  it  to  the  greenhouse. 
Reverse  thermosiphoning  might  be 
intentionally  planned  for  extremely 
cold  nights  when  you  want  to 
supplement 
internal  passive 
heating  of  the  greenhouse.  Gener(cid:173)
ally,  however,  this  pattern  of  air 
flow  is not  desired  or needed.  One 
way  to  stop  it  is  to  close  the 
greenhouse off completely from the 
house; if windows and doors are the 
interior venting arrangement, then it 
is  no  problem  to  shut  them  after 
sundown,  and  that  stops  reverse 
thermosiphoning  immediately.  But 
if you have built high and low vents, it might be difficult  to reach them, and in this case 
you  may  want  to  install  an  automatic  check  valve.  Well,  here  it  is,  the  30  solution, 
suggested by Doug Kelbaugh, who applied the idea to his Princeton, New Jersey, home. 

To  Home 

Figure  36 

This is a failsafe  check valve. Applied to the top vent, the lightweight plastic film (or 
silk) is placed on the house side of the wire mesh. On the lower vent the plastic film is on 
the greenhouse side. When these check valves are in operation, the greenhouse can only 
supply  heat  to the house, never  take warm  air from  it, because the film  is forced  back 
against the screen by the natural convection currents and stops reverse thermosiphoning. 

I 

factors have to be taken into consideration in choosing the type that is best suited to your greenhouse (and 
your budget). You will have to plan for the appropriate system in your interior design. 

1) Most  systems  are  bulky  and  thus can  be  difficult  to  store,  move,  and  remove.  Interior  rigid 
insulation panels have to cover large glazed surfaces,  and the problem is to provide a storage space  for 
them when they're not in use. Flexible curtains or drapes are not much easier to store because, in order to 
achieve a respectable R-factor (insulation  value), you have to use a good insulator, such as two inches or 
more of  fiberfill.  Bunching  a  10 x  20-foot  blanket  mat  is two  inches  thick  in  the  comer  of  a  small 
greenhouse  can  make  The  Blob  look  handsome  by  comparison.  Either  an  adequate  space  has  to  be 
designed-in to the greenhouse for storing the movable insulation or space has to be provided in a room, 
garage, or tool  shed. 

Exterior rigid panels  are  exposed  to the weather  and  thus have  to be protected  by  some  durable 
material.  They  are  often  sheathed  in  plywood,  which  is effective  but makes  the  panels heavy  and so 
increases the awkwardness of moving them. Various design innovations have been applied to overcome 
these problems, and we will discuss them shortly. 

2)  Some systems are expensive, costing up to $14.00 per square foot.  Although such  systems are 
very ingenious, demand little or no effort on your part to operate, and solve the storage problem, it may be 
difficult  for you to justify  paying this much to insulate the glazed surfaces when the greenhouse only costs 
$7.00 per square foot  to build. 

46 

CHAPTER  V 

3)  The success of a manually operated movable 
insulation  system depends a great deal on the green(cid:173)
house  owner.  You have  to be present to install and 
remove the panels daily during cold weather.  If you 
miss a night and the temperature drops unexpectedly 
low, you can lose your entire greenhouse garden. So, 
while  manual 
systems  are  generally  more 
economical  than  automatic  ones,  they  do require a 
daily time commitment. 

4)  Some  materials  can  pose  a  health  hazard; 
polystyrene and urethane, for instance, will give off 
toxic  fumes  if  a  fire  occurs,  and  city  building 
inspectors  have  told  me  that  they  will  not  approve 
these  materials  for  use  without  a  fire-retardant 
covering on all surfaces. Although I have neverheard 
of  any problems of  this nature in a greenhouse, it is 
best  to  be  aware  of  the  potential  hazard  of  using 
certain  products without  the appropriate  protection. 
With these various considerations in mind, let's 
look  at  several  different  systems  and  examine their 
advantages and disadvantages. 

A time-tested device that can insulate your clear 
walls is a curtain or drapery  (Fig. 37). Pulled closed 
in the evenings or on cloudy days, the curtain should 
seal as tightly as possible to be effective.  Ideally the 
curtain  should  have  a  reflective  surface  (such  as 
aluminized Mylar or Foylon) facing  the air space in 
the interior. A disadvantage to the curtain is that you 
have to be present to operate it (unless, of course, you 
install amotorwith aheat- or light-activated switch). 
Another approach is to use rigid foam panels to 
fill  clear areas at night (Fig. 38). Clips and magnets 
have  been  used  to  attach  the  rigid  panels  (see 
Zomeworks,  p.  161,  Chapter  VIII).  The  obvious 
disadvantage is that the panels must be removed and 
stored during collection  periods. You might devise a 
mounting system for the stored panels in which they 
double  as  interior  reflecting  surfaces  to  combat 
phototropic  plant growth. 

An  insulating  curtain  can  be  made  from  rigid 
styrofoam  or  polyurethane  panels  sandwiched 
together with cloth on alternate edges (Fig. 39). This 
oriental  style  curtain  is stored at the top of the clear 
wall  and  lowered  via cord or wire that runs through 
the panel centers from  top to bottom. 

In  any  vertical  curtain  arrangements,  the  fit 
must be tight when closed or the system may  defeat 
itself  due  to the  "chimney  effect."  Thermal  action 
can  set  up  convection  currents  between  a  loose 

INTERIOR DESIGN 

47 

curtain  and  the  clear  wall,  causing  heat  loss greater  than  if the 
curtain were not there. 

The rolling blanket  shown below  (Fig. 40) has been  used in 
storm window applications and can be adapted to your greenhouse 
if both layers of glazing  are mounted  on the outside of  the  front 
face. Tracks on each side and a Velcro sealing strip at the bottom 
prevent  the chimney  effect.  There  are  several  companies  manu(cid:173)
facturing  insulating  blakets using  this scheme. They  are  featured 
on pp.  159-160. 

Insulating  materials  on  the  outside  of  the  structure  offer 
another solution to the heat loss problem. The one shown in Fig. 41 
that doubles  as  a  reflector  is an  example.  We  suggest  that  you 
investigate  buying  manufactured  panels  that  have  lightweight 
aluminum facing adhered to the rigid insulating foam if you try this 
installation.  Insulation distributors or mobile home manufacturers 
might give you a lead. 

Clear roof sections can be insulated in several ways. The first 

option, developed by Scott Morris, (Fig. 42) employs rigid insula(cid:173)
tion that  is stored  under the solid  roof during  collection  periods. 
The panels slide down to cover the clear roof at night. They are also 
effective  in shading the greenhouse during the summer. This insu(cid:173)
lation system must be planned before the roof is built, as it requires 
specific materials and design considerations. 

You can also install a hinged insulating panel that swings from 
its storage  position  under  the  solid  roof  to  cover  the  collecting 
surface (Fig. 43). 

One of  the  most  cost-effective  methods  of  reducing  radiant 
heat loss through the roof and front face is to isolate both areas from 
the growing  space  with a movable blanket suspended  from  wires 

Figure  39 

Figure  40 

Figure  41 

48 

CHAPTER V 

Sliding  panels  may 

_A 

Tin  roofing-
Permanent  rigid 

foam 

insulation^ 

Double  fiberglas 
roof  glazing 

also  be  used  for 
summer  shading 

Daytime  position  of 
insulating  panels 

Panels  slide  down  at  night 
to insulate  glazed  portion 

H  (Fig.  44).  Inexpensive  shade-cloth  materials  made 
by  several  commercial  greenhouse  supply  com(cid:173)
panies are effective  for this installation. These large 
coverings,  originally  marketed  to  keep  light  out of 
greenhouses,  can  serve  a dual  function  by  keeping 
heat  inside  the  unit.  They  are  usually  a  very  thin 
woven cloth with  virtually no R-value. The material 
has one  reflective  side that should  face the  interior. 
When  mounted  to block all of the glazed areas, the 
shiny side  bounces about 90% of the radiant energy 
back  down  to  the  plants  and  the  thermal  storage 
below.  If properly  installed, the blanket can also act 
to break  up convective  loops and  slow conduction  losses through  the glazing. Tests  have shown that a 
simple one-layer  1 -R reflective barrier can reduce heating needs in commercial greenhouses by up to 60%. 
We recommend  radiant barriers  before  higher  R-value  insulating blankets. The low-R barrier can 
serve as your primary clear-surface  insulation in all but the coldest climates. A combination of the radiant 
barrier and insulating blanket or panel will probably be necessary in extremely cold regions if a full winter 
garden  is to be maintained. 

of roof. 

Figure  42 

Several universities and chemical companies are experimenting  with a poly-film  application  that is 
opaque  to  the  infrared  rays.  One  such  product  is Heat  Mirror,  developed  by  Day Charoudi  and John 
Brooks (Suntech  Research  Associates, Corte Madera, California).  A selective surface,  vacuum-coated 
with transparent mylar, allows 70% transmission of solar radiation and a clear view through windows on 
which  it  is mounted. The coating  cuts down  reradiation  of  long waves  by 75%. Acting as an  effective 
radiation  trap, the Heat  Mirror increases the thermal  resistance of double-glazed  surfaces  3'/2  times. In 
greenhouse applications this type of product could be used within clear roof sections as an insulator. The 
30% decrease  in incoming solar radiation  produced 
by  the film  could  be compensated  for  by  enlarging 
the clear roof area by about one third. 

Another  "automatic"  insulating  system  has 
been  developed  by  Zomeworks  in  Albuquerque, 
New  Mexico.  The  design  is  active  in  that  it  uses 
electrical  blowers  to  fill  a  double-glass  clear  wall 
with  small styrofoam  beads when temperatures drop 
(Fig. 45). The "Beadwall" R acts as a solid insulated 
barrier when filled and a transmitting clear wall when 
the beads are automatically vacuumed out. 

Aesthetics 

for  growing  plants  and  beautiful 

The  main  goal  in  designing  your  greenhouse 
interior  is  to  produce  an  environment  that  is  both 
practical 
to 
experience  (for you  and the plants). Your choice of 
an interior layout will to an extent be predetermined 
by functional  considerations. Many designers equate 
function  with  beauty—the  most  functional  is  the 
most beautiful.  Since the function  and process of the 
greenhouse  is  such  a  positive,  creative  one,  this 

Figure  43 

INTERIOR  DESIGN 

49 

Figure  44 

notion will generally hold true. As you concentrate on producing the most functional  space for growth, 
certain characteristics that  are unique  to the biosphere environment  will guide you in deciding how the 
interior should look. 

You  may  refer  to  Chapter  VII  for  planting 
information  to determine the most suitable growing 
arrangement for your purposes. Certain depths of soil 
and conditions of light  and shade are recommended 
for different  varieties of plants. These conditions will 
influence the dimensions and placement of beds and 
interior structures. 

Growing, changing plants will be a primary part 
of your greenhouse. You may choose to heighten the 
profusion  by using a wide  variety of colors, shapes, 
and surfaces in the walls and bed structures. On the 
other hand, you may wish to balance the active look 
of plant life with a more simple interior design by 
limiting the number of exposed (visible) materials to 
a few that appeal  to you most.  Choosing few colors 
will accomplish  the same end. 

If a constantly  changing environment suits you 
best, build trellises for growing "'living walls"' with(cid:173)
in the space. Climbing vegetables such as tomatoes 
or pole beans  will  cover  a  hanging  string or  stake 
lattice  in short  order.  The  planting  will  necessarily 
demand  consideration  of  shading,  but  the  aesthetic 
rewards can be great. 

The finishing  touches you apply are a matter of 
personal  taste.  Surfaces  that  receive direct  sunlight 
and  have  sufficient  thermal  mass  for  heat  storage 
should  be painted  with  a dark  nonreflective  color. 
Flat black  is  most  effective  for  absorption,  but we 

Figure 45 

50 

CHAPTER V 

also recommend  a dark  blue, brown, red, or green. 
All insulating walls with no thermal storage potential 
should  be  a  light  color  to  reflect  more  light  to the 
plants.  Trim,  such  as  wood  stripping,  molding,  or 
lath  can  be  used attractively  to unify  planes (and to 
cover less-than-tight joints). 

Perhaps  the  single  most  important  step  in 
designing the greenhouse interior is to examine your 
own likes and dislikes. The qualities of environment 
that you feel are most attractive should be combined 
in the plan.  The value of this point has been proven 
repeatedly: if you are pleased with the final  results, 
you  will  spend many  pleasant  hours  in the environ(cid:173)
ment,  helping to insure  its success and deriving the 
fullest  benefits  from  the fruits  of your labor. 

CHAPTER  VI  

CONSTRUCTION 

In this chapter we will take you from  the first shovel of excavated earth to the last nail in the wall. 
Experienced builders may want to skim this material for pertinent greenhouse information  and do the  rest 
of the  building their own way. In this edition we have included several options for certain of the  construc(cid:173)
tion steps. They will allow you to better plan foryour specific site, geographical region, and budget. Also, 
the construction techniques described here would apply to any basic add-on green house geometry. A list 
of tools and materials used in building a 10 x  16 foot attached solar greenhouse is shown at the end of the 
chapter. But read the entire chapter before you buy or build anything. 

There are about a thousand ways to do any particular building operation (that's what perpetuates the 
mystical aura that surrounds construction). Any "expert" will give you one or two of these ways. So will 
we. 

Once you  start building, you'll  find  it addictive.  We have had  a love-hate relationship with  it for 
years. It will torture your days and keep you awake nights, but you'll want to do more. You will think of  all 
the improvements you could make in your house and you'll be hooked. 

General Tips 

1.  Plan  each  step of  construction  as completely  as possible.  Determine which  materials you 
need for each step and buy them before beginning. This is easy to say and not so easy to do.  But if you 
consider the amount of time, organization  and gas money that goes into a "quick  trip to the supply 
store," you should be convinced of  the need to plan ahead. 

2.  Many construction materials come in standard sizes. Sheetrock  and plywood, for instance, 
come in 4' x 8' panels. Designing the dimensions of the greenhouse to correspond to these standard 
sizes can eliminate time-consuming cutting and custom fitting.  It also reduces expensive waste. 

Do not expect framing lumber to be the size it's called. Those days are long gone. For instance: 
a2x4 is l-l/2"x3-l/2",  a  1x6 is 3/4"x5-l/2".  Also, when buying stud lumber, check the length. 
Not long ago, I bought some 8''  studs that shrank to 7-7-1/2" by the time I got home. When I called 
the company, I was told that including the  top  and bottom plates, the studs would make an 8 foot wall. 
Well, that's true, but I paid for eight feet! 

3.  Prices vary greatly. In shopping for materials, a few phone calls to competitive suppliers may 
provide substantial savings. If you  can get some other folks interested in building a greenhouse, you 
can save some money by making "quantity  orders." 

Americans don't realize that there is no set price on anything. Don't be afraid to bargain-shop or 
haggle. Ask for  a special  price. Get to know  the manager of the store. Tell that person that you're 
working on an  "experimental  project."  That  always sounds interesting.  It may bring the store in(cid:173)
creased business if your friends like your greenhouse and decide to build one themselves. Supply and 
demand still functions  in the building industry.  If an item isn't moving, the manager can lower the 
price on the spot. 

4.  You may choose to use less than "first grade" materials. Resawn or rough wood can be pur(cid:173)
chased for about one-third the cost of finished  grade lumber. Usable materials are often  discarded; 
you can recycle them. Check large construction  sites, salvage yards and dumps. A note here: How 
much recycled material you use may depend on how  much time you have to devote to this project. The 
reason most construction companies buy everything new and in standard sizes is to save time. If you 
have the time, save cash by scrounging. 

52 

CHAPTER  VI 

5.  In  buying  materials,  order  somewhat  more  than 
you expect  to  use. This will  allow  for  mistakes and  save 
unnecessary  trips to the supplier.  It's also wise to expect 
the total  cost of construction  to be somewhat  higher than 
your estimate  and  time involved  longer.  (I'm  usually  off 
by about twenty  percent.) This is probably why the build(cid:173)
ing  industry  has the highest percentage of  new company 
failures of any industry  in the country. When was the last 
time you heard of a construction project  being completed 
in less time and at a lower cost than the estimate? 

6.  Set up a staging and storage area for die materials. 
Plan  to  keep  the  entire  building  area  off-limits  to  little 
children and pets. There are so many activities going on at 
a construction site it's easy for someone to get hurt. 

7.  In all steps of construction, measure as accurately 
as possible.  If in doubt,  exceed  the correct  measurement 
rather than cutting under it. You can always take a bit more 
off but it's difficult  to put it back on. 

8.  Perhaps  the  most  useful  piece  of  advice  for  the 

novice  builder  is to ask  for  advice.  The  elderly,  experi(cid:173)
enced  salesperson  at  me  local  hardware  store  may  be  a 
fund  of  building  knowledge.  Don't  hesitate  to  tap  this 
valuable source. 

The Site 

The  site  that  you  have  chosen  for  the  greenhouse  may 
demand  attention  before  you  can  begin  foundation  work.  In 
certain cases, a site that is not level can work to your advantage. 
If  the  terrain  slopes  away  from  the  existing  structure,  for  in(cid:173)
stance,  you  might  consider  "sinking"  or  terracing  the  floor 
level  of  the  greenhouse  interior  (Fig.  47).  A good  depth  for 
attached greenhouses is me same depdi as me home foundation. 
One of the main reasons for excavating is to lower the "profile" 
of me unit so that it fits beneath the existing eaves of the house. 
Sinking the greenhouse will require more excavation than sim(cid:173)
ply  leveling  the  site,  but  it  can  result  in more  usable  vertical 
space.  Situating  the  highest  point  of  the  greenhouse  interior 
directly adjacent to a house window or doorway will also supply 
more usable heat to the home. 

If the ground slopes laterally to die side of die house, you 
may  wish to design a split-level floor plan radier than level die 
entire  site.  Whether  split-level,  sunken, or used  in its existing 
state,  me  site  should  be relatively  level  (side to side,  front  to 
back) before beginning foundation  work. 

Window  to  Home 

Single  Terrace 

Double  Terrace 

Figure  47 

The  excavation  depdi  for  a  greenhouse  is determined  by several  factors. Many  people  have  die 
misconception mat if you dig a little way into the earth, die below-grade soil will act as diermal storage. 
Actually,  you'd  have  to go down  a considerable distance below the frost  line to reach earth that would 
constitute a heat gain for a winter greenhouse. 

CONSTRUCTION 

53 

"Pit greenhouses" or "grow holes*' are based on this principle. They are dug out several feet below 
the frost  line  to enjoy  the  benefits  of  the earth's  thermal  storage.  We  have observed  that  grow  holes 
perform slightly better than solar greenhouses only in extremely cold weather (below  -20°F  in the New 
Mexico region). 

To achieve increased performance in a pit type of greenhouse adjacent to the home, you might have to 
dig down several feet  below the foundation  of the dwelling. This is not advised.  If you have an existing 
deep cellar or basement with strong walls and good drainage away from it, an attached grow hole might do 
quite well. The hot air in the apex of the greenhouse would enter low in the home and the cool air in the 
basement would be circulated into the lower part of the greenhouse. The problem is that any design of this 
nature would  require  extensive excavation,  landscaping  and  a thorough knowledge of  the strength  and 
condition of existing walls. It is not a recommended project for novice builders. 

The Foundation 

The foundation  of any structure  is one of its most important elements. If it is built properly,  many 
future problems will be avoided. Careful  measurements for the foundation are essential. We will assume 
for the purpose of these construction steps that you are building a greenhouse with a rectangular floor plan 
and that you are attaching it to the home. For the materials needed, see the list at the end of the chapter. 
To determine the ninety degree corners off of the structure, place one edge of your framing  square 
against the existing  wall  and  extend  the other edge  with  a string (see Fig. 48). Stake  this string  at the 
distance you have determined for the outer boundary of the greenhouse. After repeating this procedure for 
the other end wall, measure to see that the two strings are of equal  length ("A"  to " B" equals  " C"  to 
"D"). Connecting  the outer perimeter stakes should produce a rectangle ("A"  to " C"  equals  " B"  to 
"D").  To  double  check  your  ninety 
degree corner angles, see that the diag(cid:173)
onal measurements are equal ("A"  to 
"D" equals " B" to "C"). 

the  perimeter  of 

We will describe die poured con(cid:173)
crete/rock  type  of  foundation  because 
it is widely used and easily understood 
and constructed by the home builder. It 
is appropriate  in  areas  that  have  rela(cid:173)
tively shallow frost  lines (three  feet or 
less), and it will meet code anywhere. 
the 
greenhouse  excavate  a  trench  to  the 
desired  width  and  depth.  Make  it  at 
least 4  inches  wider  than  the walls of 
the greenhouse. Massive stone or con(cid:173)
crete/block walls, for instance, will re(cid:173)
quire  a  wider  foundation  than  frame 
walls. Drive stakes into the trench at 6 
to 8 foot intervals, leaving 6 inches of the stakes exposed above the bottom of the trench. Check that the 
trench is level by laying a flat board from  the top of the highest stake and taking a reading with the level 
from there. Do this around the perimeter of the trench. Fill when necessary; then smooth out the sides and 
bottom  with  a  flat-nosed  shovel.  After  the trench  is dug,  leveled  and  cleaned  out,  keep  all  interested 
gawkers away from the edges so they don't cave in the sides. 

Along 

Figure  48 

Before the foundation is poured, the outside of the trench should be insulated with  1" or more of rigid 
styrofoam  (see  Fig. 49). Cut  the panels to size and fit them  into the trench. They can  be temporarily 

54 

CHAPTER VI 

propped in place until the concrete is poured. Another method of insulating the perimeter is to wait until the 
foundation  has been poured and the concrete has hardened; then dig a trench around the outside of it. Line 
the trench  with  sheet plastic and fill  it with sawdust, dry pumice or styrofoam  beads. Enclose the loose 
insulating  material with plastic to keep it waterproof and cover the trench with dirt (Fig. 49). 

Another prepouring step is to insert reinforcing material in the foundation trench. If you have to meet 
stringent building code requirements, this may be mandatory. '"Re-bar" or *'re-rod,"' as it's called, can be 
used in Vz" or %" diameter. It can be bought and cut to length at any building supply store. Two lengths of 
re-bar are laid  along the bottom of the trench about 8 to  10 inches apart, supported 4 to 5 inches off  the 
bottom by rocks. Ends that meet are lashed together with baling wire. 

I've poured foundations with and without re-bar. I often throw as many river rocks as I can find (5 to 8 
inches in diameter) into the bottom of the trench and forget about the re-bar (Fig. 50). I haven't noticed any 
settling or cracking in the foundations  I've built this way. 

The re-bar or no re-bar question reminds me of a typical bureaucratic hassle over the recent building 
of  adobe  homes  in  New Mexico  pueblos. When  the government  engineers finally  approved  adobe  for 
Indian housing (the all-adobe Taos pueblo has only been standing for a millennium or so), they stipulated 

Rigid  and Loose  Foundation  Insulation 

Figure  49 

I 

The Old Carpenter's Water Trick 

So, you want to check one end of the foundation  trench with the other. You don't have a transit 
and the 2x4 won't bend. Get a friend.  Then take a regular garden hose and lay it in the trench. 
Drive stakes  in the end comers; each must be exactly  the same height from  the bottom of the 
trench. Holding the ends of the hose flush with the top of the stakes, fill it with water. If the ex(cid:173)
tremes are level, the water at each end will be equal. 
The beauty of this trick is that it will work for any length and over rough terrain (with a couple of 
people and plenty of garden hose). Of course, the hose ends have to be held higher than any point 
in  between. 

CONSTRUCTION 

5 5 

that  re-bar  be  inserted  in  the  vertical  walls  every 
several  feet.  A Santa  Clara  Pueblo  friend  of  mine 
said, "Isn't that going to frustrate the archaeologists 
a thousand years from now? They'll wonder what all 
the little red holes are doing  in  the middle  of  those 
mud walls." It's probably  true that the adobe walls 
will be standing when the steel re-bar has rusted out. 
Suit yourself about the use of reinforcing  bar. 

It's a good  idea to bring the foundation  above 
grade (3 or 4 inches). This automatically  eliminates 
some drainage problems and is definitely necessary if 
frame,  adobe,  or  other water-soluble  materials  are 
going to be used to build the walls. 

Old lumber can be used for the forms to restrain 
any concrete that is above grade. Most anything will 
do  to  secure  them  in  place;  large  rocks,  blocks, 
stakes,  wire.  Be  sure  the  forms  are  the  right  dis(cid:173)
tance apart  and  well  braced  so  they  don't  spread 
with  the weight  of  the  concrete.  Anyone  who  has 
worked with concrete can testify  to its weight. Once 
you've had the terrifying experience of seeing a large 
mass of wet concrete start moving toward you, you'll 
always  over-brace  forms  and  wire  the  braces 
together. 

On the inside of the forms, mark a level line for 
the top of the foundation.  A chalk line works well for 
this. Make the line about 3" above the actual level to which you are going to build the foundation so that it 
doesn't smear when the wet concrete is being poured. This is a convenient guide for a level pour (Fig. 51). 
Another way is to chalk line the exact level and height, and drive nails halfway in along the line. This gives 
an accurate guide. 

Figure  50 

56 

CHAPTER VI 

The fast way to pour the foundation  is to have the ready-mix concrete truck back up to the site and 
dump it on you. But often the concrete companies won't deli ver in small quantities, or the site is impossible 
to reach.  In  that case you have the option  of buying  premixed  dry bags or making your own  mix  from 
cement and sand.  If mixing your own (much cheaper), a standard concrete recipe is five parts sand and 
3/4"  gravel (mixed equally) to two parts dry Portland,  and water. 

This is a heavy job so line up a few friends. The entire foundation  should be poured at one time. You 

don't want to have seams from  two or more separate pourings. 

So,  you're  ready  to do  it.  Sand  and  gravel  in place,  Portland  bags stacked,  shovels  in  the  ready 
position, wheelbarrow  greased,  beer iced down. Consistency  is what you want in the mix. It should not 
have dry clumps or an overabundance of any ingredients. The mix should be wet without being runny. If 
you pull a hoe through it, it should make nasty noises. When the mix is just right, it reacts like Jello when 
patted with  a trowel.  Nice stuff. 

Start at one end of the trench and work around. After a load, usually a full wheelbarrow, is dumped, 
spread the concrete along the trench. Push and work the mix down into the trench with a trowel. Don't be 
gentle.  You want to avoid holes or pockets in the foundation.  Keep adding loads of concrete until you've 
nearly reached  the level  line or marker established  as the top of the  foundation. 

As you work around the trench, pat and smooth out the top of finished areas. After the cement begins 
to set up, insert an anchor bolt (screw threads exposed) for  sections such as low door jambs that will be 
framed  above the foundation.  With a square make sure that these bolts are perpendicular and in line with 
where the plate will be and that you've left  about  I *&  inches extending above the poured foundation  (see 
Fig.  52). The plate, which  we will  talk  about in various contexts throughout  this chapter,  is not some(cid:173)
thing  on  which  dinner  is  served.  It  is  a  piece  of  lumber,  in  this  case  a  2x4.  The  foundation  plate 
provides a base for the frame walls of your greenhouse. The top plates give vertical studs and roof  rafters 
something  to hang on to. In general  plates serve as weight supporting members of  any frame  structure. 
Note: clean your tools immediately after use or they'll never be the same. If for some reason you have 
to leave a load in the wheelbarrow or mixer for a short time, pour a small amount of water on top of it and 
cover as tightly as possible. This also applies to mortar and plaster mixes. 

After  the pouring is done, check to see if  any areas have sunk  and make sure that the above-grade 
forms  are secure. When the concrete has set up or hardened (usually within three or four hours), spray it 

A.  Rigid Insulation Below Frostline 

Figure  52 

CONSTRUCTION 

57 

with  a light mist of water or cover with wet hay or straw. This prohibits rapid 
evaporation that might crack or weaken the foundation. Spray it every few hours 
for the next day or two (don't bother at night). 

When  the  foundation  has  a  feeling  of  permanence,  the  forms  can  be 
removed. Clean well and recycle them into shelves, tables or bed frames for the 
greenhouse interior. 

There are ways to avoid laying a foundation under the frame portions. I'll 
give  one  to you  as  an  option.  This method  is common  in  large  commercial 
greenhouse construction, and might be useful if you rent your home and plan a 
portable structure. Level the ground where the frame walls will be. (Don't dig a 
trench;  just  level  the  earth.)  Wood  plates  (I've  used  railroad  ties)  are  laid 
directly on two inches of sand and staked in at 3 to 4 foot intervals (Fig. 52). The 
stakes  can  be  metal  or  wood  but  should  be at  least  36"  long. They  can  be 
screwed, nailed or bolted to the ground plate. The wood should be treated with 
copper naphthenate as a preservative (Fig. 53). Don't use fresh creosote or pentachlorophenol (" 'penta"), 
as these chemicals give off fumes that are noxious to plants. 

Figure  53 

Whatever foundation  method you choose, the most important considerations are: 

1)  Is the weight evenly  distributed? 
2)  Is the foundation  level? 
3)  Will the water drain away from  it? 

If these criteria are met,  the foundation  will be functional. 
Another commonly  used foundation  is the stem wall (Fig. 54), required  by building codes in many 
areas. In regions having deep frost lines, the wide footing and narrow stem design can be more economical 
than a deep foundation  of uniform  width. The upright stem must be sized to receive the type of wall to be 
built above it (narrow for frame,  wider for massive walls). 

A related alternative  to the stem  wall  is the pressure-treated  wooden  foundation  pictured overleaf 
(Fig. 55). Here, treated 2 x 4s, 2 x 6s, and plywood panels take the place of concrete. The space between 
the vertical 2 x 4s is insulated and has a vapor barrier 
on the inside. 

A third  foundation  option  is  the  pier  type  of 
construction  shown  in  Fig.  56.  Individual  piers of 
treated wood (or concrete) support  a plate on which 
the greenhouse  frame  walls  will  be built.  The  pier 
foundation  is perhaps  the most  economical  one  for 
areas having deep  frostline. 

In all of these foundation options panels of rigid 
insulation surround the perimeterto reduce heat loss. 
Construction steps and details  for these  foundations 
can  be found  in  several  of  the  books  listed  in the 
Bibliography. 

the  Massachusetts 
to  avoid 

An experimental  option  that  could  have  wide 
application  is  presently  being  evaluated  by  solar 
Institute  of 
architects  at 
Technology.  In  order 
the  extensive 
trenching (and cost) required  in deep frostline  areas, 
rigid  insulation 
is  placed  vertically  around  a 
relatively shallow foundation  and horizontally away 
from  its edge  (Fig.  57).  No  frost  heaving  was ob(cid:173)
served during the first heating season (1977-78). 

Glazing 

Frostline 

Figure  54 

Affectionately  known as the "old New Mexico" style, our 
final foundation  alternative  (Fig.  58) minimizes  technological 
advances and expense. A bed of river rocks packed in a shallow 
trench of local mud is the weight-distribution  medium.  Larger, 
flatter  rocks should line the trench  bottom.  A mud cap on  top 
forms  the  flat  surface  for  laying  adobe  bricks.  (Note:  This 
foundation  can  only  be used in dry regions with  deep ground(cid:173)
water  levels  and  on  sites with  good  drainage.  It will  pass  no 
codes—nowhere—at  no  time,  and  is  inappropriate  for  areas 
experiencing  earth  tremors  or  quakes.  In  many  areas  of  the 
Southwest  adobe  homes  have  been  standing  on 
these 
foundations for hundreds of years.) 

Massive Walls 

When  the concrete in the foundation  has cured,  you  can 
begin  work  on  the massive masonry  walls.  Different  types of 
masonry  constuction  call  for  different  techniques.  Let's  use 
hollow concrete  blocks for our example.  (Basically,  the same 
technique applies to building brick  or adobe walls, except that 
you can use mud for mortar in the latter case.) The standard size 
pumice  block  is  15-1/2" long x 7-1/2"  high  x  7-1/2"  wide. 
(They  also come in half blocks and about every  other size and 
shape imaginable.) For estimating the amount needed,  use the 
dimensions 16"x 8" x 8" because of the added space to  be filled 
by mortar.Before  making your estimation, determine the exact 
size and location of any vents or doors in the walls. They must 
have  a jamb  or frame  built  around  them,  and  that  lumber  is 
usually  one  and  a half  inches  wide.  Include  twice  that  width 
(both sides) in your calculations. 

I  like  to  avoid  openings  in  masonry  walls  whenever 
possible. They involve a precision and degree of patience that I 
often  lack.  It's usually easier to locate vents and doors in areas 
that will be  frame. 

As the diagram in Fig. 59 (following page) shows, the high 
vent is set in the eastern frame  wall ("A").  The low southwest 
vent sits on the masonry wall ("B"). The lowest part of the door 
is set in the east masonry wall ("C"), the upper4/5ths in a frame 
section. 

When the size of openings in masonry walls is determined, 
the estimate of the total number of blocks needed can be made. 
Determine  the  square  footage  of  the  walls  and  estimate  one 
block  per  square  foot  plus  10  percent  for  cutting.  For  our 
example I'd  buy  80 full  blocks and 25 half blocks. 

However, if you're having problems making the necessary 
calculations,  remember  that  elderly,  experienced  salesperson 
we  mentioned earlier.  Write  the dimensions of the walls (with 
doors  and vents  figured  in) on a piece of paper and go to your 
local hardware store. Odds are you will get all the help you need 
and some good advice on the side. 

You  may  want  to  order  more 
than  we've  estimated.  Masonry 
blocks  look  rather  formidable,  but 
are actually  quite  fragile  and easily 
broken  until  they're  in  the  wall. 
Handle and stack them carefully.  If 
you  do  have 
leftovers,  most 
reputable building supply stores will 
refund money  on  items returned in 
good condition  and with a receipt. 
in  laying 
blocks 
is  made  with  masonry 
cement  and  screened  sand.  The 
standard  proportions  are  5 <A  parts 
screened  sand:  2  parts  masonry:  1 
part  Portland.  Mixing equipment  is 
the  same  as  for  the  foundation. 
Small amounts are made as needed. 
A large triangular trowel is used to spread the mortar. 

The  mortar  used 

—.•-.-J1 

CONSTRUCTION 

59 

vWZi 
>''^^k^ 

Figure  59 

To lay a perfectly  straight and level block wall, poles can be erected precisely at the outside edge of 
each comer of the structure.  Marks are made up the poles at 8"  vertical  intervals. Poles and marks are 
checked against each other with heavy twine and a string level. They should all be at exactly the same level 
for each course of blocks, and they  indicate the top of each layer. That's the precise way to do it. 

Another  method  is  to  simply  begin  by  laying  the  blocks, 
checking for level, plumb, and straightness as you go. In an area as 
small as our  10' x  16' example, this should be sufficient.  Lay the 
first  course of blocks all the way around. Check for square on the 
comers.  Now,  using  the level,  build  up two courses of blocks at 
each comer. String is strung between comers and straight runs laid 
down  to  the string.  Checks  for  vertical  can  also  be  made with  a 
carpenter's level or plumb line. If you're new at this kind of work, 
don't trust your eye too much. 

m 

Have you ever watched an experienced mason building a wall 
and seen the beautiful fluid movements he makes? A quick scoop of 
the trowel places a glob of mortar on the edge. The mason flicks his 
wrist downward,  a microscopic spasm, and the mortar adheres to 
the blade in a flat, compressed mass. A long, thin line of cement is 
spread along a four-foot edge of the existing wall in the next stroke. 
Another similar motion,  backhanded,  lays it on the outer edge of 
the wall. The third trowel of mortar is applied in fast, choppy slaps 
center ridges. The new block is picked up and hit with mortar on two vertical edges, and wham, in it goes. 
This takes about six seconds. Like a finely tuned human machine, the mason progresses along the wall with 
the speed, economy of movement and accuracy found in downhill racers and basketball centers. The only 
things that slow down a pro like this are scaffold  movers and unions. 

Figure  60 

Don' t expect to match this degree of skill. Try to put a uniform thickness of mortar (3/8 to 1/2 inch) on 
all seams. Any way you can get it to stick to the blocks is cricket. Try putting a small amount on the trowel 
and scraping  it off  with downward and outward motion.  If you can't get the knack of this, put a larger 
amount on the trowel and shake it over the edges. I resort to my hands occasionally.  "Seat"  (firmly  tap 
down) the block with the handle of the trowel. It should be evenly supported by mortar and level when it's 
in place.  See that the seams are staggered, not one directly over another. 

60 

CHAPTER VI 

A method  used to "tie-in"  a new masonry wall to an existing structure is to bend a small (8 x  10") 
piece of metal lath to form a 90 degree angle and fit this between blocks in the new wall and the home wall 
(Fig. 60). Tack the lath securely to both walls. Lay the mortar and firmly seat the next course on top of the 
lath, pushing the block tightly to the existing wall. This should be done three or four times in a wall as tall 
as the one in our example, the 8-foot west wall. 

Every three or four courses of cinder blocks, fill in the center holes with concrete (the same mixture 
you used for pouring the foundation). This strengthens the walls and adds mass, heat storage capability, to 
the structure. Before the concrete dries, insert anchor bolts where the framing plates will be applied to the 
top and sides of the walls (see Fig. 59). 

When  all the masonry  walls are up, relatively straight,  level and plumb, it's a good time to have a 
celebration.  You can finally  see and feel the results of your brain and muscle work. The hardest part is 
over. Enjoy  it! 

Frame Walls (Clear and Opaque) 

As  stated  earlier,  a  frame  wall  does  not  have  any 
appreciable  mass;  therefore  it  cannot  store  heat  for  a 
structure. However, when properly insulated, it will keep the 
heat in and it is often justified if other heat storage is planned. 
In the diagram  in Figure 65, page 62, we show  frame  walls 
for purposes of  illustration. 

The  vertical  framing  members  (mullions)  in the clear-
wall  sections  are  erected  at 47-inch  intervals  (measured  in 
what's called  centers. Centers are determined by measuring 
from  one  edge  to  the  next  edge  on  the  same  side).  The 
fiberglass that we recommend comes in 48" widths. The 47" 
center  allows  for overlapping  the panels. Studs  in the solid 
frame  wall  are on 24"  centers,  as are the  roof  rafters.  All 
comer  studs  and  upper  plates  are  double-width  for  added 
strength. A scale drawing of your greenhouse using this type 
of  specifications  will  help you estimate how  many  2x4s of 
various lengths will be needed for the rough framing.  Add the 
total  linear  footage  of  doors,  vents  and  horizontal  blocks 
(firestops)  to the estimate.  Add  another  20 percent.  We've 
supplied  a  list  for  this  10 x  16 foot  unit  at  the  end  of  the 
chapter. 

Figure  61 

You'll save money by having as few leftover  scraps as possible.This is accomplished by making all 
principal framing members slighdy shorter than an even number. Hence, if the mullion in the south wall is 
T  10" high, it can be cut from  an 8' piece. On the other hand, if it is 8'  1" high, a 10'2x4 usually must be 
purchased, and you're left with a 23" scrap. At current lumber prices, that's sinful. In your scale diagram, 
make  the  lengths  come  out  economically.  Do this by  slighdy  changing  angles  and  dimensions  in  the 
drawing until it works. If you just can't make it come out right, then plan to use the scrap lumber for tables, 
shelves, boxes, bed frames or other things. A 23" scrap, for instance, could be used for a firestop in the 
sheathed  (solid frame)  wall. 

CONSTRUCTION 

61 

It's important to get a proper dollar value for your lumber. As with most things in life, you do this by 
choosing it yourself.  Service personnel in the lumber yard are usually happy to let you choose and load 
your order. Occasionally it will be "company policy" not to let the customer look through the stock. Don't 
do business with  a company  like that. 

Hold up each stud and look down the entire length for straightness. It should not be warped, twisted or 
badly bent. A slight curve is to be expected; it is called the' 'crown.'' If you are holding the stud on its edge, 
you can easily see the crown (Fig. 62). The crown is not to be 
confused  with a bow in the broadside of the lumber which, if 
it's slight, can be taken out in installation. In construction, the 
crowns should all face the same way on the walls and should 
always be arch-up on the roof. 

Top View 

Next,  check  the  stud  for  clearness.  Does  it  have  an 
unusual  number  of  knots?  Reject  it.  Does  it  have  heavy 
"pitch"  or "sap"  areas? Reject it. Soundness can be tested 
by tapping it against a solid object. The stud should sound firm and full, not tinny or dead. When making all 
these tests, carefully  place the rejects back on the pile or the yard people will never let you do it again. 
Lately, I get about a one-out-of-five  acceptable ratio (that should give some idea of how much  lumber 
you're moving around). Stud lumber, No. 2 common grade, won't be perfect, but get it as straight, clear 
and dry  as you can. 

Figure  62 

*z-
-** 
Crown (Exaggerated) 

After  all this trouble in selecting the lumber,  be sure to stack it flat and keep it dry when you get it 

home. 

Let's begin by framing  up the front  face. First, you have the option of framing  the wall in place or 
building  it  "prefab"  on  the ground  (see Fig. 63 above).  This decision is mostly  a matter of  personal 
preference.  We're  going to prefab the front  face in our example, and frame the side walls in place. 

Figure  63 

62 

CHAPTER VI 

In the diagram below. Fig. 65, the length of the roof and 
sill plates (top and bottom framing  members) is exactly  16' 
(No.  1). The  top plate  should be double  to prevent  bowing 
under the weight of the roof. So the first step is to nail the two 
2 x 4s together with 16 penny nails. Place the 2 x 4s flush and 
drive the nails in at an angle so that they don't protrude from 
the  wood. 

Lay the plates (bottom and top) on the ground and mark 
them where the vertical studs (47" centers) will be attached. 
Ends should  be double-width  (No. 2); use 4x4s or sandwich 
two 2x4s together with W  plywood or wood lath in between 
to bring the dimensions to 4*' x 4"  (Fig. 64). 

The  next  step  is  to  cut  the  lumber  to  the  appropriate 
length.  In our example, we have  seven  mullions cut  to 7' 
7-1/2".  With the plates, this makes an 8'  high front  face. 

Figure 64 

Now if the south wall is to be vertical, the cuts are square on each end of the mullions. In our example, 
we have tilted the front face twenty degrees to make a seventy degree slope. (With any tilted south face, the 
bottom  angle  to  the  foundation  plate  will  be  the difference  between  the south  face  angle  and  ninety 

Figure  65 

CONSTRUCTION 

63 

degrees.) All we need to do here is mark off  twenty degrees from  a ninety-degree cut. Make the top cut 
parallel to the bottom so that you have a horizontal surface for the top plate. When the mullions are cut, nail 
them at the marks to the top and bottom plates with  16-penny nails. Note: always buy high quality nails. 
The south panel can now be lifted into place on the low front wall. This will take several folks working 
in unison. In order to precisely mark the junctions of the anchor bolts in the low wall with the bottom plate, 
gently  lower  the  prefab  frame  structure  into  its  permanent  position.  While  several  people  hold  the 
framework  in place, one particularly  aggressive type can pound on the plate with a hammer directly over 
the protruding  anchor bolts to mark their position. Take the face off  again and drill holes at the indicated 
marks.  After  installing  metal  flashing  (see  Fig.  54),  the  front  face  can  then  be  installed  on  the  wall, 
temporarily braced and bolted down. 

At this point put up a few rafters (No. 2) for braces, the ones on the comers and a couple of others. 
With luck, you will be able to tie the roof rafters of the greenhouse into the existing rafters of yourhome. If 
not, attach  a 2x6"  or 2x8"  ledger to the wall of the house as a base for the rafters  (No. 9).  Expansion 
bolts or  large  wood  screws  are used  to get  a secure tie-in  to the wall.  Don't  scrimp here. The  green(cid:173)
house  roof  must  bear  its own  weight plus,  in many  areas of  the country,  snowloads and the  additional 
loads of snow sliding off the roof of your house. Nail the rafters down to the top plate of the front face and to 
the plate or rafters on the house side (see next page for instructions). This will give the structure stability 
and  give  you  a  chance  to  see  the  outline  of  the 
greenhouse. When you have finished attaching a few 
rafters,  take  a break.  Stand  back  and  admire your 
work. 

The next step is to cut and place the sill plates on 
the  east  and  west  walls  (No.  3,  Fig.  65).  Bolt  the 
plates  down.  To  connect  the  frame  walls  of  the 
greenhouse to the home, a ledger (No. 4) is securely 
"tied-in" to the home wall. It should fit snugly  from 
the sill plate to directly  under the rafter  ledger plate 
(No. 9). 

You now have the perimeter of the east and west 
walls  to  fill  in  with  framing  lumber.  First  install  a 
plate that will also serve as a "header"  for the lower 
frame walls (No. 5). In some cases the plate will also 
be the top of the door frame.  Hold a piece of lumber 
level  across the span and mark  its intersection  with 
the front face. On the west, it sits on the massive wall 
for  the  majority  of  the  span.  When  the  pieces  are 
cut, nail  them into place. 

The east and west walls can now  be framed  in 
place.  Remember,  the clear sections will have 47" 
centers.  The insulated  walls will  be framed  on 24" 
centers (No. 6). The easiest way to do this is to mark 
the sill  plate at the intervals where the upright studs 
are to be nailed. Take a carpenter's level and hold it against the side of the first stud (Fig. 66). Keep the base 
of the lumber on the bottom mark and get the stud exactly plumb. Then mark the point of intersection of the 
stud with the header on both the stud and the plate. Cut the stud about  1/16"  longer than the mark you've 
made. 

64 

CHAPTER  VI 

All frame walls can be constructed in this way. 
It's easy  and  it's  fast.  Toenail  (drive  nails  in  at an 
angle) the studs as you go. When the studs are cut, 
fitted,  and nailed,  install  horizontal  firebreaks (No. 
7), and the vent and door plates (No. 8). Make certain 
they're level, and nail them  in with  16-penny  nails. 

Roof  Rafters 

The rafters  for a short span (under  10 feet) can 
be  2x4's  or  2x6's  set  on  24"  centers.  For  longer 
spans use heavier lumber or put the rafters on closer 
centers. 

Shallow notches are cut in the rafter ledger plate 
or joist hangers can  be used instead.  The rafters  are 
toenailed  to it at these points. At the intersection of 
the rafters and the south face top plate, very shallow 
notches  (called  "bird's  mouth"  notches)  are cut in 
the bottom of the rafters  so that they will rest snugly 
on the plate. Again, toenail them in (Fig. 67). 

Putting up the rafters  (and the roof) can force a 

person  into  some  pretty  strange  acrobatic  contor(cid:173)
tions. I would caution you that eight to nine feet up in 
the air  is higher  than you might imagine, especially 
from an aerial view. A body can be broken at the end of a free-fall  from that height. Also, get in the habit of 
not leaving any tools or materials lying about on the rafters or the roof (even for a moment or two). 

Figure  67 

When all the rafters are in place, mark the intersection of 
the clear roof with the insulated roof areas. Use a chalk line to 
do this (see Fig. 78, p. 72). To determine that junction in your 
unit, use the charts as explained in Appendix B. It will usually 
be about halfway  down the rafter span. 

The figure on the following page illustrates another good 
method  of joining  the rafters  to the front  face top plate (Fig. 
69). It can be used with sloped or vertical front-face  configur(cid:173)
ations.  In this design  the roofing  material will extend  about 
three inches past the top plate. Depending on the roof length 
of your design, you may be able to economize on lumber by 
eliminating the rafter overhang recommended  previously. 

figure  68 

Another variation of the same join is pictured in Fig. 70. 
j t  f e a( U r es 2" x 6"  rafters and front-face  mullions that are cut 
to form  a flush-fitting  angle that is bolted together. The joined 2"  x 6" 's are then trimmed to round off 
the sharp top angle (wood trimmed away is nailed to the inside of the join). This configuration  will allow 
one continuous piece of flat fiberglas to serve as a clear roof and front-face  cover, eliminating  infiltration 

CONSTRUCTION 

65 

losses that can occur along the more conventional joins. The 
smooth contour it produces may also appeal to you and make 
this design aesthetically  appropriate for your addition. It will 
be  less  angular  in  appearance  than  the  other  examples  we 
have included. For details, see p. 109. 

In  contrast  to  this  *'knee  joint" 

is  the  standard 
construction  method  shown  below  (Fig.  71).  This  type  of 
rafter join  is recommended  for  a vertical  front-face  config(cid:173)
uration. 

Painting the Frame 

Rafters  and  framing  lumber  must  be treated  in  humid 
climates. Copper naphthenate is recommended. Some paints 
have  a  preservative  in  them.  After  it's  been  treated,  all 
framing  lumber that will be visible within the clear walls and 
ceiling areas should be painted with a glossy white enamel or 
latex. This will help reflect  light into the greenhouse and also 
enhance its appearance. 

Choosing the Clear  Glazing 

it 

Traditionally,  glass has been used for the clear surfaces 
in greenhouses.  Because  of  its  resistance  to high  tempera(cid:173)
tures, 
is  also  used  extensively  for  covering  solar 
collectors.  Prefabricated  sheets  of  double-layered  glass are 
available  from  major  manufacturers  in  various  sizes  as are 
many  types  of  double  glazed  glass  doors.  The  obvious 
advantages of glass are that it allows a view to the outside and 
is highly resistant  to the harmful  effects  of weathering.  It is, 
however, easily broken and demands extra care and consider(cid:173)
able skill  in installation. 

Technological  advances in the design  and  manufacture 
of  plastics  have  produced  important  alternatives  for  the 
greenhouse  builder.  Some  types  of  semi-rigid  fiberglass/ 
acrylic  sheeting  are  guaranteed  for  20  years  to  transmit 
enough  light for photosynthesis.  But, fiberglass can become 
cloudy  or  brown  as  a  result  of  ultraviolet  ray  damage 
("blooming").  Tedlar coating,  however,  has  an  ultraviolet 
retarding  characteristic  that  helps  greatly  to  preserve  the 
clarity  of  the plastic to which it is applied. 

Fiberglass transmits nearly the same amount of light as 

Figure  69 

2x6"s 
Bolted 

Figure  70 

2x4"  Blocking 

Bird's Mouth Notch 

Figure  71 

glass, even though it's translucent rather than clear (see Fig. 72). Corrugated fiberglass  is recommended 
for clear roof areas; it is easily installed and resistant to hail damage. Flat fiberglass is readily attached to 
clear-wall  frames  with  rubber-gasketed  nails or  lath  strips  (see Fig.  73).  I recommend  the  use  of flat 
fiberglass on all vertical and near vertical surfaces.  Flat material has a 20 percent smaller surface area than 
corrugated;  therefore  far  less area  for  heat  loss.  The  quality  of  light  transmitted  through  fiberglass  is 

66 

CHAPTER VI 

diffuse.  It  doesn't  give  the  sharp,  clearly  defined 
shadow  areas  of  glass.  This  is  beneficial  to  plant 
growth. The cost per square foot of new fiberglass is 
considerably less than the cost of new glass. 

There is an ecological question concerning the 
use of plastics in general. Plastic is a petrochemical 
product  and  is  not  biodegradable.  The  supply  of 
petrochemicals 
the 
atmosphere  is becoming polluted  by  petrochemical 
wastes.  Nondegradable  products  also  constitute  a 
form  of pollution on earth. 

is  dwindling  rapidly,  and 

I  feel  that  our  only  hope  for  maintaining  an 
ecological  balance  on  the  earth  depends  on  a 
thoughtful, positive use of modem technology and its 
products.  I  believe  that  employing  fiberglass  and 
plastics  in your greenhouse constitutes  such  a use. 
Many  people are convinced  that solar energy is the 
obvious fuel  of the future.  Further  experimentation 
will  lead  to  advances  in  the  efficiency  of  solar 
collection,  storage  and transmission.  It  is probable 
that  plastic  products  will  become  essential  to  the 
production  of  solar  energy  components.  I suggest, 
therefore,  that  the  intelligent  and  careful  use  of 
plastics  in the greenhouse  will  serve  as a  valuable 
example of how  to put our fossil  fuels  to beneficial 
use.. .before they are exhausted. 

Figure 72 

Material Properties of the Glazing 

No glazing allows  100 percent of the total solar radiation through it. As mentioned previously, most 
glazings used in greenhouses transmit 80-90 percent of the light. The rest is either absorbed or reflected at 
the  surface.  The chart on pages 68 and 69 contains a wealth of information  about common  greenhouse 
glazing materials. The thickness of the materials is given in inches. Solar transmittance is expressed as a 
percent of the total light available at a normal angle of incidence. Long wave transmittance is a percentage 
of how much long wave energy is transmitted back out of the glazing once it gets inside. You'll notice most 
of the glazings are either at one extreme or the other. Glass is the lowest in long-wave transmission (it tends 
to  hold  in  the  heat),  and  polyethylene  the worst  at  retaining  energy.  The  transparent or  translucent 
columns  indicate  whether  you  can  see  objects  clearly  through  the  material.  Notice  that  some  of the 
translucent materials are as high or higher in transmission than the transparent ones. 

The visual impression you get looking through a translucent material is roughly equivalent to what 
you see when peeking through a wet shower stall door. The translucent glazings have the characteristic of 
diffusing  the light passing through. They do this to varying degrees. The effect is that all of the light beam 
does not travel in a relatively  straight line, as it does through clear glass. The beam scatters over a broad 
area, causing a more even light inside the greenhouse. Because the light is being scattered about the inside 
of the greenhouse, surfaces not in the direct path of the sun receive increased lighting. Several studies by 
agricultural research  institutions have shown that plants respond better to this diffuse  light regime than to 
direct  light through  clear glass. The scattered  radiation will strike thermal mass in higher levels of the 
greenhouse  and can be reflected  more evenly by light-colored  surfaces  and bounced back to the plants 
below. 

CONSTRUCTION 

67 

Maximum  operating  temperatures are  the  high-temperature  limits  a material  can  stand  before  it 
begins to deteriorate. A note here: these limits are usually set by the manufacturer who tests the materials 
under laboratory conditions.Glass may stand temperatures up to 400°F if it is mounted properly. Without 
adequate provision  for its expansion  and contraction  it may crack if the collector reaches 250°F. Many 
people  have  been  enamored  with  the  transmission,  low  cost,  and  ease  of  application  of  greenhouse 
fiberglass. They will use it to cover a black flat plate collector that achieves 200°F temperatures, and then 
become upset when the glazing turns yellow in six months. All of the materials listed here can easily handle 
greenhouse  temperatures. For high-temperature collectors or unusual  conditions, please get  information 
from  the manufacturers.  The weatherability,  lifetime,  and cost columns are self-explanatory.  To update 
the cost for estimating, you might try adding on about  10 percent a year from  the  1978 price listed. 

The four most common materials used in home greenhouses are glass, fiberglass, acrylics, and 
polycarbonates.  Because  of  their similarities  in solar and long wave transmission,  choosing one to use 
normally  comes  down  to  personal  preferences  in  terms  of 
initial  cost,  appearance,  ease  of  application,  and  durability 
(as a function  of cost). 

We've worked with all of them and can give you some 
tips. All four glazings come in panels to cover large expanses. 
Maximum  common  widths are four  feet. 
Glass  This  is a  beautiful,  long-life  material  in  the proper 
application.  It's  best  in  vertical  walls  in  locations  where 
vandalism  won't  be  a  problem.  When  you  use  it  in  tilted 
surfaces, stipulate safety or extra-strength glass. You can get 
good  bargains  in glass  from  local  building  contractors who 
have  surplus patio  doors.  Glass  can  also  be  recycled  from 
defunct greenhouses and urban renewal projects. Glass is not 
as difficult  to mount  as  many  people  think,  but  extra care 
must  be  taken  in  terms  of  calculating  exact  framing 
dimensions and allowing for expansion. Don't be intimidated 
by glass; just  respect its quirks. 
Fiberglass  We' ve used fiberglass more than any other glaz(cid:173)
ing  material  because of  its relatively  low initial cost and  its 
ease of application.  Fiberglass  is very forgiving  stuff  (it lets 
you cover  minor mistakes  in framing)  and can be cut to any 
shape. See p. 70 for details of application. The drawbacks are 
lifespan  and  maintenance.  After  several  years,  the  ultraviolet  light  in  the  solar  spectrum  starts  to 
deteriorate the material. The small glass particles in the glazing become exposed on the outer surface and 
the material begins to look greenish-yellow. Most manufacturers sell a refinishing substance that is applied 
to restore the  fiberglass  to nearly  its original clarity.  We suggest  you  buy  a brand  with  a twelve-year 
warranty and check the guarantee  carefully. 
Acrylics  We've used the double-walled panels (4 feet wide x 8 feet,  10 feet,  12 feet long) and have been 
quite  pleased  with  the  results. The panels are excellent  for roof sections where you want  an attractive, 
light-diffusing  surface.  In high ultraviolet conditions, don't get the very thin panels; specify  the thicker, 
more durable material. Allow for more expansion/contraction than glass (1/2" in a4' span). You can use 
the expensive  mounting hardware sold by the manufacturers,  or construct your own.  Acrylic panels are 
very lightweight, and so, a joy to handle. One drawback  is that they scratch quite easily. Be careful  when 
moving diem around. Follow the manufacturers  recommendations to the letter in cutting and applying the 
material. 
Polycarbonates  These come in all thicknesses from films thinner than polyethylene to rigid panels used 
for bullet proof glass. As interior glazings anything from  .005"-.060" is recommended. For exterior, use 
.060" or thicker. A polycarbonate can be used when the transparency of glass is desired but vandalism or 
breakage may  occur.  Although  all polycarbonates  begin as transparent  as glass, weathering on exterior 

Figure  73 

68 

CHAPTER VI 

s 

18 

8! 

£^ H 

_ LL 

O  <7\ 

Q UI a 

- l e j a dg 

l u n u j i x ew 

J  S 

l u a o n i s u B j^ 

1 

a—  l u a j e d s u BJ   I 
o_y_ 
± 
(cjj)  »au>»|«u 
- S U B JI   BABM  6uo~| 

- S U B JX  

- j e | °S 

C u!) 

SS3U>|3mX 

gj 

1 
I a 

I 

in  ,n 

— o 
I  'I 
in  in 

j :<   . i 
inZin 
CM  «  | 

IS" 

uj   —  i 

c  » 
(0  ~ 
X  ~ . 
O t_ 

111? 

o  i ?  !  S  it IS! 
II  fflll 

•sfiotl 

l.  0  c.«-  L 

I "8 

— 

CM 

CD  CJ 
co 

CM 

N 

UJ 

o 
o 

< 
"s. 
z 

i% 

< 
s 
z 

(A 
10  ' 

4> il . ! ! !, m iii 

°8 

—  " I /I 

*H 

o  .t:  c_  ui 
-  >  -  in 
£  —  <o 
c  •&  °> 

li 

 
t

a

l

IT 

"D  >. >•  IB 
> L 
.  £. 
it!  15 |f 
> o  irj |f 
o  L  C  >. 
m 0)  £S 
!  o 
! •^ to 
ti  4» 
i 
» 
•  l« 
V 1! 
2 
-  s 
-  s 
•0  c  V  XI  ? 
a  o  0  8* 

n
o
0]  c 
c 

to 
• 

O 

 

i

uj  UJ O  !3 O — 

D  C  j) 

1>  01, 

,«   E^ 
It  2 

ill. 
!l= 
III 
II > i - j >-

• ft) — 
'2   " 
:  •-.  ol 

r: 

~ i ii  

*3* 
IA 1 *1   i 
c on  
• 
(C 
O  4> 
h £  u :5 
en s  c 
-  c  > io 
jo  J, .-  c  . 
o  {; o  0 
I 
•i  «i  »  -
T3  c  O  >• 
o  —  a  <o 
O  I 
U . 

1 

"  g* 

ftl 

1 

i 
i  w  y  ^ 
a  t/> z 

10. 

If 

*H 

I 

-Supreme 

I 

L 

g r e a t l y. 

F olyethylene 

P r o s:   Very  low  cost. 

Polyesters 

P o l y v i n y l-
Flourides 

Light,  flexible—easy  to  i n s t a l l. 
Good  inner  glazing. 

Cons:  Short  lifespan. 

High  transparency  to  long-wave  r a d i a t i o n. 
Wind  &  temperature  sagging  effects. 

P r o s:   Low  c o s t. 

S u p e r i or  surface  hardness. 

Cons:  U-V  degradable  unless  coated. 

r a i r ly  hio>  lonq-wave  transmittance  . 

P r o s:   Excellent  weatherability, 

S t r o n g. 
High  solar  transmittance. 
Often  bonded  to  fiberglass  as  U-V  and  weather-

resistant  screen. 

Cons:  F a i r ly  high  long-wave  transmittance. 

Expensive. 
Only  available  up  to  4  mil  thickness  ( f i l m )* 
Fluorocarbons  P r o s:   Exceptional  resistance  to  h e a t,  weather,  & 

chemicals. 

Very  high  solar 

transmittance. 

Cons:  Expensive. 

Available  only  in  f i l m s. 

Regular  (not  u-v 
Regular  (not  u-v 

resistant)—at  any 
resistant)—at  any 
building  supply 
building  supply 
s t o r e. 
s t o r e. 

U-V  Resistant: 
U-V  Resistant: 
Monsanto  602 
Monsanto  602 

vlylar 
vlylar 

.004 
.004 

> 85 
> 85 

70-80 
70-80 

• 
• 

140°  P o o r.   1 mproved  by: 
140°  P o o r.   1 mproved  by: 

- u s i ng  as  inner 
- u s i ng  as  inner 
glazing  rather 
glazing  rather 
than  outer 
than  outer 
- u s i ng  u-v  r e s i s(cid:173)
- u s i ng  u-v  r e s i s(cid:173)
tant  b r a n d s. 
tant  b r a n d s. 

.003-
.003-

.014 
.014 

85 
85 

16-32 
16-32 

X  300"  D i s c o l o rs  slightly 
X  300"  D i s c o l o rs  slightly 

1-5 
1-5 

with  prolonged 
with  prolonged 
exposure. 
exposure. 

4  mos.  -
4  mos.  -
1  y r. 
1  y r. 

.01-.03 

1-3  y r s. 
1-3  y r s. 

. 0 6 -.  10 
. 0 9 - . 35 

Tedlar 
Tedlar 

.004 
.004 

90-94 
90-94 

43 
43 

X  3250  Excel  lent. 
X  3250  Excel  lent. 

- 25 
- 25 

~ . 80 

Teflon  FE.P 
Teflon  FE.P 

.001 
.001 

98 
98 

N /A 
N /A 

X  400 u  E x c e l l e n t. 
X  400 u  E x c e l l e n t. 

25 
25 

~ . 59 

Others: 
V i n y ls 
Cellulosics 
Others 

Sources: 

Note: 

Footnotes: 

Clear  f i l m s,  more  expensive  and  longer  lasting  than  polyethylenes,  but  problems  with  U-V  and  dust. 
Tough,  with  moderate  thermal  s t a b i l i t y;  U-V  degradable  unless  coated;  usually  not  easily  available. 
P l a s t i c - p l a s t ic  &  p l a s t i c - g l a ss  laminates;  double-walled  channeled  plasties^,  expanded  plastic  honeycomb  p l a s t i c s,  clear  insulative  plastic  films  with 

a ir  bubbles. 

Knudtsen,  Peter  K .; 
NMSEA  Workshop  Crew  Handbook ,  chapter  on  glazings. 

"Glazing  Materials:  Some  A l t e r n a t i v e s "; 

Southwest  B u l l e t in   ,  F e b r u a r y,  1978. 

For  each  of  the  8  major  glazing  types,  performance  data  is  provided  for  at  least  one  commercial  product  of  that  type.  The  other  products  of  that 
same  type  w i ll  v a ry  slightly  among  each  o t h e r,  but  will  basically  perform  s i m i l a r ly  to  the  cited  example. 

Most  glazings  are  available  in  a  variety  of  thicknesses.  These  figures  indicate  the  thicknessdescribed  by  the  data  in  the  following  columns. 
Cost  figures  obtained  in  August,  1978,  from  r e t a il  d i s t r i b u t o rs  in  New  Mexico. 
Manufacturer's  claim  o n l y.  Lascolite  estimate  c r o s s - c h e c k ed  with  o t h e r,  non-manufacturer  estimates.  Both  estimates  r e f er  to  superior  grade 
(u-v  resistant)  f i b e r q l a s s. 

PERFORMANCE  DATA  HERE  IS  LARGELY  MANUFACTURER'S  DATA  —  Actual  performance  may  be  somewhat 

less. 

Table IV 

O 
O 

e o 
o 

ON 

70 

CHAPTER  VI 

surfaces  reduces their transparency with time. Polycarbonates have a tendency to whiten a bit on the outer 
surface,  become slightly brittle and scratch easily. We prefer them as inner glazings behind glass and as 
storm windows. Many people have single-glazed glass greenhouses and want to keep a view. A thin-film 
polycarbonate  makes an excellent  inner glazing that can be removed and stored at the end of the winter 
season.  The  film,  when  applied  as an  inner layer or storm  window,  has the visual  quality  of old  glass 
(slightly  wavy) which we find quite lovely. The film comes in 2 and 4 foot widths and can be cut to any 
length. Panels are generally sold in 2-foot  wide increments. 

There  is no one  correct  glazing.  Many people  are combining materials  in home greenhouses.  For 
instance, all four materials mentioned above plus polyethylene can be used in this manner: major exterior 
panels are fiberglass (for cost and light-diffusing  quality); interior glazing is polyethylene (cost); the roof is 
acrylic twin wall (light diffusion,  strength); exterior transparent windows for views are polycarbonate film 
(cost, ease of installation). A combination we*ve also used is thermopane glass for large vertical panels in 
the greenhouse  and acrylic twin wall panels or double-glazed fiberglass for the clear roof sections. This 
gives the beauty of glass combined with the light-diffusing  and structural qualities of acrylic or fiberglass. 
Many manufacturers will send samples upon request. Get to know a material before you stock up. 

Clear Walls 

Having  built and painted  the frame  walls, you 
are now ready to install the outer layer of fiberglass. 
Most  of  the  products  (Lascolite  and  Filon,  for 
example,  brands  we've  used  and  can  recommend 
highly)  are  sold  in  4-foot-wide  rolls,  up to 50  feet 
long. For this reason, we suggest that you install one 
4 foot panel  at  a time.  Beginning  at one end of the 
frame  wall,  measure  the  height  of  the  section 
carefully.  After measuring and marking the material 
with a felt-tipped  pen or razor knife, cut the section 
with  sharp wire-cutting  shears. Apply  an even  bead 
of sealant, silicone or butyl rubber to the wood frame 
you  are going  to  cover.  With  two or  three  people 
holding the edges of the material, align it in front of 
the frame.  It is handy to make corresponding marks 
on  the  fiberglass  and  the  wood  frame  to  aid  in 
alignment.  Nail  the  top  edge  to  the  upper  frame 
member in the center. Use a gasketed nail; do not nail 
it  in  completely.  Check  to  see  that  the  sides  and 
bottom will fit properly. Nail the outside edge in the 
center  (again,  halfway  in).  Pulling  slightly  on  the 
remaining two edges (bottom and inside), nail them 
temporarily  in the centers of the frame.  You can use 
flat-headed  1" nails for the inside or leading edge or 
simply  lay  it on  with  no nails. The  next section  of 
plastic  will  overlay  it  and  must  fit  snugly.  The 
rubber-gasketednail heads protrude about 1/8"  from 
the  wood  and  would  cause  bumps  in  the  overlaid 
plastic.  Nail  the  material  down  to  the  horizontal 
braces  first.  Then,  pulling  diagonally  on  the  four 

Figure  74 

Figure  76 

CONSTRUCTION 

71 

corners of the sheet, put in nails approximately 8 inches apart and angle them out to pull tension on the 
sheet. Work the bulges out of the plastic from the center to the comers. Ifa major bulge has developed, try 
to detect it early; remove {he temporary nails and realign the sheet. 

After  cutting the second panel, lay another bead of adhesive over the leading edge and the top and 
bottom. Proceed as above, overlapping the second panel by  1 inch on the edge previously flat-nailed. Use 
gasketed nails to attach the overlapping section (Fig. 74). Follow the steps given for the first panel, again 
using  1" flat-headed nails in the leading edge to be overlaid by the next panel. For vents and removeable 
panels, install the fiberglass  on the ground. 

There are two  very expensive items used in this method,  silicone  sealant and gasketed aluminum 
nails.  Lately  I've  used a cheaper method  that I believe is just as effective.  Check  and mount as  before. 
Don't use any silicone sealant. Get small galvanized nails and drive them into the fiberglass about every six 
inches.  After  all  panels are up, cover edges and overlaps with thin (lA"  x  116") wood lath (Fig.  75). If 
there are any bulges or leaks, they can be sealed wim regular caulk. 

You  may choose to mount both glazings on the front  of the south-facing clear wall (Fig. 76). This 
option  will  produce  an  effective  interval  between  the  layers  of  (rigid)  fiberglass  and  allow  for  the 
installation of movable insulation within the space between the 2 x 4 mullions (see Fig. 26, p. 33). 

The irregular shaped panels in the comers of the east and west wall are sized by cutting a rectangular 
piece to fit the length of the frame. Hold the piece up to the panel and mark the shape with a chalk line. Save 
the scraps for other irregular shapes and vents. 

CHAPTER VI 

72 

Chalk 

Roof Installation 

Blocking  (No.  7  in  Fig.  65,  p.  62)  like  that  used  between 
the  vertical  wall  studs will  be nailed  between  the  roof  rafters  to 
receive the corrugated plastic and solid roofing material. Be sure 
to  toenail-in  a  straight  row  of  these  blocks  along  the  line 
separating  the  clear  from  the  solid  room  (Fig.  78).  In  all  other 
roof areas, the blocking can be staggered for ease of nailing (Fig. 
79).  Install  1/2  round molding along rafters  and "wiggle  board" 
across  tops  of  roof-dividing  and  front  face  purlins  (Fig.  80. 
below). 

You  are now  ready  to install  the corrugated  clear  roofing. 
One  sheet  of  corrugated  is  held  in  place  at  a  comer.  Align  it 
carefully  along  the  bottom  and  side  edges.  The  roof  can 
overhang  the  side  two  corrugations  and  the  bottom  about  6" 
unsupported.  Get  it  "true."  that  is,  perfectly  in  line,  with  the 
rafters  and  "wiggle  boards."  An  out-of-line  first  piece  will 
throw  the  roof  whacky. 

Figure  79 

Now nail down the fiberglass every 3 to 4 corrugations with 
gasketed  nails  to the front  face  purlins and  rafters.  Nail  into the 
high ridge rather than the valley. This will prevent water seepage 
through  the  nail  hole.  Overlap  the  sheets  at  least  one  and,  if 
possible, two corrugations and continue across the clear area in this manner.  Don't nail the top edge (to be 
overlapped by the opaque roof) yet. The only real trick to nailing into the fiberglass is to have a steady  hand 
and  a  good  eye.  A  missed  hammer  blow  can  splinter  the  material.  leaving  an  ugly opaque  mark  (to  say 
nothing of  the damage to your  thumb). 

The solid roof  is installed next.  If plywood and composition  roofing  material  is to be used, lay a strip 
of  corrugated  foam  molding  across the top edge of the clear/solid  roof junction.  Nail  the plywood  sheets 
onto  the  rafters,  overlapping  the  foam  strip  and  the  clear  roof  area  by  3  to 4  inches.  The  foam  molding 
above the corrugated plastic will create a tight seal against heat loss. You can now apply your composition 
shingles  or other  roofing  material  over the plywood  (Fig.  81). 

Vents in the roof are not  recommended  for any but the most experienced  builder.  It is extremely  diffi(cid:173)

"\ 

1/2"

 Round 

"\ 

cult to seal them against air and water  leaks. If you have the knowledge, build a'  'boat hatch'' type vent of  1 
x 4s that extends about 2"  above the  roof. Fit 
the vent  so that  it lays flush  on the  1  x 4 box. 
In  much  of  the  country  a  common 
roofing  materal 
is  corrugated  galvanized 
steel.  It  is  relatively  cheap,  easily  installed 
and  maintenance  free.  If  you  use  metal,  no 
plywood 
the 
corrugations  of  the galvanized  with  those  of 
the  plastic  (they  match)  and  nail  it down  to 
the  rafters  and  blocking.  Again,  the  solid 
roof  should  overlap  the  clear  areas.  For 
nailing,  hold  lead-headed  roofing  nails  with 
a  pair of pliers over the designated  spot (on a 
ridge  and  over  a  rafter  or  block)  and  strike 
solidly  with a hammer.  Wear eye protection. 

is  needed.  Simply  align 

Figure 80 

CONSTRUCTION 

73 

Figure 81 

The Interior  Glazing 

hi 

Depending on the framing method you have chosen for your 
clear walls, the interior plastic will require one of the installations 
pictured  at  right  (Fig.  82). The three  framing  options range  from 
most economical  (A) to most expensive and durable (C). Example 
B is the method  recommended  in the framing  section. 

Six-mil  polyethylene  (with  an  ultraviolet  inhibitor)  is 
suggested as an inexpensive glazing for the interior clear walls and 
roof  areas.It  is susceptible to weathering but will be protected by 
the fiberglass outside layer; it should last three to five years before 
having to  be  replaced.  I've  used  both  Monsanto 602 and Tedlar. 
The thin plastic is more easily installed than the outside fiber(cid:173)
glass.  Large sections of clear area can be covered  at once. Using 
scissors or a razor knife, cut out the sections to be attached. Make 
your cuts at least 3 inches longer than measured. With three or four 
helpers  holding  the extremities of  the sheet,  begin  stapling  along 
the  centermost  mullion.  Work  outward  toward  the  sides  and 
comers,  stretching  the sheet  as staples  are driven  8 to  10 inches 
apart.  Wood  lath  ('4"  x  l'/i")  is nailed over the plastic-covered 
mullions  with  finishing  nails  to  produce  the final seal.  You can 
stain  or  paint  the  stripping  before  nailing  it  up  to  make  it  more 
attractive. 

Insulating Frame Walls 

A. 

B. 

^ 

C. 

Solid  frame  walls  can  be  insulated  with  a wide  variety  of 
styrofoam,  polyurethane. 

materials.  Rockwool, 

fiberglass, 

Figure  82 

74 

CHAPTER VI 

pumice, and cork are all excellent. Foil-backed insulation stops a lot of radiant heat loss through the walls 
and acts as a vapor barrier,  but it can be prohibitively expensive.  If you do use it, install  it with the foil 
backing facing the interior of the greenhouse. Recently I've been stapling heavy duty tinfoil on the interior 
side of the fiberglass batt. That's cheap and effective. 
The  amount  of  insulation  applied  should be as 
much as is used  in the walls and roof of a well-built 
home in your area.  I usually use at least 4 inches of 
fiberglass  batt  in the walls and 6 inches in the roof. 
Fiberglass is easily applied with a staple gun or tack 
hammer. Salespeople at the local hardware store can 
help  you  choose  the  right  amount  and  type  of 
insulation. 

Always  wear a long-sleeved  shirt, gloves, and 
installing  fiberglass 
button  your  collar  when 
insulation.  Wear  safety  glasses  for  rafter  work, 
especially  if you have sensitive eyes, and try not to 
breathe too much. 

Figure  83 

Interior Paneling 

Insulated  frame  walls  can  be paneled  with  any  material  you  find  attractive.  Masonite,  plywood, 
waterproof  sheetrock, and rough or finished lumber are widely used. Paneling materials call for various 
adhering techniques. Wood products are usually simply nailed with finishing nails. Some paneling can be 
glued with construction  adhesives. When using large panels, measure carefully  before cutting.  If you're 
careful,  you  can  save  odd-shaped  scraps  for  other 
areas  and  keep  waste  to  a minimum.  Occasionally 
you may have to nail in a "scab," a scrap of 2x4, to 
the studwalls in order to give a nailing surface for the 
paneling.  If  comers  don't  "flush  out"  perfectly, 
don't worry. That's what God made comer lath  for. 
As  the  insulated  wall  will  not  store  heat,  the 
inside should be a light color to produce a  reflective 
surface.  Water-sealing  will  help  to  protect  the 
interior against deterioration  due to high humidity. 

Rip 2x4 for  Vent Cover 

l^and 

Stop 

Doors and Vents 

Doors  and  vents  must  be  tight-fitting  and 
weather-stripped  around all joining surfaces.  If you 
are using fiberglass for the large collecting surfaces, 
you may choose to use it for the vents and/or doors. 
Clear  views  to  the  outside  can  offer  attractive  ac(cid:173)
cents  to opaque  and  translucent  walls.  When  glass 
is  used,  it  should  be  double-glazed  to  reduce  heat 
loss.  If possible, windows and doors should slide or 
hinge away from the greenhouse interior. Hinges are 

Figure 84 

CONSTRUCTION 

75 

mounted on top of vents to open out (Fig. 84). Remember, the high vent that you put in should be on the 
downwind side of the prevailing air flow. 

In determining the dimensions for an outside door, remember that you will be moving large quantities 
of  soil  into  the  greenhouse.  Make  the  door wide  enough  to  accommodate  a wheelbarrow  (plus  your 
knuckles).  Thirty-two  inches  is good.  It  is  also  advisable  to  make  the height  of  the  door  a  standard 
measurement for convenient access. In very cold climates an air lock over the exterior door will save large 
heat losses (see Herb Shop, p.  140). 

Exterior Paneling and Insulating 

All  massive  walls  should  be  insulated  on  the outside.  An effective  insulating  material  for  this is 
styrofoam  or styrene  panel  ( i"  or 2").  They can be stuck  to the walls with  a heavy duty  construction 
adhesive. Use it liberally. If the wall is to be plastered, cover the styrofoam with tar paper. Then use fining 
nails  and chicken  wire over that.  The wall can  now be plastered with a hard coat (5 parts sand: 3 parts 
Portland:  I part lime). 

Exterior  covering  of  the  frame  walls can  be  any  material  that  suits your  aesthetic  and  economic 
criteria.  I've  used old lumber,  plywood, Celotex (exterior fiber sheathing), and metal siding. The most 
important thing is to make sure there are no leaks that allow water into the frame walls. Remember—higher 
panels overlap lower ones for waterproofing.  Caulk anything that looks suspicious. 

Sealing the Greenhouse 

If there is one most critical factor  in the construction  of your solar greenhouse, it is that all joining 
surfaces fit  lightly together. Tightness to reduce air leaks is one of the highest goals which you can attain, 
both  as  a  designer-builder  and  proud  owner.  But  another  important  goal  is  to  produce  an  attractive 
environment that reflects  the care and thoughtful  work that went into the design  and construction. 

During  each  phase  of  building,  ask  yourself  where  heat  loss  is  likely  to occur.  Wherever  large 
surfaces are joined (such as the foundation plate to the foundation), a layer of fiberglass or foam insulation 
will  help  solve  the  problem.  Sealants  such  as  silicone  and  caulking  materials  (wood  filler,  spackling 
compound) should be used on any crack or opening that could transmit air through the structure. For larger 
openings, such as might occur at the house/greenhouse junction, use metal lath and plaster to build airtight 
walls (insulate between them). As we mentioned earlier, vents and doors must be completely weathertight. 
The importance of sealing insulation cannot be overemphasized, as it can make the difference  between the 
success or failure of your greenhouse. 

THERE YOU ARE! 

YOU DID IT! 

CONGRATULATIONS! 

76 

CHAPTER VI 

Annotated Materials List 

This is an outline of construction materials commonly  used in Solar Sustenance Team/New  Mexico  Solar 
Energy  Association  solar greenhouse  workshops. 
Use  it  as  a  general  checklist  for  similar  projects  whether  they  be  greenhouses,  workshops  or  home 
improvements. 
The  "Quantity"  column  is for  a  10' x  16' floor  size; it can  be modified  for  other dimensions. 

ITEM 

USE 

Quantity 

Foundation 

48  ft. 3 
5  sheets 

3 sacks 
6  ft.3 
10 
80 
25 

36' 
130' 
72' 
48' 
110' 

40' 
61b. 
41b. 
21b. 
21b. 
lib. 
lpkg. 
21b. 
150 count 
5 
8-10 
1 sack 

6  pair 
3-5  tubes 
2 tubes 
2 tubes 
2 gal. 
2qt. 
40-60' 
1 tube 
1  gal. 

Rocks (2"  to 6"  diameter) 
Styrene  beadboard  insulation 

(1-2" thick). 

Portland  cement 
Concrete sand, #4  steel  re-bar 
Concrete anchor bolts 
Full blocks 
Half  blocks 
Frame 
2 x4  sill plates 
2 x4  studs 
2 x4  rafters 
2 x4  plates (wall, ledger,  top) 
2 x4  blocking  (firebreaks) 

Finishes & Fasteners 

6"  galvanized  flashing 
16 penny  nails 
8 penny  nails 
3 penny galvanized  nails 
6 penny galvanized  nails 
dry wall nails (glued, ring-shank) 
l/4"-3/8"  staples 
lead-head  roof  nails 
rubber-washered aluminum nails 
rafter  hangers with nails 
60 penny spikes or lag screws 
wall board joint compound 

and tape 

3-1/2"  square flush  hinges 
butyl or latex  caulk 
butyl gutter caulk 
clear silicone caulk 
white exterior latex paint 
dark (black) paint 
1 x 6 pine boards 
wood glue 
cuprinol or copper  naphthenate 

Fill  most of footing trench (2' deep by 6-8" wide). 
Line outer edge of trench. Reduce heat loss. 

Mix with some rock; makes concrete footing 8' * wide x 
6"  deep at top of trench.  Center re-bar. 
Place every 4". Tie wood frame to block walls. 
Perimeter block walls. 
Perimeter block walls. 

Bolt to concrete  footing. 
Skeleton  of walls. 
Skeleton of roof. 
Tie roof to front  and to house wall. 
Fill in frame  grid. 

From sill plate, over buried  insulation 
basic  framing 
siding, light  framing 
fiberglass,  batten, exterior trim 
exterior trim 
gypsum wall board 
vapor barrier, inner glazing 
steel roof only 
fiberglass  roof only 
rafter—wall  plate 
wall plates—house wall 
seal wallboard  edges and texture  surface 

door hinging 
sill—concrete, general  sealing 
metal roof seams 
seal fiberglass edges 
all wood exposed or under glazing 
water storage barrels 
exterior trim 
door, vent  frames 
preserve wood 

CONSTRUCTION 

ITEM 

USE 

4-8' 

32' 
70 ft.2 
2 sheets 

80 ft.2 
3 
40' 
80 ft.2 
3 

2-10' 
1-50'roll 

Roof 
Corrugated  steel sheet 

(2'  wide) 

Insulation  batts (2' x  3-1/2") 
Polyethylene 4-6 mil film 
Gypsum wall  board (3/8") 

Insulated  Walls 
15 1b. building paper 
Exterior siding (4' x 8'  sheets) 
Insulation  batts (2' x 3-1/2') 
Polyethylene 4-6 mil film 
Gypsum wallboard  (3/8" x  1/2") 

Clear Walls & Roof 
(South half of greenhouse) 
Fiberglass-corrugated  (4'wide) 
Fiberglass-fiat  4'wide 

(4-5  oz/ft.2) 

Exterior  surface 

Under steel roof 
Vapor barrier under batting 
Inner ceiling 

Moisture-resistant  barrier outside bolts 
Exterior sheathing 
Fill wall cavities 
Vapor barrier inside batts 
Inner wall 

Front half roof 
Outer wall  surface 

200' 
200-250 ft.2 

Wooden  lath (1/4" x 1-1/2") 
Clear Polyethylene,  6-8 mil 

Batten strips at seams 
Inner wall  surface 

50' 
40' 
1 

6 

ultraviolet  inhibited film. 

corrugated closure strip 
1/2-round closure strip 
Wood storm door, glazed 2 

sides with fiberglass 

"Furniture" 
55 gallon or 30 gallon drums 
scrap boards 
pea gravel or flagstone 

Set on rafters.  Match roofing corrugations. 
Cover base of front  wall. Hinged air in-lets. 
Translucent door to outside 

store heat in water (closed lids) 
2' deep planting boxes 
floor outside beds, barrels 

CHAPTER  VII 

THE GREENHOUSE  GARDEN 

Solar greenhouse gardening takes the natural patterns and rhythms of growing and harvesting and 
intensifies  them  in  space  and  time.  The  greenhouse  creates  its own  ecology  and  is  an  everchanging 
microclimate. Plant life fosters animal and insect life and a system of interdependence emerges.  You, as 
the gardener and caretaker, set the stage and define the parameters of this process. 

The greenhouse gardener has some advantages and problems that the outdoor gardener does not have. 
Planting space is much more limited, for one thing. Also, an attached greenhouse is an integral part of your 
living  environment;  your  home  shares  in  the  problems  of  the  unit,  as  well  as  deriving  benefits 
from  it. The greenhouse gardener does have one great advantage over the outdoor gardener in  not being as 
dependent on the weather. Low temperatures in the coldest part of the  winter are the only exception. The 
ravages of wind, hail, drought, and frost have no effect  on greenhouse plants, whereas outdoors they can 
and do destroy many crops. As a greenhouse gardener, you enjoy both a greatly ex tended and a much more 
predictable growing season,  because you control the climate in your unit. 

One of the most innovative aspects of the solar greenhouses in this book is that they are geared mainly 
to  the  production  of  vegetable  food  crops  rather  than  flowers  and  houseplants.  Food  production  and 
supplemental heat transform the greenhouse from a luxury item to a functional addition to the home. What 
you get from the greenhouse, though, is directly proportional to what you put into it. The heat is dependent 
upon the design  and construction, and once the greenhouse is complete the temperature range is pretty 
much  determined.  But  the  food  you  get  from  the greenhouse  changes  continuously  according  to  the 
season, the weather, and your efforts. A greenhouse will maintain itself with little input, but with regular 
care  and  attention  it can  perform  beautifully.  Four to five hours of  work  a week  in  a small,  attached 
greenhouse can produce enough to provide a family of four and many guests with 80 percent of their fresh 
vegetables. This we know from experience. 

look 

in  on 

time  to  just 

A  productive  greenhouse  calls  for 
your care in a variety of ways. Five or ten 
minutes  first  thing  in  the  morning  is  a 
good 
the 
greenhouse and see how it is faring, check 
the plants,  and take count of the insects. 
This is also a very nice way to wake up. 
Then,  at  other  times  of  the  day  and 
depending  on  the  season,  you  will  be 
doing various gardening tasks that will be 
described throughout this chapter. 

We  plant  our  greenhouses  by  the 
season,  growing  what  grows  naturally 
during  different 
times  of  the  year— 
although in the greenhouse these seasons 
are greatly extended.  Also, we  use  only 
the light and heat of the sun to grow  our 

Figure 85 

crops, no artificial  lights or supplemental  heat. The garden is self-sufficient  in these ways. 

It's important to learn to work with the planting cycles in the greenhouse. Keeping written records, 
either a diary or charts (see Appendix I),  is a helpful technique that takes no more than a couple of minutes 
a day.  Beginning greenhouse gardeners looking for a good, reliable system may want to do what  many 
farmers have always done: follow the phases of the moon in their planting through each season. We do this 
and find it very  effective. 

9 

THE GREENHOUSE GARDEN 

79 

First Quarter 

(increasing from  new moon to about half  full) 

Plant the vegetables whose foliage  we eat.  Examples  are lettuce, 
cabbage, celery, spinach, etc. 

Second Quarter 

(increasing from  about half full  to full  moon) 

Plant the vegetables whose fruit we eat.  Examples include beans, 
peas,  peppers,  squash,  tomatoes,  etc.  An  exception  to  this  rule 
is the cucumber,  which seems to do best when planted during the 
first quarter. 

Third Quarter 

(decreasing from  full moon  to about half  full) 

Plants the vegetables whose roots we eat, such as onions, radishes, 
carrots, etc. 

Fourth Quarter 

(decreasing from  about half full  to new moon) 

Best for cultivation, pulling weeds, destroying pests. 

The planting of flowers breaks down into annuals during the first and second quarter, perennials and 

biennials during the third quarter. 

Of course, the vegetables and flowers you select to plant in accordance with this lunar calendar are 
dictated by the season. You shouldn't plant tomatoes in December regardless of the phase of the moon. But 
by  superimposing  the  lunar  cycle  onto  the  seasonal  one,  you  can  create  an  effective  structure  for 
maintaining  a successful  greenhouse garden. 

Greenhouse Layout 

The size, shape, and number of planting areas included in your greenhouse will be determined by the 
configuration  of  the  unit  and  your  own judgement  (practical  and  aesthetic).  However,  since  space  is 
limited, plan the layout of planting areas with the utmost care. For maximum productivity, leave narrow 
walkways  and put the rest of the floor  area 
into  beds  and  tables.  Vertical  and  tiered 
space  should  be  used  to the greatest  extent 
possible. Shelves lining solid walls, planters 
on  top  of  fifty-five  gallon  drums,  and 
hanging planters are some effective methods 
of  using  this  space.  Movable  shelves  on 
brackets  along  the clear walls work  well to 
hold trays of seedings. By June these shelves 
can  be  taken  down  and  stored  (Fig.  86). 
Temporary tables can also be erected in beds 
for seedlings (Fig. 87). Another good way of 
using vertical space was devised by the Uni(cid:173)
versity  of Arizona Environmental  Research 
Laboratory.  It  involves  a series of  hanging 
pots,  attached  one above the other (Fig.  88). This ingenious idea really makes the most of  greenhouse 
growth/space  potential. 

Figure  86 

Some of the space in your unit will have to be given up to equipment. If you already have a tool shed, 
then  you  won't  need  as  much  storage  area  in  the greenhouse.  But  empty  trays  and  pots,  cartons  for 

80  CHAPTER VII 

seedlings,  small  hand  tools, containers of 
fertilizer,  and  other  basic  necessities of 
greenhouse  living  do  accumulate  quickly. 
When  planning  the  interior  layout,  leave 
space  for  equipment  and  a  comfortable 
amount of standing room. An example of an 
interior layout is given on p. 85. 

Soil 

The  greenhouse  can  be  a  successful  year-
round  garden  if  the  soil  is  kept  in  top 
condition.  To  be  fertile,  soil  must  contain 
three  elements:  minerals,  air  and  organic 
matter. Gardeners used to "taste"  their soil 
before planting. If it tasted sour or bitter, it was no good for raising plants; but if it tasted sweet, a high yield 
could  be expected.  The soil that tasted sour was too acid; soil that tasted bitter was too alkaline. A good 
balance between the acidity and alkalinity of soil is important for a good harvest; most plants like a neutral 
or slightly  acid soil.  It is not necessary  to taste the soil, however; if you have questions about it, send a 
sample to a county agent or buy a do-it-yourself  soil-testing kit. 

Figure 87 

A healthy plant needs nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and postassium  (K) from the soil; trace mineral 
elements are also essential. Nitrogen is needed for growth, particularly for green leaves. Yellow leaves and 
poor  growth  denote  a lack  of  nitrogen  in  the  soil. 
Organic matter decaying to humus releases nitrogen 
slowly, but is a steady source. Cottonseed meal and 
blood meal  are other excellent  sources of  nitrogen. 
Phosphorus  is  needed  for  roots, fruit  development, 
and  resistance  to  disease.  It  comes  from  organic 
decaying  matter,  bone  meal,  and  from  ground 
phosphate  rock.  Potassium  is  needed  for  the  cell 
structure  of  the plant and  is obtained  from  organic 
matter  and  wood  ashes.  Trace  mineral  elements 
come from  a variety of components in decomposing 
organic matter. 

ingredient 

in 

Air 

is  another  vital 

the 
composition of healthy, fertile soil and in producing 
well-rooted plants. Along with using organic matter, 
vermiculite,  or  sand,  another  way  to  aerate  and 
allow  water to penetrate  the  soil  is by  providing  a 
good supply of earthworms. Worms also fertilize soil 
through their casts which are rich in nitrogen, potash, 
and phosphate, and help balance the composition of 
the soil; if your soil has a good number of earthworms 
in  it,  you  do not  need  to  add nutrients  as  often  or 
worry  as  much  about  insects.  There  are  over  two 
thousand kinds of earthworms but the two that are of 
interest in the greenhouse are the soil-ingesting blue 
and the manure- and composting-ingesting red. Both 

Figure  88 

THE GREENHOUSE GARDEN 

81 

make humus. Research is now being done that may introduce new or little known varieties of earthworms. 
Keep a lookout for the results. 

Traditionally,  sterilized  soil  is  used  in  the  greenhouse  to  avoid  importing  bugs  and  diseases. 
However, we have never done this due to two major practical problems. Soil is sterilized by heating it, but 
how do you get a ton of soil (the average amount needed for ground beds in a small greenhouse) into 
a home oven? The other solution, buying presterilized or potting soil, is prohibitively expensive in such 
quantities. If you have access to sterilized soil use it, but if not, don't let this be an obstacle to planting your 
greenhouse.  When  you  start  seedlings,  though,  use  a sterile  medium  such  as  1/2  peat  moss  and  1/2 
vermiculite. 

The soil in a ground bed should be  12-16 inches deep, and under it should be 4-6 inches of pumice, 
sand,  vermiculite,  or  pea  gravel  to  insure  proper  drainage.  Greenhouse  soil  should  not be  as  dense 
as regular garden soil and it must drain well. Plants do not like sitting in a puddle of water. If your soil is on 
the heavy  side, add a good portion of vermiculite and organic matter. Two good soil mixtures are: 

1/3 rich organic topsoil 
1/3 peat or compost 
1/3 vermiculite or perlite 

O^ 

1  part of organic matter 
1  part of sandy  loam soil 

If you live near the mountains, try this one: 

1/4 arroyo sand (river bottom) 
1/4  black  mountain  earth (found  under the pines) 
1/4 pumice, perlite, or vermiculite 
1/4 compost or peat moss 

The  same  soil  can be used for a long time in a greenhouse, but  it must be regularly  enriched  with 
compost  and  organic  matter.  By fertilizing,  rotating plants, and  using nitrogen  fixers  (such as peas) in 
various locations,  I have kept the soil in my greenhouse productive for five years, replacing only the top 
couple of inches every year. (See sections on crop rotation, page 91, and fertilization  below). 

Carbon Dioxide 

Together  with  sunlight  and  water,  carbon  dioxide  is essential  for  photosynthesis. 

Minimum  CO2 for  plant growth  is  .03%; doubling CO2 in a greenhouse can  approxi(cid:173)
mately  double  photosynthesis.  Increasing carbon  dioxide  levels  in the greenhouse can 
partially  offset  the reduction of light in winter. Keeping animals (such as rabbits) in the 
greenhouse,  evaporating  dry  ice,  or  having  a  functioning  compost  bin  increases  the 
carbon dioxide level. An attached greenhouse has a CO2 advantage over an independent 
one  in that the air  from  the home circulating  through the greenhouse on winter days is 
naturally higher in COT than outside air. The greenhouse, in turn, gives back to the home 
oxygen-rich purified  air. This is another example of the symbiotic relationship between 
house and greenhouse. 

Fertilizers 

Every time a crop is harvested, the soil should be fertilized. Remember that you are asking a great deal 
more of the greenhouse earth than the garden earth in terms of length of the growing season and density of 
the  crop.  Because  of  the  relatively  limited  space,  most  greenhouse  owners  plant  intensively.  We 
deliberately crowd our crops in order to squeeze every last tomato, bean, and pea from the unit. This type 
of  intensive planting  does work,  if  the soil is rich enough.  Regular  fertilization  is the primary  way  to 
enrich  the soil. 

82 

CHAPTER VII 

There are many different  types of fertilizers.  A local nursery can recommend a variety of basic dry 
and liquid commercial brands. If you apply any of them every time you are ready to plant a new crop, the 
soil  should  stay  in  good  condition.  Your  plants  are  the  best  indicator  of  insufficient  or  incorrect 
fertilization.  Liquid fertilizer is available to the plants immediately, while dry fertilizer takes six weeks to 
three months to be absorbed. If you wish to mix your own fertilizer,  blood meal is an excellent source of 
nitrogen and some phosphate. Rock phosphate also supplies phosphates and wood ashes supply potassium. 
Well-composted  manure provides many trace elements as well as being a source of nitrogen, phosphate, 
and potassium.  Iron comes from  blood meal and magnesium from  seaweed or Epsom salts. I use a liquid 
fertilizer (fish emulsion) in my greenhouse every two or three weeks. I use dry fertilizers, cottonseed meal, 
bone meal, and blood meal each time I have harvested one crop and before  I plant another. 

A compost bin in the greenhouse is another valuable source of fertilizer.  It supplies decayed organic 
matter,  the best  source of the essential  mineral  nutrients for the plants. And as the organic material is 
decomposing, it supplies heat and carbon dioxide to the greenhouse. The compost pile must of course be 
well planned and maintained so that it does not smell foul. This is not a problem if it is kept active with 
manure and green material (green leaves, plant stems, flowers, roots, lawn clippings, etc.) and layered 
with dry material (hay, straw, dry leaves, sawdust, etc.). Each layer should be from 2 to 4 inches in depth. 
When the green materials have lost their moisture, water should be sprinkled on the pile; apply only a little, 
as too much water will cool the pile down. Compost temperatures should be between  140°F and 160°F. 
The biggest drawback to a compost pile in the greenhouse is the space it takes. The bin should have a 
floor space at least 3 feet by 3 feet. And you need to have enough room in front of the bin to comfortably 
turn the pile every  3 or 4 days. But if you have a greenhouse large enough to house a compost  bin, the 
rewards are well worth it. 

THE GREENHOUSE GARDEN 

83 

Other  organic  fertilizers,  such  as  manure,  work  beautifully.  Dry  cow  and  horse  manure  are 
particularly effective.  Keep in mind, though, that every time you bring foreign matter into the unit, you run 
the risk of bringing harmful  insects with it. 

Manure and compost should also be added to the soil while the plants are growing and producing. 
Frances Tyson makes what she calls ' 'horse manure tea'' by soaking fresh dung in a pail of water. Frances 
periodically pours this hearty brew on her soil; the health and beauty of her plants (see Fig. 89) testifies to 
its value as a fertilizer. 

Many people believe that organic fertilizer  is more effective  overall than chemical fertilizer  (we're 
among  this group). We've  used fish emulsion  very successfully.  I like the stuff,  although  it makes my 
whole house smell like Provincetown at low tide for a couple of hours. But what you use depends to a great 
extent on what is available. The most important thing is to fertilize regularly, lavishly, and deeply. When 
fertilizing,  turn the soil over with a shovel or pitchfork.  Dig down to the bottom and really move that earth 
around. You will bury the fertilizer deep in the soil, the best place for it. It will feed the whole root system 
of your plants and also encourage the roots to grow deeper,  thus creating a firmly well-rooted crop. 

Mulching  will enrich  the soil  and keep it evenly moist.  Mulch  with organic  substances that break 
down  readily  into  humus.  Grass  clippings,  leaves,  wood  shavings,  vegetables,  and  other  leftovers— 
anything you would  compost—will  work  very  well 
in the greenhouse.  You can literally  turn your beds 
into  compost  piles,  using  nearly  all  your  organic 
garbage, mulch, and fertilizer on them. Keep a small 
jug  by your sink  and every  day  or so convert your 
"garbage"  into your greenhouse soil. 

Get an image in your mind of the soil as a living 
element.  Nourish  and care for it just as you do your 
plants.  The  soil  essentially  makes  the  difference 
between  a sterile and  fertile  greenhouse (Fig. 90). 

Hydroponics Versus Soil 

Hydroponics  is  a method  of  highly  controlled 
agriculture  whereby  plants  are  grown  in  a  "non-
soil"  medium  such  as  sand  or  vermiculite.  A 
balanced  diet of nutrients is fed  directly  to the root 
system. 

There is a long standing battle raging between 
hydroponic  and  soil  aficionados.  Hydroponic 
gardeners  claim  as high  as 300 percent  increases in 
yield;  soil  users  retort,  "Hydroponic  plants  are 
chemical junkies and besides they don't taste good. 
I have limited experience with hydroponics but have 
found the following: 

Figure 90 

1)  Hydroponic  plants  are  more  dependent  on  continuous  care.  A  soil  plant  in  a  deep  bed  can 
survive several days in midsummer without watering. A hydroponic plant will die if a feeding is 
missed.  For this reason, most hydroponic operations call for an electric timer, feed batch tank, 
tubes to plants or containers for feeding and drainage. In a small home operation these items are 
not particularly expensive or energy  consuming. 

2)  I have  seen  plant growth and densities  in soil that are not surpassed by any hydroponics tech(cid:173)

niques, as in the Tyson's greenhouse (Chapter VIII, p.  149 and Fig. 89). Granted, this is a small 
operation that receives a maximum of tender love and care; in a larger commercial unit increased 
yields by hydroponics are documented  fact. 

84 

CHAPTER VII 

3)  The  soil  in  beds  and  on  tables  has  the  ability  to  store  heat.  Some  hydroponic  media  such 
as pea gravel  can  also thermally  charge but other media such  as vermiculite do not hold much 
thermal storage capability. 

4)  For  the complete  novice  I recommend  starting  with  soil. The greenhouse  is a new experience 
by itself. The added element of hydroponics might complicate things. After you have had some 
experience  with  the greenhouse,  run  a hydroponic  experiment  and  then  decide which  side of 
the battle to join. 

We have included some good hydroponic books in the reference  list. 

Straw Bale Culture 

A compromise between growing in soil and hydroponics is to use straw as the growth 
medium,  a  method  I learned  about from  Don  Knight of  Santa  Fe.  This  is a  standard 
commercial procedure in Great Britain. The advantages of this method are: quantities of 
soil do not have to be hauled into the new greenhouse; since straw is lighter than soil, it is a 
particularly  appealing option  for a second-story greenhouse such as the one in Chapter 
VIII (p.  108). The straw medium is constantly composting, providing both nutrients for the 
plants and gentle heat for their roots and for the greenhouse; composting straw produces 
CC»2; plants  such  as tomatoes enjoy  being  able to form  large root systems in the loose 
structure of the straw. The space where you will put the bales must first be covered with a 
layer of plastic material; put bales bound with wire on top of the plastic. Next there is a 
three-week  period of preparation.  Soak each bale daily with one gallon of water for two 
weeks. To avoid evaporation, it is helpful to cover the straw after each watering with thin 
plastic.  After  the  bales  are  thoroughly  soaked  (and  composting  of  the  straw  is  well 
underway)  the  next  step  is the  application  of  fertilizer  (see p.  82). The  fertilizer  must 
provide the following  nutrients: nitrogen,  phosphate, potassium,  magnesium, and iron. 
Commercial tomato food contains all of these; the ratio of available nitrogen, phosphate 
and potassium is approximately 5:10:10. Two and one-half pounds of this fertilizer will be 
needed per bale of straw. 

The initial application of fertilizer should be introduced into the straw by applying it 
dry to the top and then wetting it with one gallon of water per bale per day. If the straw 
appears too dense or the fertilizer at first too insoluble, work it into the straw with a hand 
tool.  Getting  the  fertilizer  to  penetrate  rapidly  increases  the  bacterial  action  in  the 
composting straw. The internal heat will rise to quite high temperatures. To hold this heat, 
continue to keep the bales covered. The composting straw is generating nutrients needed 
for  the  plants  about  to  be placed  in  the bales.  Within  a week,  the high  temperatures 
generated in the straw will fall below  100°F. Pull out the sprouts that have come from the 
seeds  in the straw. Then it's time to plant. 

Plant 6- to 8-week  old seedlings that have been  transplanted at least twice. Put no 
more than 2 tomato plants in each bale. Surround every seedling with a ring of cardboard 
or metal 3—4 inches high and about 6 inches in diameter,  and fill it in with rich soil or 
compost.  If your plant will need to be staked,  this is a good time to do it. 

As  the young  plants  begin  to  send  their  roots  into  the  enriched  straw,  they  will 
rapidly make use of the fertilizer present. It is necessary to continue feeding periodically. 
Beginning  2 weeks after planting and every other week after that, add about  1/4 of the 
amount of nitrogen fertilizer. On alternate weeks feed with potash, again about  1/4 of the 
initial  amount.  You can  vary  the water to include a gallon or two of manure tea or fish 
emulsion.  With  this schedule of feeding  and watering  (and training  and pruning) your 
plants will grow well. 

THE GREENHOUSE GARDEN 

8 5 

Planting Layout 

Before planting, give careful  thought to the right light and heat requirements, the shape and size of 
various crops. Seasonal light changes affect  plant growth and photosynthesis, as does temperature. The 
sun follows different  paths in the sky at different  times of the year. At midwinter when it's lowest in the 
sky the sun will be high on the back wall of me greenhouse. In midsummer, the sun is at its highest and 
only the front of the greenhouse is in full sun. These changes cause different microclimates and will dictate 
to some extent where you plant certain crops at various times of the year. 

Different  areas of the greenhouse also create different  growing environments. The higher areas will 
always be the warmer; the front will have full light, while the back will be shadier. During the winter, the 
back  area will  not experience as wide a range in temperature variation  as the front  area will. Learn  the 
requirements  of your  plants and put  them  into the area of  the greenhouse  where they will  be happiest. 

Figure  91 

Planting fruiters—eggplant,  tomatoes, peppers—in  the front of the greenhouse in spring, summer, 
and fall will allow them to receive the full  sun they need. The greater challenge is finding plants that will 
grow in the back beds. Greens, root crops, legumes (peas, beans), and some herbs do well in these area. 
They prefer the cooler temperatures and can tolerate lower light levels than the  fruiters. 

You will probably want to experiment with a variety of planting layouts. Just remember to give extra 
attention to the plants in the rear. Provide them with as much light as possible or they may tend to become 
phototropic. 

Phototropism is the tendency of plants to bend toward their source of light. In the outdoor '"natural" 
growth  area plants  receive light from  all sides, though  much  of  that light may  be from  the south.  In a 
greenhouse,  mis "diffuse"  source of light may not be available, especially  if the north wall of the solar 
greenhouse is dark in color for heat storage. In such a case, the plants will bend toward the south glazing. 

86 

CHAPTER VII 

This bending is caused by an accumulation of growth-regulating auxins along the ' 'dark'' side of the plant 
stem,  causing  it to  become distended  or bent.  Wasted  plant energy  results, though plant  growth  is not 
greatly  reduced. Using glazings that diffuse  sunlight, and painting interior, nonmassive, walls white, will 
more evenly  distribute light to the plants. 

Figure  92 

As you get ready to sow your seeds, keep in mind that most greenhouse gardeners plant intensively 
(see Fig. 92). The number of plants you can squeeze into one bed depends a great deal on the fertility of the 
soil.  Under good conditions you can cut the recommended spacing by %ths for many crops and get a fine 
harvest. 

The Vegetable Planting Guide 

Don't  grow  any  vegetables  that  you  don't  enjoy  eating.  It's  no  major  accomplishment  to grow 
radishes or the hardy cold-weather crops in your solar greenhouse at any time during the year. But if you 
dislike radishes then it's a waste of time and soil nutrients. Raise the vegetables that you and your family 
eat  and your success will be measured  not only in terms of what you can grow but what you use. 

Having said this, we encourage you to plant any vegetables or flowers that you especially like. If you 
take proper care of the plants, start them at the right time of the year,  ward off insects (see p. 92), and 
follow  the other basic procedures we are suggesting, there is no reason why you can't grow almost any(cid:173)
thing you want to. We urge you to experiment, particularly  if you enjoy gardening enough to take a few 
risks in return for possibly spectacular results. Imagine how you would like your greenhouse to look and 
then  simply bring that vision into reality. It can be done. 

Thus far we have talked mainly about vegetables, but don't feel compelled to use every square inch of 
the greenhouse for edible plants. Flowers add color, fragrance, and beauty to your unit year-round.  If the 
greenhouse  space is an attractive one, you'll  find that you want to spend time in it and maintaining  the 
plants will  be a pleasure. The plants will enjoy your company and benefit  from your care. 

THE GREENHOUSE  GARDEN 

87 

The greenhouse experiences seasons just as the outdoor environment does, but summer comes early 
and lingers on in the greenhouse garden. The planting cycle in the greenhouse is based on this extended 
growing season. Although the planting cycles will vary regionally, the guidelines we will give you apply to 
most  areas  that  experience  moderate  to great  seasonal  variation—including,  most  importantly,  cold 
winters. In these regions the greenhouse seasons can be generally defined as follows: spring is February 
through  April;  summer  is  May  through  September;  fall  is  October  through  November;  winter  is 
December through January.  Some crops will be harvested within one period, others will extend through 
two seasons, and still others, notably tomatoes, will continue to bear through three cycles. 

Profile:  SPRING—SUMMER—FALL 

A.  Shading plants 
B.  Fruiters.  Tomatoes,  cucumbers  trained  up  twine. 

Trim foliage, squash, melons. 

C.  Seedlings, herbs, fruiters.  Hydroponic table. 
D.  Low  light,  coolest  greens.  In  late  summer  new 

fruiters  can go here. Climbers, flowers. 

E.  Flowers, shade lovers. 
F.  Berries, shade lovers. 

igure 93 

Spring. While there is still snow on the ground and the 
temperature outside says winter is here, it is wonderful 
to experience spring in the greenhouse. In February start 
seedlings in trays for the tomatoes, eggplant, and herbs that will be planted in the greenhouse to produce 
through summer and fall. The hardy cold-weather crops such as peas, leafy greens, onions, radishes, and 
broccoli can be planted directly in the greenhouse beds. 
Even  though  you  may  still  have  these  cold-weather 
crops in the beds from  the winter cycle, they are usually 
tired after  battling the cold and in most cases you will 
want  to remove them or turn  them  under for  compost. 
The spring crops come up quickly and are healthy  and 
strong. 

By  the middle of March all crops are doing well. 
At  this  time  transplant  the  seedlings  in  trays  into the 
greenhouse beds. Interplant everything that grows well 
together as this helps confuse the insects and allows you 
to  plant  more  intensively  (see  Companion  Planting, 
p. 91). 

The  middle  of  March  is  a  good  time  to  plant 
melons, pumpkins, cucumbers, and any other shallow-
rooted (less hardy) fruit-bearing  crops you want to keep 
in  the  greenhouse  through  the  summer.  Plant  melons 
near a low vent so that you can grow them out through 
this  opening  when  they  are  large  and  the  weather  is 
warm enough  to have the vent open all the time. Many 
people  are  tempted  to  start  their  outdoor  garden 
seedlings at this time, as everything in the greenhouse is 
growing  like  mad.  Do  not!  It  is  too  early;  garden 
seedlings  will  become  rootbound  and  too  big  to 

Figure  94 

88 

CHAPTER VII 

transplant,  unless you are lucky enough  to live in an area where the last freeze  is the end of April. Pole 
beans do well when started now and are a very successful greenhouse crop (Fig. 94). They put most of their 
energy  into vertical growth and thus do not take up much space  in relation to the amount of beans they 
produce.  You do have to provide a lattice work of stakes for them to climb, and  it should extend  to the 
ceiling, as the beans will easily reach that height. 

By April the greenhouse is in full  swing. This is when I begin giving away fresh  vegetables to any 
willing neighbor,  since there's always more than we can eat. During the middle of April, begin planting 
seedlings for the outdoor garden. This is also a good time to start plants that will be planted just outside the 
south face  of  the greenhouse for shading 
(Fig.  95).  Sunflowers,  morning  glories, 
and  Jerusalem  artichokes  all  work  well. 
Grapes  can  also  be  planted  in this  area. 
Train  the  vines  up  and  across  the  front 
face; in the fall cut them back. 

Summer.  During  the  summer  season 
the  plants  you  have  growing  in  the 
greenhouse  will  flourish,  with  regular 
care  and  attention.  Fruiting  vegetables 
begin producing about two months before 
their  outdoor  counterparts,  and  you 
should have  a steady  harvest  throughout 
this season.  By the second week of May 
all  the  seedlings  you  started  for  your 
outdoor  garden  are  well  established. 
Harden  off  garden 
transplants  by 
exposing  them  to  harsher  outdoor  weather  for  about  two  weeks.  In  the  beginning,  bring  them  in  at 
night.  Also, some vegetables that were planted directly in the beds can be moved outdoors even though 
they  are quite large  by this time. Tomatoes, peppers, and broccoli, blossoming  and fruiting,  have  been 
transplanted with no ill effects on their productivity. My broccoli actually benefited  from the move as the 
garden  was cooler than the greenhouse. 

Keep the greenhouse well ventilated. It's a good idea to close the greenhouse off from the house and 
open  vents  and  doors  to the outside.  This, however,  may  bring  unwanted pests  such  as grasshoppers, 
chickens, dogs, and cats in, so you would be well advised to put chicken wire over low vents and a folding 
gate on the door that will keep out the larger pests. If you put screens up you must increase your vent size 
substantially as screens decrease the air flow necessary for good ventilation. The greenhouse must always 
be kept clean and the population of harmful insects under control, but during this time of heavy production, 
it  is  especially  important.  Train  climbing  vegetables  up  lattices,  string,  or  stakes,  and  keep  foliage 
trimmed. 

At the end of August begin seedlings in trays for the crops you want in your fall and winter greenhouse 
as they must be well established and do most of their growing before the cold nights set in. It's a good time 
to start a few  of the smaller tomato varieties. 

Fall.  Early October is a good time to thoroughly clean the greenhouse and fertilize the soil. The plants that 
grow through  late fall and winter need all of the help they can get. Dig out the top 2-3 inches of implanted 
soil and replace them with compost, or fertilize well using another method you prefer. Also dig around the 

THE GREENHOUSE  GARDEN 

89 

plants that will continue to grow in the greenhouse to 
loosen the soil, and fertilize  them deeply before you 
transplant the seedlings you started in August. 

Leafy  greens, broccoli, cabbage, peas, onions, 
root  vegetables,  and  herbs  all  do  well  in  the  fall 
greenhouse  (Fig.  96).  Tomatoes,  beans,  and  egg(cid:173)
plant  continue  to  produce,  but  usually  cucumbers, 
melons and peppers are past their prime. 

them 

Winter.  Because of the lower temperatures and the 
shorter daylight hours all plants show a slow growth 
rate in the winter greenhouse. You may find this is a 
good  time  to really clean  out the unit; wash all the 
containers  and  boxes; replenish  the soil. This  is an 
excellent  time  to  get  rid  of  any  lingering  pests  by 
freezing 
to  death.  Simply  open  up  the 
greenhouse at night  for a week to ten days. Close it 
during the day and turn the soil over several times. It 
is  a  valid  decision  to  give  your  greenhouse  and 
yourself  a rest during  this time.  On the other hand, 
you may  find  it  the most  rewarding  time of year to 
have  a garden.  Hardy  and cold-weather  plants will 
grow during this period without added heat. I love the 
nightly fresh salads and herbs and the weekly serving of fresh broccoli and peas we eat through this period. 
The planting chart (Appendix I) will give you a full listing of varieties, time of planting, and locations 

Figure  96 

we've used in our greenhouses. 

Profile: WINTER 

A.  Lightest,  coldest.  Leafy  greens,  radishes,  peas, 

broccoli, roots, tubers. Carry over fruiters. 

B.  Light,  cool.  Herbs,  greens,  flowers.  Transplant 

seedlings. 

C.  Light, warm. Hanging pots, flowers, herbs. 
D.  Light, warm. Winter tomatoes, peppers. Climbers, 

beans, houseplants. 

E.  Low  light,  warmest.  Start  seeds,  sprouts.  (On 

shelves, bread will rise well here.) 

F.  Shady,  cool.  Berries. 

Figure  97 

Flowers in the  Greenhouse 

Houseplants.  All houseplants seem to thrive in the solar greenhouse. Many people give their plants an 
invigorating outdoor vacation during the summer. A vacation in the greenhouse is even better. The color, 
size and density of foliage improves tremendously,  and the plants look as good or better than when they 

90 

CHAPTER  VII 

were nursery-new.  Therefore,  any plant suffering  from  the windowsill, coffee  table, or bookcase blues 
should be transferred  into the greenhouse for a couple of months or more. 

Light and humidity in the greenhouse are two important factors in reviving plants. Be sure, though, to 
place plants that are susceptible to burning in a location away from  direct sunlight, just as you would in 
your house. 

Hardy  houseplants can  stay  in the greenhouse year-round,  unless you are planning  a solid  winter 
freezeout.  Geraniums are one of the best examples of this. Once, at about 22°F, mine died down to the 
roots, then made a magnificent  comeback in the spring. If your greenhouse temperatures never drop that 
low, cut back the geraniums in midwinter anyway. By April they will be beautiful  again. 

Strawberry  begonias have  also proven to be very  frost-resistant  houseplants; in fact,  they  seem  to 
thrive at cooler temperatures. Wandering jews are remarkably hardy, though again, they die back when the 
temperatures  are in the twenties. The color and vigor of the new leaves in spring is incredible. 

More tender houseplants, such as the coleus, benefit greatly from  the greenhouse environment, but 
they must be brought back into the house during the coldest months unless your unit never freezes. In this 
category,  fuchsias,  Swedish  ivy, and spider plants are especially  content in the greenhouse. Treat them 
exacdy  as you do in the house in terms of watering, trimming, and feeding. 

All  the flowering plants  you  normally  have  in  your garden  grow  beautifully  in  the  greenhouse. 
Choosing  those to include in the unit involves considerations of space, size, and general planting layout. 
Smaller varieties are often  preferable  because they add color but don't require much space. A favorite in 
this category  and probably  one of the easiest is the petunia. Petunias come in a wide range of colors and 
bloom  profusely.  If  they  get  spindly,  cut  them  back,  and  you'll  see them  return  in  healthy  vigorous 
condition.  Petunias  are considered  tender  annuals,  but  in the greenhouse  they  can  become  perennials 
(hardy to about 22°F). The same applies to marigolds, nasturtiums, and pansies. Pansies, like petunias, 
need to be cut back periodically.  All these types of flowers  bloom continuously. 

If you have a dark moist comer in your unit where nothing seems to grow, try ivy. Buy a variety that is 
recommended for  shady north-facing  walls and your problem comer will be transformed  into a haven of 
green. 

Gladiolus bulbs planted along the border of the front beds grow very well. In many regions gladiolus 
are not reliably hardy, and bulbs planted in the garden have to be dug up and brought in during the winter. 
In the greenhouse, however, they remain in the ground year-round; they die back to the bulbs in late fall, 
proliferate,  and return with increased beauty in the spring. 

Transplanting.  The greenhouse provides prime  conditions for  starting flowers to transplant  into the 
garden.  You can get a good headstart on the outdoor growing season and thus get much more enjoyment 
from  your flowers during the summer. 

In early April start perennials such as poppies, daisies, and chrysanthemums in the greenhouse; they 
can be transplanted sooner than annuals and will usually bloom the first year with this kind of headstart. 
Plant annuals, including marigolds, zinnias, morning glories, and sweet peas in mid-April. 

One of the advantages to starting flowers this way is that April temperatures in the greenhouses are 
usually warmer and more consistent than outdoor temperatures in early June. Seeds therefore germinate 
faster; also, the soil can be kept evenly moist more easily during the crucial time of germination, and this 
improves the success rate for sprouting seeds. You can also set the plants out, already several inches high 
and hardy, in any configuration you like. They are properly spaced and will remain that way. I have never 
been  able  to achieve  this kind of symmetry  (without a lot of effort  and frustration)  when sowing seeds 
directly  in the garden beds. 

Many flowers can also be transplanted into the greenhouse in fall. If you are careful to get all or most 
of the  roots, they will continue blooming all winter.  Petunias, pansies, and marigolds are the three  I've 
transplanted  successfully. 

THE GREENHOUSE GARDEN 

91 

Generally  it  doesn't make much  sense to dig  up hardy perennials that are well established  in the 
garden, but you should follow your own preferences in deciding what flowers to transplant. When you do 
get  ready  to bring  them in, dig  up the roots with  plenty of  soil around them. This lessens the shock of 
transplanting, decreases the danger of damaging the roots, and gives the plants the illusion that nothing 
unusual has happened to them. By the time their roots have grown beyond that ball of soil, they should be 
firmly grounded and ready to cope with any differences  in the growing conditions. 

Maintenance 

Watering.  The  amount  of  watering  that greenhouse  plants  need  varies  according  to the  season  and 
climate. In summer and over prolonged periods of clear days (any time of the year) they will require more 
water than on cloudy days and during most of the winter. Determine the amount of watering you will need 
based on personal observation and experience. The best way is to stick your index finger down into the soil. 
The soil should be moist, not slushy. 

DO NOT OVERWATER! A greenhouse  uses much less water than  an outdoor garden.  Humidity 
should not be a problem in the greenhouse if you run it properly. Overwatering can rot the roots and create 
other problems.  Use rainwater whenever possible; it is good for the plants. 

In warm weather the best time to water the greenhouse is about noon.  In summer evaporating water 
cools off  the  unit and keeps  the  temperatures comfortable  during  the afternoon.  In winter a  morning 
watering with lukewarm water will help the plants after a cold night. During the cold months it is best not to 
water on cloudy days. 

The equipment you use can be as simple as a large watering can.  In the summer you can water the 
greenhouse with ahose from outdoors. Ideally, though, install ahose in the greenhouse foryear-round use, 
with an inside faucet to attach it to. Incorporating such an arrangement into the design of your greenhouse 
will save time and work. It is also helpful  to have attachments for your hose that will allow you to spray a 
fine mist, beneficial  for newly planted  seeds and young seedlings. 

Slow watering is always preferable  to quick, forceful  watering. The soil is better able to absorb the 
moisture  and  you'll  get  a true  idea how  much  the ground  needs  and  can  use.  A quick  flood  will  not 
penetrate as deeply to the roots and more is lost through evaporation. 

Crop Rotation.  Rotating crops is a highly recommended method of maintaining healthy soil and getting a 
good harvest over a number of years. Different  crops take varying amounts of nutrients out of the soil; 
some actually  enrich  it. 

The  "heavy  feeders"  include  tomatoes,  cabbage  (and  members  of  that  family),  com,  all  leaf 
vegetables such as chard,  lettuce, endive, spinach, and celery, cucumbers, and squash. They need to be 
well  fertilized  and should not be planted year after year in the same bed. 

Legumes (notably peas and beans, including soybeans and lima beans) are good soil builders; they 
"fix"  nitrogen  from  the air, storing it in the soil for plant use. By alternating crops of legumes with the 
heavy feeders, you will be helping the soil to maintain a healthy balance of vital elements. 

A third category  consists of crops called  "light feeders."  Herbs and root vegetables belong  in this 

group.  If you're  uncertain  about how to classify  a plant,  it's usually safe to include it here. 

Flowers break down into these same divisions. But unless you put all of the beds into flowers, they 
should not present  a big problem. Just relocate them from  time to time and keep the soil well  fertilized. 

Companion Planting.  Vegetables and flowers grown side by side complement each other and make the 
greenhouse more attractive. Companion planting, mixing one plant with another in the vegetable row or 
flower bed, is a good practice in any garden but is especially beneficial  in the greenhouse. 

92 

CHAPTER VII 

Some reasons for companion planting are: certain plants excrete a substance above and/or below the 
ground that protects the plant (other plants growing nearby also benefit).  A large plant that needs a lot of 
light may be a good companion to one that needs partial shade; a deep-rooted plant may benefit  a shallow 
rooted plant by bringing up nutrients from deeper soil layers. Companion planting increases diversity in the 
greenhouse  and  tends  to frustrate  insect  feeding  and  thus  thwart  buildups of  insect populations.  Plant 
clumps of herbs such as basil, anise, and coriander throughout the greenhouse. Garlic and marigolds are 
good companions to have in every bed. In fact, garlic is such an effective  insect repellent that it's a good 
idea to keep a refrigerated jug of water with crushed garlic in it on hand to spray any whitefly,  cabbage 
moth,  aphid, or other harmful  insect that dares enter your greenhouse. 

In planning the layout of your crops, give some thought to companion planting. There are obvious 
mixes that will not work: two plants that grow tall, two that have deep roots, and so on. Some plants do not 
like others; for example, kohlrabi and fennel should not be planted next to tomatoes. Some plants that do 
well  together  are  carrots  and peas,  kohlrabi  and  beets,  tomatoes  and parsley,  celery  and  bush  beans, 
radishes and lettuce, turnips and peas, onions and beans. Aromatic herbs make good companions as border 
plants. 

Air Circulation.  Plants need fresh  air to replenish  their oxygen for respiration  and carbon dioxide for 
photosynthesis. If there is not sufficient  air movement in the greenhouse, a layer of stale air surrounds each 
leaf and slows growth. Air movement through ventilation is the most effective way to control humidity and 
temperature, and thus to promote the propagation of vigorous, disease-resistant plants. In the summer air 
circulation is improved by having the exterior door and all exterior vents open. On winter days open vents 
to the house.  Always make sure you have sufficient  air circulation  through the greenhouse. 

Pollination.  Your  help  may  be needed  as a pollinator  in the greenhouse—the job  may  not be done 
effectively  by wind  and  insects  alone,  as it is outdoors. There  are two types of  blossoms you  need to 
become familiar with in order to pollinate correctly. The complete flowers, found on peppers, eggplants, 
and tomatoes, are pollinated by gently flicking the base of the blossom cluster with your finger. Melons, 
cucumbers,  and squash  have incomplete flowers; the male and female  parts are on separate flowers  and 
must be cross-pollinated. The female part is easy to identify as it has the immature fruit below the petals; 
yellow pollen is on a center stalk in the male blossom. Gently touch the pollen with a paintbrush or feather 
and transfer it to the female blossom. Pollinate daily and do it during the cooler part of the day; I have found 
early morning the best. Also, look for self-pollinating  varieties in seed catalogs. 

Dogs and Cats 

Pets in the greenhouse  can be a nuisance. Dogs with their bounding energy can trample seeds and 
plants into oblivion. They  also love to dig into and lie down in a moist bed on a hot summer day.  Cats 
consider the greenhouse beds a custom-made litter box. In general, all the problems you are likely to have 
with dogs and cats in an unfenced garden exist in the greenhouse. A gate is usually sufficient  to prevent 
animal damage, but use your ingenuity if further  barriers are needed. 

Insects 

Joan Loitz, owner of The Herb Shop and Solar Greenhouse in Santa Fe, New Mexico has prepared a 

"Commonsense Pest Control for the Home Greenhouse" manual that we are reproducing here: 

THE GREENHOUSE GARDEN 

93 

COMMONSENSE PEST CONTROL 
FOR THE HOME GREENHOUSE 

By Joan Loitz 

Greenhouses are special places—good for you, great for plants, but equally suitable for undesirable 
pests. Have no doubt that in time they will find you. You can build a greenhouse in the middle of the desert 
and one day the slugs will appear. You can have a most tidy greenhouse, but a summer breeze may still 
carry  aphids or whitefly  in to take up residence on your tomatoes. 

What to do? 
•  PREVENTION IS THE BEST CURE. 
• 
•  TAKE ACTION. 
Let's look at these three steps in greater detail. 

IDENTIFY  EXACTLY WHAT THE PROBLEM IS. 

Prevention is the Best Cure 

Keep  it Clean.  Periodically  remove  dead and decaying matter from  plants.  Also,  if you have entire 
plants  that  are  seriously  infected  by  disease  or insects,  get  rid  of  them.  Despite  our  occasional  fond 
attachment  to greenhouse plant  "pets," it's always better to start new plants rather than risk the serious 
problem  of  spreading  a  major  infestation  or  infection  throughout  the  greenhouse.  Clean  matter  (not 
infested  by disease or insects)  can  be placed  in the compost pile.  Infested  matter  should be burned  or 
thrown  out in the trash. Never  allow  infested  matter to propagate by burying or composting  it. Typical 
compost piles do not reach high enough temperatures to completely  destroy disease or insects. 

Weeds  are  trouble.  Weeds  either  in  the  greenhouse  or  within  the  immediate  vicinity  outside  the 
greenhouse provide a handy breeding area-for plant pests and diseases. By removing weeds from outside 
the greenhouse area in particular, you deprive insect pests of a secure home for overwintering their eggs. 
This  reduces their chances of infiltrating  your greenhouse during the winter as well  as the next spring. 

Beware of taking in boarders.  Quite often  greenhouse gardeners like to bring in several plants  from 
their outdoor vegetable or ornamental gardens.  Before  doing so, each plant must be checked  carefully. 
Outdoor plants can carry aphids or whitefly, for example. Bring in only the cleanest and healthiest plants. 
Minor  infestations  can be treated, observed,  and then, only when the plants are clean,  brought  into the 
greenhouse. 

Don't  take  in  a  friend's  plants.  Occasionally  vacationing  friends  or  acquaintances  with  soulful 
expressions and  "sick"  plants will seek the rehabilitative environment of your greenhouse. Thank them 
for their sincere confidence in your abilities as a plant sitter and healer and politely say, " n o ." Remember, 
whatever problems their plants have will compound with interest  in your greenhouse. 

Always buy plants and supplies from  a reputable source; buy from  a supplier who can answer your 
questions both now and, should you run into difficulty,  later. When you purchase new plants, isolate them 
for awhile. Check  for any bugs or other problems that could spread  undetected. 

Bleach it, boil it.  We've discussed how to get rid of undesirable plant material, but what of the pot that 
contained it and the potential harm that it might harbor? With a little bleach or hot water containers can be 
made ready for planting anew with no danger of spreading anything undesirable. 

Plastic pots, trays, cell packs, even wooden seed flats can be soaked in a 10 percent bleach solution (1 

part bleach  to 9 parts water). Soak for one hour,  scrub if necessary, dry, and they're ready to use. 

94 

CHAPTER VII 

Also, twice a year (spring and fall) remove all pots from any wooden benches in the greenhouse, and 
scrub  the wooden  surfaces  to  remove  debris; let  them  dry,  then  apply  straight  bleach  to the  benches, 
making  sure to get  it into all the cracks and crevices. Allow  them to dry  thoroughly  in full  sunlight  for 
several days. Be sure to maintain adequate ventilation during this time and be careful  not to splash bleach 
on  plants  growing  under  the benches.  This process  tends  to discourage  scavengers  such  as sow  bugs, 
millipedes, and slugs that live in dead and decaying matter and the rotting wood bench. 

Clay pots may harbor bacteria,  fungi,  and insect eggs due to their high porosity. Wash off any dirt, 
then soak them in boiling water for 30 minutes. Another trick taught to me by a friend  is to wash dirt off 
pots, then put them in the dishwasher on hot cycle. (This is not advisable for plastic pots which may melt.) 

Keep it moving.  As winter approaches and temperatures drop, doors and vents are closed to prevent heat 
loss. Solar greenhouses in particular are efficiently  designed to reduce this factor as well as inhibit cold-air 
infiltration.  This is all well and good from the solar engineering viewpoint, but an "airtight" greenhouse 
will  drive an experienced horticulturalist straight up the trellis. Why? An airtight greenhouse invariably 
produces an excessively moist environment of stagnant air, in which: 

•  Bugs thrive! Most plant pests and diseases love this kind of environment. 
•  Plants can starve for carbon dioxide. CO2 is food for plants. In a stagnant environment,  plants 
quickly  use the available CO2 and growth will  slow substantially  without  a supply  of fresh  air. 
•  Plants will produce excessively  tender and fleshy growth, and quite often  they become incapable 

of even  supporting their own weight. 

Thus, one of the most effective deterrents of plant diseases and insect pests, and inexpensive promotors of 
plant growth and vigor, is simply FRESH ATR. 

On sunny days, open vents and let in some air. For greenhouses attached to residences, keep doors 
and/or windows open between house and greenhouse to permit full air exchange. On overcast days, open a 
vent just slightly or for a short time. You might lose a little heat but you will make up for it in healthy plants. 
Commercial  greenhouses have large automated fans for circulating  air.  Home greenhouses can  be 
ventilated with small room fans. One small greenhouse I had years ago was adequately ventilated with a 
small cooling fan from  a computer 1 purchased at a local surplus store for $3. Use your imagination, but 
remember to keep it moving. 

Watering.  Excessive moisture in a greenhouse can cause a lot of trouble. The combination of warm days 
and cool nights particularly during the fall and spring can encourage many plant pests and diseases. Water 
well early in the morning on sunny days. Plants will need the water as they will dry out more rapidly and the 
sun and fresh  air will insure the leaves are dry by sunset, thereby reducing humidity during the cool nights. 
Skip watering  if at all possible on cold, cloudy days. 

Keep them healthy.  Healthy plants will stave off disease and pests far more successfully than plants that 
have  been  stressed  by conditions  inadequate  for  proper growth.  This  is true  for  any  living  organism. 
Provide the proper cultural conditions for your crops and you will be rewarded with increased yield and 
fewer problems. 

Keep your eyes open.  Make a habit of checking your greenhouse regularly for insect pests and diseases. 
A weekly  15-minute safari through your greenhouse with magnifying lens will help keep you on top of any 
potential problems. 

Is it a bug? Or is it a disease or a culture problem? If it is a bug, make sure you can 
Identify the problem. 
identify  it  specifically  (see  chart  on  p.  99).  If  you  cannot  identify  it,  take  it  to  a  local  nursery  for 
identification  or check with your local county agricultural extension agent. 

THE GREENHOUSE GARDEN 

95 

Recently  a  friend  arrived  at  my 
greenhouse  carrying  a jar  of  bugs.  He was 
upset,  as  they  were  occurring  in  epidemic 
proportions 
in  his  greenhouse,  and  he 
wanted to know what he could do to get rid of 
them.  Well, they turned out to be Junebugs 
that were attracted to the sap coming out of 
the new wood  on their recently constructed 
greenhouse.  Within  a  short  time,  the  bugs 
left  of  their  own  accord,  without  ever 
touching 
insects  you 
encounter in your greenhouse will not be so 
harmless,  but  it  serves  to  point  out  that 
specific  identification  can save you a lot of 
trouble.  Certain  treatments  will  be  more 
effective  on one type of insect than another. 
Moreover, biological controls (which will be 
discussed 
specific 
knowledge  of pests and  the insects  used to 
control  them.  So,  it  is  very  important  to 
know exactly what you are dealing with  right 
from  the start. 

the  plants.  All 

later) 

imply  very 

Figure  98 

Take Action Immediately 

When you spot undesirables, what are your choices? 

A.  The  first  option  is  topical treatment—sprays and  dusts.  It  is  important  to  note  the  relative 
effectiveness  of sprays versus dusts. Most greenhouse pests such as whitefly, aphids, mealy bug, 
scale mites, and others are sucking insects and are most effectively  treated topically by wettable 
sprays,  sprays  that  can  be  mixed  with  water  and  applied  as  a  mist.  Larger  insects  more 
common  to the outdoor garden and occasionally to the greenhouse such as squash bugs, beetles 
and others are classified  as chewing insects and are more effectively  controlled  topically  with 
dusts. 

(1)  Inorganic.  These are earthen materials such as lead or sulphur. 
(2)  Botanicals.  These are naturally  occurring pesticides made from  plants or plant extractions. 
Pyrethrin  and  Rotenone  are two good examples. They do the job but biodegrade rapidly and 
have little residual effect;  they are  very suitable  for use on edible plants. 
Note:  Nicotine is also considered  a botanical  but is not  recommended  for home greenhouse 
use due to its extreme toxicity. Commercially  it is available as nicotine sulphate and is 
very  potent.  Home preparations  of  nicotine  made  from  tobacco  leaves  are  less  toxic 
but  run  the risk of  spreading  tobacco mosaic  virus particularly  toxic  to tomato plants. 
For  this  reason,  also,  do not  allow  smokers  to light  up in your  greenhouse  or  touch 
tomatoes. 

(3)  Microbial.  Bacillus  thuringiensis  is  the  most  widely  used  and  successful  microbial 
preparation,  commercially  marketed  under various names,  such  as Dipel, Thuricide,  and 
Biotrol.  It  is  a  bacterial  that  is  very  effective  against  members  of  the  caterpillar  family 
but is harmless to humans and animals. 

96 

CHAPTER VII 

(4)  Home remedies.  Many gardeners have devised special "home brews" featuring everything 
from  garlic juice to hot pepper sauce to combat insect pests. The most effective  concoction 
I've  ever  used  is simply  soap  and water.  Mix  up  a mild  solution  of  soap  (not  detergent) 
and  spray  on  plants  until  all  surfaces  are  covered.  This  is  very  useful  against  small  in(cid:173)
festations  of aphids. 

(5)  Synthetics.  These  are  chemical  preparations  generally  classified  as  chlorinated 
hydrocarbons  (such  as chlordane, DDT) or organo-phosphates  (such  as malathion,  TEPP 
and diazinon).  These  usually produce quick  results  but do not degrade  rapidly  and have a 
high residual value. Most of these chemicals are extremely toxic and are not recommended 
for  home  greenhouse  use,  particularly  those  greenhouses  that  are  attached  to residences. 
Systemic insecticides are chemicals that are mixed with water and then fed to the plant. The 
poison  then  permeates the entire  plant.  When  pests take a bite of  the plant,  they  are thus 
poisoned  and die. This is used most often  on ornamental  plants outdoors; it is exceedingly 
dangerous to use this in home greenhouses where any edible plants are being grown. 

To apply sprays or dusts, use hand sprayers (like an old window cleaner bottle) for small jobs. One- to 
two-gallon pressure-pump sprayers are better for larger jobs. Dunking is also very good for pests that are 
good  at hiding, such as scale and mealy bug. 

Figure  99 

Caution: Remember,  all pesticides, botanicals as well as synthetics, ait poisons'. 
•  Use only the recommended dosage or less. 
•  Store in a cool, dark place away from  children. 
•  Always  wear  protective  clothing,  gloves,  and  a  professional  mask  or  agricultural  respirator  when 
spraying.  (Respirators  are  available  from  feed  stores,  local  agricultural  suppliers,  and  mail  order 
houses.) A paint mask or simple bandana across the face  is not  sufficient. 

•  For  treating  greenhouses  attached  to  residences,  be  sure  the greenhouse  can  be  completely  sealed 

off  from  the house. Any leaks could allow harmful  fumes to seep into the home. 

•  Keep everyone (including pets) out of the greenhouse during spraying and for a safe period  thereafter. 
It  is  always  best  to  spray  late  in  the  day  or  right  before  sunset  when  the  greenhouse  can  then  be 
closed completely and allowed to ' 'cook" overnight. Ventilate thoroughly with fresh air in the morning 
before  entering. 

B.  Mechanical  methods of pest control: 

(1)  Whitefly  love the color yellow. By hanging common yellow flypaper next to tomato plants 

(a whitefly  favorite),  then shaking the plant, you can trap quite a few. 

(2)  Cold  fumigation.  Most plant pests cannot  survive a week without  food.  Thus, if you pick 
an appropriate time when there might be a lag in yourplanting schedule during the winter, just 
open the doors and let the greenhouse freeze-out  for a week. 

THE GREENHOUSE GARDEN 

97 

(3)  The thumb and forefinger  squash.  (Use gloves if you're squeamish!) 
(4)  Vacuum cleaner inhalation. (Good on whitefly!) 

C.  The best solution for home greenhouse pest problems is biological control—employing bugs that 

like to eat other bugs instead of your plants for lunch! 

Biological  control  attempts  to  preserve,  introduce,  or  otherwise  manipulate  beneficial 
insects in order to control harmful insects whose numbers have gone out of control and are causing 
marked  economic  or  aesthetic  damage.  There  are  various  types  of  beneficial  insects.  These 
include  broad-spectrum  predators and parasites: ladybugs, praying  mantises, green lacewings, 
Trichogramma wasps. 

Most  outdoor  gardeners  will  be  familiar  with  the  valuable  roles  these  insects  play  in 
controlling  plant pests. But they  only have limited success in a greenhouse situation. They are 
called broad spectrum  because they like a little of this and a little of that. Also, they are highly 
mobile.  They  can  be successfully  used  in  larger greenhouses  where  a variety  of  insect  life  is 
available, but will tend to wander out of smaller greenhouses quite rapidly in search of more food. 

Host-specific  predators  and  parasites  (see  chart).  There  are very  specific  predators  and 
parasites for spider mite, whitefly,  scale, mealy bugs, and flies. In general, they are quite small 
and prefer  only  one or two types of  insect pests to eat.  They  are not  as mobile  and thus very 
effective  in greenhouse situations. 

Maintenance  of predators and parasites.  Let's take a simple example to demonstrate how 
this process can  work.  You start off  with  a high  number of insect pests (called the host), then 
introduce  a small  number  of predators.  The predators will  begin  eating  the host and will then 
reproduce rapidly due to this plentiful food supply. In short order, you will have a large number of 
hungry  predators with  few  host left  to eat.  At this point, depending on the species involved, a 
number of the predators will die or go dormant due to the lack of food if they are left on their own. 
The host will rise slightly  in number and hopefully,  with good management,  a population  will 
evolve containing a small number of host and predators. Should the host population rise again out 
of proportion,  a few predators could be periodically  introduced. 

Another  option  includes  maintaining  a  'sacrifice'  plant  on  which  an  infestation  of  a 
particular  pest  is  allowed  to continue  separate  from  the main greenhouse.  Periodically  a few 
leaves are removed from the infested plant and placed as food in areas where predators are active 
but the host population is reduced. 

The key  to success in pest control  by biological means is accurate, periodic  observation, 
identification,  and  manipulation  (when  necessary)  of  respective populations  of  beneficial  and 
harmful  insects. For the home greenhouse gardener, this need not be elaborate nor complicated. 
Armed  with  an  inexpensive  10-power  lens  and  a little  notebook,  a weekly  inspection  of  the 
greenhouse provides sufficient  information  to determine the status of the insect population. 

In  general,  biological  control  should  not  be  considered  an  instant  cure  but  rather  an 

investment that can provide effective  pest control over a longer time period. 

Biological control is an attitude as much as it is a technique. Many greenhouse gardeners, 
especially  new  ones, will prefer  the convenience  and fast results of  commercial botanical  and 
synthetic  products  for  pest  control.  But  there  is  an  emerging  segment  of  gardeners  who  are 
seeking alternatives that will yield effective  results with less or no danger to their own health or 
personal environment. These alternatives are in keeping with a sense of stewardship and respon(cid:173)
sibility  to the larger environment as well. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  the  use of predators  and parasites  for  pest control  was very 

CHAPTER  VII 

widespread in the  1920s and  1930s in England and Canada. With World War II came DDT and 
many  other  petrochemicals;  activity  in  the  area of  biological  control  was  largely  abandoned. 
We know more now. The facts are more than sufficient  to indicate that the widespread uses 
and abuses of highly toxic, residual pesticides have been carried out at peril to our own lives and 
environment. Moreover, many insect species and mites have proven most successful  in produc(cid:173)
ing mutants resistant to chemical treatment. Another phenomenon common to pesticide abuse is 
' 'secondary emergence.'' You may have noticed that after treating plants for a bug problem with 
highly  toxic residual pesticides everything seems fine until, all of a sudden, the same problem 
returns  only  worse.  In treating  the plants  to rid them  of  unwanted  pests you have  also killed 
beneficial  predatory  or parasitic insects who were trying to do the work for you. Thus the basic 
problem  has only  been increased. 

Biological  control  offers  viable  alternatives  to these  problems  and presents  a method of 
gardening  with nature.  The attempt  is toward participation,  not annihilation.  You have to pay 
close  attention  to  the  greenhouse  environment  and  do  some  homework,  but  the  rewards  of 
maintaining  biological  control  are  well  worth  working  toward—and  besides,  the  process  is 
fascinating! 

SOURCES OF SUPPLY 

Biological Control: 
Biotactics, Inc. (predators for spider mite) 
22412 Pico Street 
Colton, CA 92324 

Rincon-Vitova Insectaries, Inc. (Lacewings_, Ladybugs, Trichogramma, Fly parasites, 
P O  Box 95 
Oak View, CA 93022 

predators for spider mite, mealy bug,  whitefly) 

Bio-Control  Co. (Trichogramma,  Ladybugs, Praying mantis) 
10180 Ladybird  Drive 
Auburn,  CA 95603 

SOME GOOD REFERENCES: 

The Gardeners's Bug Book (4th edition) 
by Cynthia Westcott, Doubleday  & Co., Inc., N.Y. 

Organic Plant Protection 
Edited by Roger B. Yepsen, Jr. 
Rodale Press, Inc., Emmaus,  Pennsylvania 

Windowsill Ecology 
by William  H. Jordan, Jr. 
Rodale Press, Inc., Emmaus, Pennsylvania 

* * * * * * * * * * ** 

Common Pests: Description and  Treatment 

PEST 

DESCRIPTION  OF  PEST 

WHITE  F LY 

1/8"  L O N G.  S M A LL  W H I T E:  W I N G E D. 
Q U I TE  O F T EN  PRESENT  IN  L A R GE 
N U M B E RS  ON  T HE  U N D E R S I DE  OF 
L E A V E S.  W H EN  T HE  P L A NT  IS  DIS(cid:173)
T U R B ED  T H EV  F LY  O FF  IN  A  C L O U D. 

l / I G"  L O N G.  S M A L L,  SOFT  B O O I E O, 
PEAR  SHAPED  S U C K I NG  INSECTS.  C AN 
BE  B L A C K.  G R E E N,  Y E L L O W.  BROWN 
OR  G R E Y I SH  IN  COLOR 

DESCRIPTION  OF  PLANT 

DAMAGE 

TOPICAL 

TREATMENTS 

WHITE  F LY  SUCK  P L A NT  JUICES 
A ND  CAUSE  L E A V ES  TO  Y E L L OW 
A ND  DROP  O FF 

P Y R E T H R IN 
R O T E N O NE 
R E P E AT  W E E K LY 
U N T IL  C L E AR 

NATURAL 
PREDATOR 
OR  PARASITE 

[PAHA-

E N C A R S IA 
FORMOSA 
S I T E| 
E F F E C T I VE 
IN 
GREENHOUSES 

REMARKS 

W H I TE  FLY  W I LL  REPRODUCE 
MORE  R A P I D LY  WHEN  N I G H T(cid:173)
T I ME  T E M P E R A T U R ES  A RE 
LOW.  WATCH  OUT  FO I*  A N T S. 

T H EY  C O N G R E G A TE  ON  T HE  Y O U NG 
SUCCULENT  G R O W I NG  TIPS  A ND 
FLOWER  BUDS  C A U S I NG  S T U N T I N G, 
C U R L I NG  A ND  P U C K E R I NG  OF 
L E A V ES 

N I C O T I NE 
P Y R E T H R IN 
R O T E N O NE 

G R E EN  L A C E W I N GS 
(CHRYSOPA 
C A R N E A) 

FOR  A  S M A LL  I N F E S T A T I O N,  RE(cid:173)
M O VE  A ND  WASH  W I TH  M I LD 
SOAP  S O L U T I O N.  WATCH  OUT 
FOR  ANTS. 

M E A LY  BUG 

1/4"  -  1/2"  L O N G,  C O V E R ED  W I TH 
W H I TE  F U ZZ  W H I CH  M A K ES  T H EM 
L O OK  L I KE  PIECES  OF  C O T T O N.  THEY 
H A VE  T A I LS  A ND  M A NY  LEGS. 

W I LL  CAUSE  NEW  L E A V ES  A ND 
F L O W E RS  TO  D E V E L OP  P O O R L Y. 
F O U NO  ON  U N D E R S I D ES  OF  LEAF*. 
AT  L E AF  A X I LS  &  A L O NG  V E I N S. 

1/»".  WINGLESS.  LEGLESS,  W I TH  A 
W A X Y,  S C A L E - L I KE  C O V E R I N G.  T HE 
L A R G ER  ONES  ARE  GREY  OR  BROWN 
M O T T L ED  W I TH  B L A C K. 

T H EY  M O VE  V E RY  L I T T LE  SO  O F T EN 
GO  U N D E T E C T E D.  F O U ND  M O S T LY 
ON  F E R N S,  C A C T I, C I T R US  A ND  SUC(cid:173)
C U L E N TS  ON  STEMS  A ND  U N D E R(cid:173)
SIDE  OF  L E A V E S.  W I LL  S T U NT 
P L A NT  G R O W TH 

P Y R E T H R IN 
R O T E N O NE 

P Y R E T H R IN 
R O T E N O NE 
N I C O T I NE 

C R Y P T O L A E M US 

A P H Y T IS  MEL1NUS 

REPEAT  TOPICAL  T R E A T M E N TS 
E V E RY  WEEK  U N T IL  C L E A R. 
ISOLATE  P L A N T.  WATCH  O UT  FOR 
ANTS 

I S O L A TE  P L A N T.  FOR  M I N OR 
I N F E S T A T I O NS  WASH  O FF  W I TH 
T O O T H B R U SH  WITH  M I LD  SOAP 
S O L U T I O N. 

YES,  A N TS  A RE  A  PROBLEM  IN  G R E E N H O U S E S,  P R I M A R I LY  BECAUSE  THEY  " H E R D"  A P H I D S.  M E A LY  BUGS  A ND  S C A LE  BY  M I L K I NG  T H EM  FOR  THE  SWEET 
H O N E Y O E W T H EY  SECRETE.  IF  A NY  OF  T HE  A B O VE  A RE  PRESENT,  CHECK  ALSO  FOR  A N TS  (ESPECIALLY  IN  SUMMER  A ND  F A L L ).  IF  YOU  CAN  C O N T R OL  T HE 
A N T S.  C H A N C ES  A RE  T HE  O T H E RS  W O N 'T  BE  AS  M U CH  OF  A  P R O B L E M. 

SPIDER  MITE 

1/50".  V E RY  S M A L L.  BODY  IS  O V A L, 
Y E L L O W I SH  COLOR  WITH  2  D A RK 
SPOTS  ON  BACK  ( A D U L T S) 

M l T ES  M A KE  COBWEBS  ON  U N D E R- 
SIDES  OF  L E A V ES  A ND  F R OM  ONE 
L E AF  TO  A N O T H E R.  O F T EN  COVER(cid:173)
ING  A  NEW  SHOOT.  CAUSE  Y E L L OW 
PIN  SPOTS  ON  L E AF 

P Y R E T H R IN 
R O T E N O NE 

A M B L Y S E I US 
C A L I F O R N I C US 
V E RY  E F F E C T I VE 

I S O L A T E.  CAN  BE  VERY  SERIOUS 
PEST.  ALSO  T H EY  H A VE  A  HIGH 
RESISTANCE  TO  C H E M I C AL 
SPRAYS.  MOST  A C T I VE  IN  W A RM 
T E M P E R A T U R E S. 

1/4"  -  1"  A ND  C AN  BE  M U CH  L A R G E R. 
S M A LL  SLUGS  A RE  D A RK  GREY  OR 
B L A C K.  L A R G ER  ONES  A RE  G R EY  OR 
BROWN  M O T T L ED  W I TH  B L A C K. 

T H EY  H I DE  IN  D A R K,  D A MP  PLACES 
D U R I NG  T HE  D AY  A ND  COME  O UT 
TO  FEED  AT  N I G HT  CHEWING  L A R GE 
HOLES  IN  L E A V E S. 

t* 

C H E C K E D.  BE  C A R E F UL  W I TH  SLUG  BAITS--THEY  C AN 

SLUG  B A I T S.  POWDER  SLUGS  C AN  BE  A  S E R I O US  P R O B L EM  IF  L E FT  U N-
OR  PELLETS.  T H EY 
H A TE  TO  C R A WL  OVER  BE  H A R M F UL  TO  C H I L D R EN  OR  PETS.  |T  IS  BEST  TO 
A N Y T H I NG  SHARP  SO  PUT  B A I TS  U N D ER  PIECES  OF  B O A R D S.  T IN  CANS  OR 
A  C I R C LE  OF  CINDERS.  D O S.  S M A LL  C O N T A I N E RS  OF  BEER  OR  GR APE  JUICE 
L I ME  OR  S A ND  A R O U ND  W I LL  ALSO  A T T R A CT  S L U G S - E F F E C TI VE  T H O U GH 
A  P L A NT  HELPS 

FOR  TWO  TO  T H R EE  DAYS  O N L Y. 

1/1 0 ".  V E RY  S M A L L.  L O OK  L I KE 
S M A LL  B L A CK  F L I E S. 

S C A V E N G E R S.  F E ED  ON  D E AD  A ND 
D E C A Y I NG  M A T T ER  AT  S O IL  L E V E L. 
FLY  UP  WHEN  D I S T U R B E D. 

P Y R E T H R IN 
R O T E N O NE 

N OT  A  S E R I O US  P R O B L EM  A L T H O U GH  L A R V AE  W I LL 
FEED  ON  S M A LL  P L A NT  ROOTS.  IF  YOU  USE  FISH  E M U L(cid:173)
SION  F E R T I L I Z ER  THEY  W I LL  BE  MORE  P R E V A L E N T. 

SOWBUGS 
OR  PILLBUGS  U S U A L LY  G R E Y I S H.  WHEN  OlS-

1/4".  H A RD  O V AL  SHAPED  B O D I E S, 

T U R B E D.  THEY  R O LL  UP  INTO  A 
B A L L.  HENCE  T HE  N A ME  " R O L Y-
P O L Y ." 

S C A V E N G E R S,  FEED  ON  D E AD  AND 
D E C A Y I NG  M A T T E R.  CAN  H A RM 
Y O U NG  ROOTS  OR  T E N D ER  SEED(cid:173)
L I N G S. 

SLUG  B A IT 

SAME  AS  A B O V E.  GOOD  S A N I T A T I ON  A ND  V E N T I L A(cid:173)
T I ON  H E L P. 

People and Plants 

When  children  are old enough  to contribute their 
love  and  labor  to the greenhouse,  we  urge you  to let 
them. The only skill required for planting, watering and 
harvesting is judgement—and perhaps intuition. 

Most  children  love  to  work  with  plants  and  the 
plants  seem  to benefit  from  the care  of  children.  The 
results  are  fairly  immediate  and  highly  visible,  yet 
mysterious. How does a seed turn into a plant? It does 
and  it  grows  quickly.  Children  have  a  single-minded 
kind of energy that can be channeled into extraordinary 
care  for 
the  plants.  It's  a  mutually  supportive 
relationship. 

The satisfaction  of greenhouse gardening extends 
to people of all ages. Most of the work is not strenuous 
and its rewards are great enough to encourage everyone 
to  give  it  a  try.  The  natural  pace  of  this  work  is 
unhurried; the environment  is relaxing  and absorbing. 
You  can  enter  the  world  at  a  different  level  in  the 
greenhouse,  be transported  and totally  involved  at the 
same time. 

C H A P T ER  VIII  

THE STATE OF THE ART 

In this chapter we'll give you an idea of what's being done in the field of solar greenhouse design. As 
you will see, there is no one solution to combining greenhouse features. These structures, which are only a 
representative selection of the kind of work that's going on, offer an amazing variety of approaches. Most 
of the people  featured  in this section make  their living doing solar design  and related  work.  Many sell 
detailed  plans  and  offer  consultant  services  (for  professional  fees)  and  welcome your  inquiry.  When 
writing to them, always enclose a self-addressed  stamped envelope. 

In this edition  we have divided die chapter  into sections on the following  topics: 

•  Attached  solar greenhouses  (retrofits) 
•  Solar greenhomes. 
•  Independent  (freestanding)  solar greenhouses. 
•  Manufacturers. 

In some cases they overlap. 

Attached Solar Greenhouses 

The attached  solar greenhouses featured  here include a number of styles and approaches that  differ 
from the economical shed roof design seen in earlier chapters. The designs are adapted to specific climatic 
and site conditions around the country,  to cost, and to individual architectural directions. 

Figure  101 

-

102 

CHAPTER VIII 

Jim  Burke/Mark  Ward 

If  you  are  considering  building  a 
greenhouse,  you  should  be  aware  of  the 
availability  of  used  greenhouse  material. 
Over the past four years, Jim and Mark have 
been  dismantling  large commercial  cypress 
and  glass  greenhouses  and  recycling  the 
material  into smaller, more efficient  ones. 
This material is very durable and attrac(cid:173)

tive.  Cypress  is  a  wood  ideally  suited  for 
greenhouse  construction,  as  it  will  last 
practically  forever  under  humid  growing 
conditions, and glass, in addition to having a 
long lifespan,  is attractively  clear. 

The  used  material  also  allows  great 
flexibility  in  shape  and  is  ideal  for  custom 
designs as well as conventional styles. Most 
important,  it is available at a fraction  of the 
cost of  new  material  and uses no additional 
energy  for  its  creation.  Those  designing 
solar greenhouses  might find that the lower 
cost  and  longer  lifespan  of  these  materials 
outweigh  the  advantages  of  more  exotic 
materials. 

Mark  Ward  added-on  this  (recycled) 
solar greenhouse designed by Tony Mastro-
buono (Fig.  101). Used primarily to supply 
supplemental heating to the main house, the 
system relies on a 70 ton rock bed forthermal 
storage. 

The  multifunctional  greenhouse  pic(cid:173)
tured  above (Fig.  102) points out the poten(cid:173)
tial  for  rooftop  greenhouse  sites  for  urban 
and  suburban  buildings.  Designed  by  the 
owner,  Robert  Patterson,  it  was  built  by 
Mark  and Jim  for  a materials cost of $600. 
The 276-square-foot  structure encloses three 
sections: greenhouse, sitting room, and din(cid:173)
ing area. 

Recycled  materials  from  a  traditional 

greenhouse  were  effectively  used  to  con(cid:173)
struct  the  energy-efficient  attached  solar 
greenhouse  seen  in  Fig.  103.  Notice  the 
sturdy old  hardware and top venting system 
(pipe gears activated by chain/wheel pulley) 
and the steel pipe assemblies used to support 
the roof. The insulating blanket, shown in its 
"up'  position,  is  supported  by  2  x  4-inch 
tracks. 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

1 03 

Jim Burke  Vermont  Recycled Greenhouses 
Franklin Rd. 
Vernon,  Vermont  05354 

Mark Ward 
396 Cambridge Turnpike 
Concord, Massachusetts  01742 

Doug  and  Sara  Balcomb 
Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico 

This  unusual  and  attractive 
solar  greenhouse  addition  was 
designed and built by the Balcombs 
in  1976 for their Los Alamos, New 
Mexico, home (Fig.  104). The 400 
square-foot  unit features  a sawtooth 
geometry  with clerestory  windows. 
Roof  angles  were  calculated  using 
winter sun altitudes so that the  front 
section  does not shade the windows 
under  the  rear  (north)  roof  plane. 
The entire  roof  is supported  by 4 x 
12-inch hollow box beams spanning 
a 20-foot length. A 6-inch drop from 
west to east allows for drainage. The 
vertical eastern wall is "stepped"  back to echo the sawtooth roof design; only its south-facing planes are 
glazed  for  collection.  The addition  gives the soaring feeling  of  a Gothic cathedral with the surprise of 
living pine trees (already on the site) growing up through the roof. 

• • • • ^ • • • • i ^B 

Figure  104 

Thermal  storage is both passive and active. The passive storage is by direct gain to earth and  floor 
mass within the planting area. The unit also has an active hot air system. Heated air (95°-100° on a clear 
winter day) is tapped at the highest point in the greenhouse and blown down a  12-inch duct into a rock-
filled  box  below  (Fig.  105).  Nighttime  heating  is  supplied  by  the  charged-up  stones.  This  system  is 
interesting because it can be added after your greenhouse is constructed. Doug told me, "1 could have put 
the storage in the floor, I suppose, but this way we could use it as a planter box and grow things on top of 
it."  This method appeals to me because it eliminates costly or exhausting excavation  work.  Plants love 
bottom heat and the top of the box should be one of the healthiest areas in the greenhouse. Also, should any 
problems develop in the storage fans, they are above grade, easy to get to and work on. 

Dr. Balcomb estimates the finished greenhouse cost about $3000, and "more hours of my labor than 

I care to calculate.'' But look at the care and concern 
that  went  into  the  design.  What  a  space!  The 
Balcombs  now  live  in  a  solar  greenhome  (Unit  I, 
First Village, p.  119). 
Builder, Designer: Doug and Sara Balcomb 
Cost: Approx  $3,000 (1976) 
Size: 400 sq.  ft. 
Clear Area: Thermopane  units 
Vents: 19sq. ft. lowerbottomofsouthwall;27sq.  ft. 
upper  in  second  sawtooth.  Natural  convection  or 
reverse  fan. 
Heat  to  home:  Natural  convection  through  slidi-.g 
patio  door. 
Storage: Above-grade box, approximately 4' wide x 
3'  deep  x  20'  long,  240  cu.  ft.  rock-filled,  1" 
insulation. 

Figure  105 

104 

CHAPTER VIII 

Ced  and  Betty  Currin 
Midland,  Michigan 

Ced  Currin  is an  energy  tech(cid:173)
nologist  for  Dow-Coming  and  an 
avid 
supporter  of 
solar 
greenhouse  concept. 

the 

The  Currin  solar  greenhouse 
was designed and built for operation 
in central Michigan  winters (known 
for  long  periods  without  direct sun 
in  late  autumn  and  early  winter), 
and  to complement  the architecture 
of  the house to which  it is attached 
(Fig.  106).  This  greenhouse  was 
constructed  in  1977  and  1978  in 
Midland,  Michigan  at  43.7°  north 
latitude. The solar design was by the 
owner,  Ced  Currin,  and  the  archi(cid:173)
tectural  design  by  Francis  E. 
Warner, architect of the house. The 
greenhouse  is attached  to the west wall of the house off  a door from  the study. 

Figure  106 

Following  are characteristics and features of this greenhouse: 
Size:  12'x  24" 288 sq.  ft. 
Construction: Frame, 2x6 studs, redwood siding, Douglas fir roof beams on 48 inch centers, 3 rows 
of vertical roof apertures oriented east-west, drywall interior on north wall, painted white; roof overhang, 
24 inches; foundation  depth, 48 inches. 

Glazing: ASG Lo-Irontm glass, 2 panes, vertical; south wall glazed area,  138 sq. ft.; roof apertures (3 
rows), 87 sq. ft.; total south facing glazing, 225 sq. ft.; west wall glazing, 40 sq. ft.; total glazed area, 265 
sq.  ft. 

The glazing is designed with sloping reflective  aluminum  roof and roof overhang to admit less than 
10% of direct sun at solarnoon on summersolstice, and between 90 and 95% between each equinox and the 
winter solstice. The west wall glazing is manually covered with foam insulation during the winter season, 
and  uncovered  during other seasons to increase the length of the photoperiod. 
Thermal Storage: Nine vertical 55 gallon drums are placed along the north wall and eight horizontal drums 
are  placed  behind  the south wall  glazing.  All drums are painted  brown and together they contain  7500 
pounds  (3400 kg) of water. 

In addition,  530 cubic feet of water-saturated sand sealed in polyethylene film is used for long term 
thermal  storage. Water heated in the north wall drums is pumped through  100 feet of plastic pipe  in the 
sand to transfer heat into and out of this storage. Heat is also conducted from the sand storage to the wood 
floor  to maintain  a warm  floor.  The  water is pumped using a  100-watt concentrating type  solar-electric 
generator only between September and March when direct sun is shining. 
Thermal  storage capacity: 

Drums 
Wet sand 
Total 

7500 BTU/°F 
16000 BTU/°F 
23500 BTU/°F 
For a temperature  range of 45 to 80°F (7-27°C): 

Drums 
Wet sand 
Total storage 

0.26  million BTU 
0.56  million BTU 
0.82 million BTU 

4.0 kWh/°C 
8.4kWh/°C 
12.4kWh/°C 

80 kWh 
170 kWh 
250 kWh 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

105 

Vents 

Low  vent area, west wall 
Area of 3 high vents between  roof beams on 
north wall 

6.4 sq. ft.  (0.60 sq. m) 

8.2  sq. ft.  (0.75 sq. m) 

Insulation 

North wall and opaque portion of west wall 

Roof 
Foundation exterior 
Wet sand  storage 

Construction Costs (Approximate,  1978) 

Foundation, wet sand storage, pump 
Glazing,  installed 
Framing,  walls, roof beams, drums 
Roof, excluding glazing 

Contracted  labor 
Materials 
Total 

$6000 
3500 
9500 

Total 

$20.80/sq.  ft. 
12.20/sq.  ft. 
33.00/sq.  ft. 

R-25 (6 inch fiberglass and  1  inch  Styrofoamtm 
brand  foam) 
R-14 (2 inch Styrofoam  insulation) 
R-5 (1 inch Styrofoam  insulation) 
R-11 (2 inch Styrofoam  insulation) 

$  1600 
1100 
3700 
3100 
$  9500 

$225/sq. m 
130/sq. m 
355/sq. m 

About 90 percent of die labor was contracted. The oak floor  rounds are not included above as they 

were cut from  the owner's trees. 
Paul and  Judy  Vance 

Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico 

In planning die orientation of their solar greenhouse addition, me Vances ran into a problem common 
to the suburban builder. Their property line was a mere five feet from uie home's south side. The solution 
was to build me unit off of die west wall of die home (Fig.  107). 

The  180-square-foot  front  face 
is  constructed  with  coverings  of 
fiberglass  outside / polyediylene in(cid:173)
side. Paul designed the clear area in 
the  top  of  die  east  side  to  collect 
winter  sunlight  as  die  sun  rises 
above  die  roof  ridge.  This  clear 
section  also  serves  as  a  high  vent, 
operated  manually  with  a  simple 
pulley  arrangement. 

When  Paul  was  in my class, I 
suggested that he also make die west 
wall  entirely  clear  for  maximum 
collection.  The  design  has  worked 
well; summer afternoon overheating 
is  avoided  by  providing  excellent 
cross  ventilation 
exhaust 
through  die  high  eastern  vent.  The 
unit  maintains  temperatures  in  die 
low  40's  during  sub-zero  weather 
and supplies the home widi warm air 
through  sliding  glass  doors  in  die 
shared wall. 

and 

Figure  107 

106 

CHAPTER VIII 

Six 55-gallon water drums and 
an  insulated  concrete/block  north 
wall (7 feet high by 18 long) provide 
thermal  storage  for  the  all-passive 
unit. 

The  Vances  and  their  green(cid:173)

in 

featured 

the 
house  were 
educational  film  Build  Your  Own 
Greenhouse—Solar  Style  (see  p. 
201).  In  the  film  Judy  says,  "I'd 
like to build a greenhouse and live in 
it  year 
them." 
Apparently  she meant it, as she and 
Paul  have  sold  this  house  to  move 
into a solar greenhome. 

'round. 

I  love 

Figure  108 

Jo Ann and John  Hayes 

Marlboro,  Vermont 

Here is another attached unit intentionally designed (at the same time as the home) to adjoin the west 
wall of the home (Fig.  108). The Hayes' greenhouse utilizes south-facing glass only. The western wall is 
solid/insulated,  as mat exposure is shaded in the winter. All interior surfaces are paneled with aluminized 
sheathing material for light reflection to the plants. Air exchange with the home is through a standard-sized 
door and  is totally  passive.  Because the greenhouse is built above the ground on stilts, interior  massive 
storage (and weight) is reduced. Planting is done in raised beds and on tabletops. 

Fran  Wessling 

Albuquerque, New Mexico 

Dr. Francis Wessling was one of the few mechanical engineers in the early  1970s who could see the 
advantages  and  the potential  of  passive  solar applications.  Fran, wishing to establish  a more  analytical 
base  to  passive  design,  built  and  monitored  four  different  systems  added  to  a  frame  stucco  home  in 

Figure  109 

•HHKHUH 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

107 

Albuquerque, New Mexico. Three of the  systems (the ones in the fore(cid:173)
ground of  Fig.  109) are greenhouses which  contain different  features. 
The last unit has a vertical wall with a perforated, decorative cinder block 
trombe  wall  directly  behind  it.  (Block  like  this  is  available  through 
masonry  materials  companies  and  landscape  supply  firms.)  Light 
passing through this geometric wall has a lovely Arabesque quality and 
forms  pretty  patterns at various times of day.  A perforated  wall of this 
nature has a much greater surface area for light absorption than a  regular 
massive wall. 

The  greenhouses  all  are  identical  externally  and  quite  different 
internally. One is a typical  add-on  structure quite similar to the model 
recommended  in  the  construction  chapter.  Another  has  an  active 
component and uses a fan to charge a rock bed below it. In the third, Dr. 
Wessling applied an iron oxide mortar to the existing stucco wall of the 
home.  Iron  oxide  mortar  (about  6"  thick)  has a thermal  conductivity 
more  than  twice  that  of  concrete,  thus diffusing  thermal  energy  more 
rapidly. In the photo, notice the simple, adjustable shading system using 
bamboo mats with conventional rope and pulley controls. 

Fran  Wessling's 

technical  results  are  widely  published 

in 
proceedings of Solar Energy Society conferences and ASHRAE publica(cid:173)
tions. Some of his findings have led directly to practical greenhouse rules 
of thumb such as the ventilation formula found in Appendix H. 

Lynn  Nelson 

San Francisco,  California 

RCCK 

STORAGE 

ilREA 

Lynn  Nelson  has  been  a  leading  solar  practitioner  in  the  San 
Francisco  Bay  area  for  several  years.  Her  organization.  The  Habitat 
Center,  is well known  for "hands-on"  workshops and innovative design. As Lynn has had to deal with 
some of the  strictest building codes and ordinances found anywhere in the U. S., she has become expert at 
adapting  solar  structures  to existing  regulations.  Her expertise extends to complete  home  designs  and 
adobe construction (she is currently building an adobe solar greenhouse in the bay area!). 

The following  retrofit was built during one of Habitat Center's "hands-on" workshops (Fig.  111). 
Lynn  describes specific  problems and solutions below; they will have wide application  throughout the 
country. 

Habitat Center Solar Greenhouse Retrofit: the Daar residence 
Design: Lynn Nelson (the Habitat Center) 
Construction: Habitat Center  "hands-on"  workshop 

In most urban areas, city planning departments establish minimum yard areas. For many city homes 
on  small  lots,  that  means  that  there's  no  place  to build  an  attached  solar  greenhouse  without finding 
yourself in violation of those yard (or setback) requirements. That was the problem with the residence of 
Sheila and Frank Daar, who wanted an attached solar greenhouse on their home. However, the house has a 
fair-sized  (21'  x 7') south-facing porch. So our approach was to create a "porch enclosure" mat worked as 
a solar greenhouse. 

Since the front of the  house had a very distinctive appearance, we decided to leave all that untouched 
and to fit the glazing in between the posts. We used glass cut to fit for the large areas on either side of the 
door,  and then filled in the smaller spaces between posts and under the glass with greenhouse fiberglass 
trimmed with redwood lath. And the Daars finally found a use for the oak-and-glass door and leaded glass 
windows that they'd  had in storage  for several years: as the door into the greenhouse and as casement 
windows at the east and west ends. 

108 

CHAPTER VIII 

Since the amount of glass in the south 
wall was  limited,  we tore out about half of 
the porch  ceiling  and the roof  above  it and 
created a skylight (double-glazed  fiberglass) 
with  the joists  and  ceiling  painted  white to 
increase light  reflection. 

Heat is vented into the first  floor of the 
home  by  opening  the  front  door  and 
windows, and into the second story bedroom 
via a vent cut at the top of the greenhouse in 
the  bottom  of  the  bedroom  wall.  Heat 
storage in the greenhouse will be provided in 
water-filled,  small, metal containers to start 
with—and  later by the water in a hot tub! 
Summertime  cooling  is  provided  by 
opening the door and casement windows to 
create  natural  ventilation.  The  mass  is 
shaded by porch overhang. 

Final  cost figures  aren't  all  in yet, but 
the  Daars  estimate  the  total  cost  will  stay 
below $1000. 

Photo by Malcolm Collier 

Figure 111 

integration") 

"architectural 

The  most  ambitious  of  our  attached 
solar  greenhouse  designs  (and  our  passion 
for 
and 
"hands-on"  construction  workshops  was 
die two-story greenhouse built on die second 
and durd stories of die A-frame residence of 
Lorell Long  in Penryn,  CA (Fig.  112). The 
335  sq.  ft.  greenhouse  was  built  onto  the 
(rebuilt) second story deck (about 24' long x 
12' wide) and encloses the third floor deck, 
which has become a little balcony inside die 
greenhouse. 

To budd  the greenhouse, we extended 
the A-frame  walls  to die south edge  of  the 
second  floor  deck.  Those  walls  wdl  be 
shingled on the outside to match die existing 
roofing,  and  are  insulated  and  sheetrocked 
on  the  inside.  Thus  all  the  greenhouse 
glazing  is soudi-facing,  except for a 4'  x 6' 
east  window.  We  installed  a  sliding  glass 
door  for  entry  and  used  double-glazed 
sliding  glass  door  replacement  seconds  for 
the  majority  of  the  vertical  soudi  glass and 
die  roof  glass,  which  is  set  at a 45  degree 
angle.  We 
then  used  double-glazed 
greenhouse  fiberglass  (Lascolite) for the re(cid:173)
maining  triangular  comer  sections,  radier 
than buying glass cut to fit. 

The  greenhouse  solar-heated  air  is 
vented into die home simply by opening die 

Figure  112 

Photo by Alan Taylor 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

109 

».,, 

sliding glass doors to the living room on the second 
floor  and the bedroom on the third floor.  Since there 
are very  few  interior dividers between rooms in the 
house, the heat can easily spread tiirough the entire 
house. 

Solar  heat  storage  is  provided  by  55-gallon 
drums  lined  up  against  the  house  glass.  The  deck 
(which we had to re-build) was engineered to support 
the weight of the thermal mass. 

Summertime cooling is provided by opening the 
greenhouse sliding glass door (which serves as a low 
vent) and then opening the triangular vent at the peak 
of the greenhouse (which serves as a high vent). The 
third story balcony inside the greenhouse serves as an 
overhang that shades the barrels and the living room 
south glass in summer. 

Total  cost  of  the  greenhouse  and  deck  was 
$1950,  or  about  $5.90/square  foot  of  greenhouse 
floor space. 

Rob Jenkins 

Grand  Junction,  Colorado 

The attached solar greenhouse shown here (Fig. 
113)  was  built  for  Mesa  College,  Grand  Junction, 
Colorado,  in  a  workshop  held  in  November  1978. 
Rob Jenkins designed the structure to employ a continuous truss system for framing the greenhouse roof 
and front face. He feels that it simplifies construction of the two planes and improves thermal performance 
of the greenhouse. The following  is Rob's description of assembling and erecting the truss system. 

Figure  113 

Assembly: The size of die truss members will depend upon span and design loads. For all but very 
long-span  situations,  2  x 4's  will  provide  adequate  strength,  and  when  fully  assembled,  will  be  light 
enough  for easy  handling.  The truss is composed of two members, dadoed at their adjoining  faces and 
bolted  witii  three  2-inch  stove  bolts  (Fig.  114).  The  angles  of  roof  and  soutii  face  are  not  of  great 
importance in the dado process. If die angle of the roof from  the vertical and the angle of [he soutii  face 
from the horizontal are the same, die truss members will be identical at die joint. If site conditions and the 
adjoining  building allow, the lengtiis and end cuts can also be exactly die same. 

The radius cut at the assembled truss is best done after bolting, 
and use of template will facilitate cuts at each truss. The size of die 
radius may differ.  However, it should be noted diat as the angles of 
die south face and roof are varied, die area of die lap of the two truss 
members will also vary. A more square roof and wall arrangement 
will  involve  a  smaller  lap.  Consequently,  die  radius  must  be 
reduced  so  as  not  to  further  diminish  die  lap  area.  The  Mesa 
College greenhouse is cut at a 9" radius with south wall and roof at 
80° respectively. In two previous applications, die radius was 12" 
and the angles of inclination  were approximately 70°. 

: 

,2x6 

Erection and Glazing: For an attached structure, the upper end 
of die truss will be anchored to a ledgerplate with a joist hanger, and 

TRUSS  CONNECTION 

Figure  114 

110 

CHAPTER VIII 

the base will usually be toe-nailed to a sill plate. Because of the continuity of roof and south face, very little 
intermediate blocking is necessary. Adequate shear strength can be established by an opaque roof section 
(4x plywood) together with the 5 ft. sections of flat fiberglass sheeting. Trusses should be spaced  at no 
greater interval than 2'-0". Care should be taken with the length of glazed roof, however, and snow loads 
should be evaluated. 

Most  critical  in the erection  and glazing process is consistency  in truss assembly and  installation. 
Because  the  fiberglass  must  bend  over  the  knee  joint,  any  difference  in  planes  of  the  three  trusses 
supporting one fiberglass sheet can mean serious buckling problems. It is, therefore,  important initially to 
insure a level ledger and sill plate. The two end trusses should then be erected and plumbed, after which 
construction lines should be stretched from points A and B. This will allow all intermediate trusses to be 
installed  level at critical points of ledger plate, transition points A and B, and sill plate. 

As  the  trusses  are  installed,  a temporary  tack  board  can be nailed  in at point C to maintain  truss 

spacing and lateral stability until the fiberglass  is fully  installed. 

Fiberglass, 49'/2" wide, is extremely beneficial. It provides a full lap at each end truss, and will help 

accommodate small deviations in truss material and installation. 

Following the glazing process, wood lattice battens are installed at each truss and are sealed with clear 
silicone at the junctions of fiberglass  sheets. Batten strips should be kerfed  and water soaked where they 
bend  at the truss knee. 

Cost: The detail cost for continuous truss framing is less than for conventional eave construction, if 
two foot spacing is maintained in each case. Fewer materials are used, and if reduced construction time can 
be achieved,  less labor. 

Valerie  Walsh 

Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico 

Valerie  Walsh  is  a  designer  and  builder  in  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico,  who  specializes  in  solar 
greenhouse additions. Valerie's company, Green Horizon, has been building greenhouses of exceptional 

Figure  115 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

1 11 

quality and beauty since  1976. Each 
greenhouse  is specially designed to 
meet  the homeowner's  needs.  Val(cid:173)
erie's  solar additions provide  more 
than just a thermally efficient  grow(cid:173)
ing  space;  they  become  the  most 
exciting  living  area  of  the  home. 
Greenhouse  owners  find  this  the 
ideal environment for relaxing, din(cid:173)
ing, and entertaining. 

This  addition  (Fig.  115)  in 
Santa  Fe,  engineered  by  Noel  and 
Jody  Norskog,  shows  Green  Hori(cid:173)
zon's  high  level  of  craftsmanship. 
The  mahogany  frame  construction 
consists  of  laminations  of  fourteen 
individual  curved  modules.  The 
glazings  for  each  module  include 
three sections: an overhead curved acrylite panel, and two vertical panels of insulating glass, the bottom of 
which opens for ventilation. In summer, air is circulated through the upper roof vents. 

Figure  116 

Thermal mass has been designed as a functional element of the structure. For example, the sculptural 
walls of the plant beds are made of concrete-filled  block that are stuccoed for sitting. The north wall of the 
greenhouse  is the existing adobe wall of the adjoining  home, an excellent heat sink. Additional thermal 
mass  is  provided  by  a  concrete  floor  slab  covered  with  decorative  clay  tile.  The  masonry  mass  is 
supplemented by 300 gallons of water in the hot tub. Aztec Radiant Heat Panels  fit  unobtrusively into the 
ceiling as a back-up heat source. If supplemental heat is necessary, low-temperature radiant heat proves to 
be 30% more efficient  than hot-air systems. 

The owners enjoy  the functional planting areas. Ground beds are filled with vegetables and the high 
ceiling  allows  for  tall  and  hanging plants. The  work area has a deep  sink,  potting bench,  and  storage 
cabinets. 

The greenhouse is located off the kitchen and living room; supplemental heat is transferred  into the 
rooms through  a connecting window and door. For dining and entertaining, there is plenty of space for a 
table and chairs. The family also enjoys relaxing in their hot tub surrounded by greenery and a spectacular 
view. 

Green  Horizon  continues to custom-build  beautiful  energy-efficient  greenhouses. The company is 

currently expanding module construction and developing nighttime insulation systems. 

Ozark  Institute 

Eureka Springs,  Arkansas 

This Berryville, Arkansas solar greenhouse is an outstanding example of the 'spin-off  the U.S.D.A. 
Solar Outreach  program  achieved.  The Ozark  Institute, headed by Edd Jeffords,  sent Bill O'Neill  to a 
Little Rock workshop (sponsored by the U.S.D.A.) to get technical training and practical experience. Mr. 
O'Neill went back to Eureka springs as the solarproject directorand, with Albert Skiles, designed and built 
the Berryville greenhouse and two others. The Institute had received a $1,000 grant for one greenhouse. 
By recycling materials and careful  purchasing, they built three greenhouses for that amount. 

From Mr. Skiles report for  the Office of Human Concern in Arkansas: 

"Two such greenhouses were recently built onto the homes of J.D. and Dorothy Trahan of Madison 
County and John and Coleen Strandquist of Carroll County. Winter heat gain will be more efficient  than 
conventional designs because of a reflective-insulative shutter along the vertical south wall. Open while 
the sun is shining, the shutter will admit about 30 percent more solar energy onto storage containers within 
the structure.  At night the shutter is closed to greatly reduce heat loss. 

1 12 

CHAPTER VIII 

' 'The glass panes on the south 
wall  are  removable  to control  heat 
during hot,  humid periods. Prevail(cid:173)
ing  south  breezes  can  then  enter 
through  a continuous  fixed  screen. 
This gives  the greenhouse  a gener(cid:173)
ous  vent  to  floor  ratio of  1:2.  The 
glass  panels  can  easily  be  replaced 
the next fall  in an airtight manner. 

"'The Trahan greenhouse has a 
thermostatically  controlled  blower 
near  the  ceiling  which  will  deliver 
heat (on at  110°—off  at 90°) to the 
house  whenever  it  becomes  avail(cid:173)
able.  By  attaching  a  meter  in  the 
circuit, we can accurately determine 
how much surplus heat  is produced 
by the greenhouse. 

"The  Standquist  greenhouse 
will be connected directly to the liv(cid:173)
ing  space  with  no  dividing  wall. 
Heat gain to the house will be found 
by  comparing  the  fuel  cost  per 
degree-day ratio with those of previ(cid:173)
ous winters." 

Figure  117 

Solar Sustenance Team Office 

Rt. 1 Box 107AA, Santa Fe, N.M. 

The Solar Sustenance Team office was added to an existing two-room adobe in Nambe, New Mexico. 
The design problem was one familiar to many homeowners: the corner of the existing building faced due 
south. Does one build on the 45° east- or 45° west-facing  wall? I felt mat building the solar greenhouse 
around the comer would give us a good opportunity to work with a rather unusual geometry (it should have 
benefits  and drawbacks not found  in a single-axis unit). 

The outcome, to date, has been satisfactory.  First, the greenhouse receives much more light than a 
south-wall  attached  model.  Because the major  collecting  planes are 45° to the east and west of  south, 
spring, summer, and fall sun is in the greenhouse all the long days through. This is a real positive factor for 
plant growth. 

1 thought that the off-south glazings would result in an extremely cold greenhouse in mid-winter. This 
was not the case. The greenhouse maintained minimum temperatures above 48° in — 12° weather (after 4 
or 5 heavily cloudy days). This is primarily because of the tremendous amount of thermal mass found in 
the shared adobe wall between house and greenhouse. 

The total amount of mass in the greenhouse works out to be the equivalent of over 9 gallons of water 

per square foot of glazing. Hence, it is very stable in temperature both summer and winter. 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

113 

Figure  118 

I  also  expected  the  large  expanse  of  western-
facing  glazing  to contribute  to horrendous  summer 
overheating  problems.  So,  I designed-in  large low 
vents with boathatchexhausts in the roof. In addition, 
the pyramid-shaped observatory was designed to be a 
thermal exhaust chimney for the house as well as the 
greenhouse.  Four  of  the  triangular  Lexan-covered 
panels  open  all  the  way out  for  stargazing.  One of 
these panels has a summer exhaust position when it's 
partially open. In this mode, the observatory heats up 
to about  115°F and pulls air through the house and 
greenhouse  at the  rate of about 2000 cfm.  Quite an 
effective  passive cooling system. 

Other  features  of  the  office  are  a  composting 
privy,  a  gray-waier  recycling  system,  photovoltaic 
fan, and the batch water heater seen above the green(cid:173)
house in the comer of the house roof. 

All of die details in die greenhouse could make 
an entire chapter of a book. However, diere are some 
subtle  and  important  aspects  of die  office  diat  I'll 
mention here. I dunk of die structure as a blend of die 
old  and  new.  Mud-plastered  walls  and  flagstone 
floors  are  combined  with  photovoltaic  fans,  heat 

Figure  119 

1 14 

CHAPTER VIII 

motors, and a solar greenhouse heating system.  With the 
exception  of  the glazings,  the materials  used  in building 
are  low-energy  and  natural  products.  For  example,  we 
experienced  a  severe  concrete  shortage  shortly  after 
beginning. So we went back to the old ways..  .river rock 
foundations and mud plaster. There's an amazing amount 
of  craftsmanship  in  the  woodworking  and  details  of  the 
office.  Native woods, lovingly assembled by McChesney 
Hortenstein,  have  been  used  in  the  cabinets  and  doors. 
Privacy  walls, constructed  after  a careful  examination of 
prevailing  wind  patterns,  do  double  duty  as  protective 
wind barriers in winter and air-flow  funnels  in summer. 

The  old  and  new  are  blended  into  a  space  that's 
aesthetically  pleasing  (for  me)  and  energy  efficient  (for 
all). 
Designer: Bill Yanda 
Glazing: 310sq.  ft. 
Greenhouse area: 350 sq.  ft. 
Total office  area:  1106 sq.  ft. 
Solar Heating Fraction: 65% 
Total cost (includes office  remodeling): $18 sq. ft. (1979) 
Builders: McChesney Hortenstein, James Bunker, 
Andrew  McGruer,  Bruce Currin. 

Figure 120 

Tim  MicheLs 

Londe,  Parker,  & MicheLs,  Consultants 
7438 Forsyth, St. Louis, Mo. 

Many of the brick homes found 
throughout urban America are ideal 
for  a  solar  greenhouse  addition. 
They will generally have either solid 
brick or brick with a clay-like infill. 
Tim  Michels  and  his  associates 
completely  retrofitted  this home  in 
St.  Louis.  They  began,  as  anyone 
serious about saving energy would, 
by  adding  insulation  to  die  roof. 
After  that they applied rigid insula(cid:173)
tion  to all exterior brick walls with a 
stucco  overcoating.  Then  diey 
began the solar part. A small second 
story  window  was  enlarged  and 
double  glazed  for  direct  gain  and 
Trombe  wall  combination.  The 
solar greenhouse below is a seasonal 
solar  heater  quickly  erected  in  the 
fall  and  removed  in  the  spring.  In 
mis  manner  die  soum  facing  brick 
wall is converted from  a heat losing 
surface to a low temperature radiant 
heater in me winter time. 

Figure  121 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

115 

Michels used computer runs to determine 
the economic  payback of the total conversion. 
The  total job, insulation,  interior  remodeling, 
solar  additions,  came  to  slightly  less  than 
$4,000.  Measured  against  any  source  of 
conventional  heating  fuel  the  investment  will 
be cost  effective. 

A  Portable  Homemade  Greenhouse 

So.  . .you're  a renter, or you  move a lot. 
You want a greenhouse but don't want to leave 
it  behind  for  the  next  occupants.  Here's  an 
alternative.  Build  a  portable,  but  substantial, 
greenhouse  that you can pack up and move to 
your next home. 

This  small  lean-to  was  designed  as  a 
demonstration  model  to be  moved  around  to 
fairs, energy exhibits, schools and the like. It's 
lightweight and can be assembled by two people. The largest panel is 8 ft. x 8 ft. and the panels fit into a 
rack on a pickup truck. Even though this is a display model, the greenhouse is fully  functional,  containing 
all the criteria for successful  operation  found in Chapter IV (insulated opaque walls, double skin, shaded 
roof,  etc.). When we set it up, we put in black water barrels and plants. 

Figure  122 

The five planes (you don't need a north wall, that's for display) are held together by slip pins in regular 
hinges. The intersections of the edges are sealed with foam insulating tape. The whole unit sets up in about 
10 minutes with two people. Just set it down in front  of your south window and you're in business. In a 
home application, it could be mounted on railroad ties (as explained in Chapter VI) right on the ground, or 
on a low block wall. 

Designers: Paul Bunker, John Gait,  Bill Yanda 
Size: 64 square  feet. 
Builders:  Same  as designers  with  help  from  the 
New Mexico Organic Growers Assn. 
Clear Area:  125 square  feet 
Hardware:  2"   sliding  bolt  hinges  hold  planes 
together; 
then 
screwed  together with  No. 6  2%" wood screws 

framing  members  pre-drilled 

Working  blueprints  of  this  greenhouse  are 
available  for  $10.00  from  The  Solar  Sustenance 
Team,  Rt.  1  Box  107AA, Santa Fe, N.M. 87501. 

Solar Water in the 
Solar  Greenhouse 

New uses for solar greenhouses are popping up 
every day. One of the most applicable is a solar hot 
water  system  inside  the greenhouse.  When  this is 
done, you have, in effect,  moved the location of the 
solar  water  heater  about  15-20°  south  in  latitude, 
compared  to a similar heater exposed on the outside 
of the roof. 

Cost:  $256  (includes  double  fiberglass  walls, 
north wall and No.  1 clear fir 2x2s for strength and 
uniformity).  Funded  by the New Mexico Energy 
Resources Board. 

A  $100  •Breadbox" 

Pre-Heater 

in  a Solar  Greenhouse 

Roof 

To Hot Water Tank 

[Cold  Inlet 

Reflective 
Insulated 
Walls 

Cold Water 
at Line 
Pressure 

Double Glazing 

JO Gal. Tank 
Adjustable  Vents 

Greenhouse Roof Must Support Load 

(Approx.JOOIbs.) 

Spread on 4 Rafters, Beef-up Rafters 

(Support from Below, or Use Diagonal Braces) 

Figure  123 

1 16 

CHAPTER VIII 

Some people are placing typical flat plate water heaters into the front sloping panels of the greenhouse 
and  letting  the  hot  water  naturally  thermosyphon  up to a tank  in the apex.  A very  simple  "batch"  or 
"breadbox"  (a  term  coined  by  Zomeworks)  heater  can  be  built  into  the  apex  of  an  attached  solar 
greenhouse  in this manner (Fig.  123). 

It is my experience with such  a heater in the Solar Sustenance Team office  that it will provide the 
majority of the hot water needs for a couple from April through September. Throughout the remainder of 
the year it functions as a pre-heater to the conventional hot water tank. It can be built by the homeowner for 
under $100 or contracted  for under $250. In the Sunbelt area, it might provide 75% of the hot water for 
a conservation minded family of four throughout the year. Batch heaters similar to this were built by the 
thousands in Southern California and Florida in the '30's and "40's. Many are still working today turning 
out free hot water on a regular basis. 

Don't let anybody fool you. Solar hot water definitely  feels better than the conventional variety. You 
just dance around  under the showerhead  laughing at everybody who is paying money to have their water 
heated. If you store the gray water, like we do at the Solar Sustenance Team office, you get quite spoiled on 
30 minute showers. 

The following  article by Rich Schwolsky  explains the rationale  and plumbing specifics  of a more 

sophisticated unit in greater detail.  It is reprinted  with permission  of a great magazine. Solar Age. 

Preheating Water in Greenhouse 

reflective 
insulating 
shutters • 

ubte  glazing  -v 

^r 

;\ 

exist,  unhealed 
bedroom 

by Rick Schwolsky 

Courtesy: Solar Age Mag. 

June,  1979 

If  a  greenhouse  has  been 
designed to create a non-freezing 
environment 
for  plants,  an 
opportunity  exists  to  include  a 
simple  and  inexpensive  water 
heater. 

.'•:-. J 
.' 

A 

Al 

important 

ten  55 gal. 
drums 

reflective 
insulating 
shutter  -. 

!C 

' 

• existing  lireplace 

with  water 
circulating  grate 

In  a  greenhouse  built  by 
Alan  Ross  and  the  Brattleboro 
Design  Group 
in  Vermont, 
domestic  water  preheat  was  a 
very 
consideration 
(Fig.  124).  Used,  glass-lined, 
gas-fired  water-heating tanks (30 
to  40  gallons)  were  stripped  of 
their outer jackets and insulation, 
flushed,  pressure 
tested,  and 
painted  flat  black.  An  enclosure 
was  constructed  for  each  tank, 
using urettiane sheathing and ply-
wood  (Fig.  125). The enclosures isolate the tanks from  the greenhouse space and increase the  effective 
aperture of  each tank. The enclosures incorporate doors  with reflective surfaces,  which can  be  focused 
manually in winter, summer, and spring-fall seasons. The doors, closed manually, insulate the tanks from 
night-time radiation losses through the greenhouse glazing. 

ROSS  GREENHOUSE 

summer  air 
intake  (exhaust 
vents  at  upper 
gable  ends) 

Figure  124 

Tanks, enclosures  and some pre-piping  were hung horizontally  from  the ledger  in the peak of the 
greenhouse. The flue openings in each tank were used as the support detail by placing  1 '/4-inch galvanized 
pipe through the flue so that it extended beyond both ends of each enclosure. Chains hung from hooks in the 
ledger were connected to hooks fastened to the ends of the galvanized pipe, and the units were placed on 
either side of the existing chimney (Fig. 126). 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

117 

The connection  to the water  system 

is very simple. Using %-inch copper tub(cid:173)
ing,  cold  water  supply  entering  directly 
from  a well  passes  through the two solar 
tanks  in a  series  to  the existing  oil-fired 
boiler. A three valve bypass was installed 
near  the  boiler  to  allow  the  removal  of 
either  or  both  solar  tanks,  which  were 
connected with unions, without interrupt(cid:173)
ing hot  water service  to the house. Each 
tank was provided with a temperature and 
pressure relief  valve for safe operation. 

Adapting  this  breadbox-type  water 
heater  for  use  in  the greenhouse  has ad(cid:173)
vantages apart  from economics and relia(cid:173)
bility.  The  space  in  the  peak  is  usually 
unused  and  contributes  to  heat  loss.  A 
water  heater puts  this space  into produc(cid:173)
tive  use  and  isolates  it  with  an  insulated 
surface  from  the  rest of  the  greenhouse. 
The  enclosures  also  create  an  overhang 
that  will  substantially  contribute  to sum(cid:173)
mer shading. 

The  system  operates  on  demand— 
the  collector-storage  tanks  direcdy  pre(cid:173)
heat domestic water. There are no  differ(cid:173)
ential controllers, no periodic changing of 
fluids,  no  motorized  valves,  no  pumps, 
and no heat exchangers.  The system can 
be drained completely to prevent damage 
which  would  otherwise  be  caused  if the 
greenhouse temperature  is allowed to fall 
below freezing. 

Figure  125 

Fi8ure  126 

The requirement to manually control the insulating doors and to fill and drain the system is not much 
to  ask  of  owners  already  committed  to  maintaining  a greenhouse.  Designers  are  not  overburdened  to 
integrate solar domestic-water preheat,  if they are committed to combining the many concepts that shape 
the solar greenhouse. 
Rick Schwolsky is a partner in Sunrise Solar Services, Sujfield, Conn., and Brattleboro, Vt., and chairman 
of the Nat'I. Assn.  of Solar Contractors, Suite 928, 910 17th St.,  N.W.,  Washington, D.C.  20006. 

Solar  Greenhomes 

The term Solar Greenhome was first brought to my attention by Jack Park of Helion.  I feel  it aptly 

describes a house which uses a solar greenhouse as its primary heating source. The integral house/green(cid:173)
house  relationship  has  many  aesthetic  and  solar  advantages  over  an  add-on  unit,  but  is  usually  quite 
sophisticated  in design and carries a new home construction  price tag. 

Solar greenhomes are based on what Dr. Balcomb has described as a 'Two-zone' approach to solar 
heating. The greenhouse, by nature of the plant occupants, can tolerate much greater temperature swings 
(40°F-90°F)  than  the humans in the home (65°F-75°F).  These differing  temperature criteria are the 
basis of solar greenhome design. 

118 

CHAPTER VIII 

Although the solar greenhomes shown in this section are found in drastically different  climate zones 
and use varied materials and building techniques, they all share some similar attributes that aren't usually 
found  in add-on greenhouses. 

•  EXCELLENT ORIENTATION and communication with the home. When you start from scratch 
it's no problem  to orient the house for maximum winter sunlight and to place doors, windows and vents 
exactly  where they're  needed. 

•  THERMAL MASS within the home to absorb surplus greenhouse heat. Adobe homes found in the 
Southwest and older brick homes have this feature, but the vast majority  of structures in the U.S. do not. 
Most of the homes  in this section are hybrid systems; they have both  passive heat storage built  into the 
structure and active warm air circulation to thermal storage below the floors of the living space. 

•  HIGH INSULATION  with  minimal  loss through  north, east and west walls and windows.  The 
designers  and  builders  here  greatly exceed  the minimum  insulation  standards for walls  and roof.  They 
know it's easier and less expensive to install large amounts of insulation initially than it is to build a bigger 
collector and storage system. 

•  PLANNED  SPACIAL  AND TRAFFIC  PATTERNS designed around the greenhouse.  As the 
greenhouse  is  the  core  of  the  home's  life  functions,  it  is  possible  to  attain  a degree  of  architectural 
integration and functionality that is rare in add-on units. Often, the greenhouse is used as the main entrance 
for the house. It becomes an energy saving air lock for the structure. This feature alone can save  10-15% on 
winter heating bills for a family  with kids and pets. 

•  THERMAL  ISOLATION  during  warm  periods. The  greenhome  designer  must  insure  that  the 
greenhouse component doesn't overheat the home in the summer. This is usually not a problem with the 
add-on  unit; it's much more of a consideration  with the totally integrated greenhome. In climates which 
have fairly  cool, dry summers (the Rockies for example), there will be adequate nighttime low tempera(cid:173)
tures to allow the thermal mass in the structure to cool off.  Many other parts of the U.S. have an adequate 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

1 19 

Figure  128 

summer diumal  swing (nighttime temperatures regularly  below 70°F) to allow the same thing.  In these 
areas  summer  cooling  is  accomplished  by built-in  shading  and/or  passive  ventilation.  In warmer  and 
wetter climates (like the Southeastern  U.S.), the solar greenhomes will demand active exhaust systems, 
removable glazing panels, or total greenhouse isolation from the home in summer. The Parallax homes, 
for instance, can completely  shut off the greenhouse from  the living spaces. 

The  solar  greenhome  holds  an exciting  promise  for  future  generations.  Beautiful  and  functional 
homes with practically no demand on conventional energy sources for heat and fresh vegetables. In almost 
all  of  these homes you  are looking  at construction  costs at or below a conventional  energy  consuming 
house. 

UNIT  I FIRST  VILLAGE 

This is a great  place to start the solar greenhome section. I was going to write a glowing section in 
praise of this home and the designers, Wayne and Susan Nichols, but I solicited and received the following 
text by Doug and Sara Balcomb. Here's a perfect opportunity for you to get first hand information on what 
it's like to live in a solar greenhome. 

Without a doubt this house is the best performing,  well monitored solar structure in the world. The 
93% solar fraction  is obtained without any sacrifice in comfort.  About 73% of the solar heating is totally 
passive through the massive shared wall between home and greenhouse and the naturally circulating warm 
air.  The  other 20% solar  contribution  is from  the rockbeds below  the floor  which are charged  by  fans 
tapping the warm air at the top of the greenhouse. The remaining 7% comes from electric baseboard heat. 
Even though Santa Fe is an excellent climate for solar applications (cold winters but lots of sunshine) it's 
important to note that this design, as it is, would provide over 50% solar heating anywhere in the United 
States. 

Now I'll  let the Balcombs do the talking. 

120 

CHAPTER VIII 

The  Solar Greenhouse  Experience  by Doug  and  Sara  Balcomb 

Living  in a combined  solar greenhouse-home  has been  a rewarding experience  for  us in terms of 
economy, the ability to grow plants year-around, and the delightful  ambience it provides our home. The 
house is Unit  1 of First Village designed and built by Susan and Wayne Nichols, developers of the First 
Village Solar Community  and with Bill Lumpkins, the well known Southwestern  architect. 

Our house is two stories with a greenhouse enclosing the south-facing triangular space formed by the 
L shape of the house. The wall between the house and greenhouse is a massive  14-inch thick adobe wall. 
The  remainder of  the house  is  well-insulated  frame  construction  using 2 x 8s with  8-inch  batt  for the 
walls,  double  glazed  windows  and  four  inches of  foam  insulation  in the flat  roof. The  house  sits on a 
gradual south sloping lot and is dug into the hillside to a depth of four feet on the north side. The below 
grade portion of the wall is filled concrete block, waterproofed  and then faced with rigid insulation on the 
outside. 

Thermally, the house works very well. We have baseboard electric heaters for our back-up and also a 
small woodstove and fireplace. Santa Fe has a cold winterclimate (approximately 6000 degree days), and 
the heating season lasts from early October to mid-May. Below 0°F weather is common in December and 
January. 

In the winter of  '77-78 we set the thermostats at 65° and left them alone. We used about Vz cord of 
wood throughout  the winter,  primarily for the beauty of the fire,  not for heating. Our baseboard electric 
use, which is metered separately from the other household electricity, was 857 kilowatt-hours, costing $38 
at our present 4.50/kilowatt-hour  rate. This was our entire heating bill for the year. 

The home tends  to remain quite constant  in temperature, generally  between 71°F and 75°F in the 
summer and between 65°F and 71°F in the winter. The daily temperature swing in the house is typically 4° 
in the summer and 6° in the winter.  (Note: This is less than half the temperature swing in a conventional 
home.)  Because  of  the  warm  wall  and  warm  floor  we  find  that  we are quite  comfortable  at 65°F  air 
temperature—more comfortable than we had been previously in a frame, forced-air heated home at 70°— 
72°F. There is an almost total absence of the drafts  and hot spots that are common in a forced  air home. 

The  greenhouse  environment 

After  about three days of stormy weather, 
the house drifts down to 65°F and some backup 
heat is needed until it clears again. Even during 
a  storm,  the  greenhouse  collects  and  stores 
sufficient  heat  so  that  the  electric  backup  is 
never used during the day.  It comes on only in 
the middle of the night during off-peak  periods. 
is  quite 
different  than the house. It runs cooler in winter 
and  warmer 
It  normally 
experiences  a  30—35°F  temperature  swing 
during  a  sunny  winter  or  summer  day.  In 
winter,  the temperature  range is between 52°-
85°F with 46°F being the all time low. It has no 
auxiliary heater and the 46°F record was after a 
long  storm  with  outdoor  temperatures  in  the 
— 15°F  range.  In  the  summer  the  greenhouse 
typically  varies  from  65°-90°F  on  a  sunny 
day. Daytime summer temperatures can be hot in Santa Fe, but the nights are very cool, dropping to the 
high  50s and low 60s. 

Figure  129 

in 

summer. 

Why does it work so well and will it work in other climates? The house has been monitored  by Los 
Alamos Scientific  Laboratory, and we can give partial answers to these questions. The predominant solar 
heating effect  is direct sun entering the greenhouse being absorbed by the floor and adobe north walls. The 
heat absorbed by the floor (flagstone on dirt, and planting beds) maintains the greenhouse at night so that 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

1 21 

heat loss by the house to the greenhouse is minimal. Heat absorbed by the massive wall between the green(cid:173)
house and the house conducts slowly through the wall giving 85°F temperature peaks on the inside (living 
space) surface during the evening hours. Thus, this wall becomes a huge low temperature heateralong the 
entire south side of the home. 

A secondary source of solar heating the house is through an active hot air loop. During a winter day— 
typically  from  10AM-4PM—the greenhouse is a quite warm 85°F. The warm air is drawn off the top of 
the  greenhouse  through  two air ducts  by a pair of  1/3  horsepower fans  and  forced  through  two 25-ton 
rockbeds beneatJi the floor of the home. The air is returned to the greenhouse at about 70°F through grills in 
the  floor,  completing  the  loop. The  rockbeds  are large; 30"  deep pancakes  immediately  beneath  and 
supporting die concrete-slab floor. The floor temperatures are not especially warm—usually 65°—70°F— 
but feel nice to the bare feet and are substantially warmer than surrounding non-heated floor areas. There is 
no problem in partially covering the floor with throw rugs or any other carpeting, and, in fact, part of our 
floor is hardwood laid over the slab. Distribution of heat from the rockbed to the house is totally passive— 
by conduction  up through  the floor. 

The advantage of the air loop-rockbed combination is two fold. First, the greenhouse is kept about 
10°F cooler during sunny winter mid-days; it has been observed to rise to 95°F if the fans are turned  off. 
Second, about  15,000 BTU per hour are removed from the greenhouse (which would be largely lost) and 
placed  in thermal storage beneath me feet of the occupants. The two fans draw a total of about 500 watts 
and cost approximately  130 a day to operate. They are controlled  by a differential  thermostat that turns 
them  on  whenever  the  greenhouse  air  is  15°F  warmer  than  the  rockbed.  The  fans  are  off  when  the 
greenhouse  air is 5° F (or less) warmer than the rocks. 

An advantage that a greenhouse has overan active solar collector is increased collector efficiency. The 
system is always 'on', so that even on cloudy days there is some net gain. For example, we have observed 
that  our  greenhouse  invariably  warms  up  during  a  winter  day,  even  if  it  is  snowing  outside.  Air 
temperatures will increase from  a typical 52°F nighttime low to at least 65°F in the worst weather.  The 
floor  and walls warm up even more, so that the greenhouse becomes self-sufficient  even during stormy 
weather. This increased collector efficiency  compensates for greater nighttime losses of the greenhouse, 
compared  to those of an active collector. 

Although 

the  solar  heating 
(and  resulting  lower  utility bills)  is 
of major  importance, it  is only one 
to  human 
aspect  of  the  benefit 
comfort  and  well-being 
that  an 
attached solar greenhouse provides. 
The quality of the heat is as import(cid:173)
ant  as  the  quantity.  There  are  no 
drafts,  no hot or cold spots, no blast 
of  hot  dry  furnace  air,  no filters to 
change.  It  is  completely  reliable, 
working 
through 
power 
outages and fuel  shortages. 

right 

It is important to emphasize the 
quality  of  life  that  a well  designed 
solar greenhouse affords  the owner. 
Imagine  a  blustery,  snowy  winter 
day . . .cold  and raw. Then  imagine 
what it  is like to step directly  into a 
room  where  roses  and  petunias are 
in  full  bloom,  where  lemons  are 
ripening on the tree, where the smell 
of  fresh  flowers  and  green  plants 

Figure  130 

122 

CHAPTER  Vffl 

pervades. Imagine what it is like to sit in a space like that and sunbathe when it is 20°Foutside. Finally, and 
best of all, imagine picking all the fresh vegetables you and your family need for your winter dinners, never 
having to worry about the price (or the age) of a head of lettuce! 

This  'impossible dream'  is a reality for us, one we hope every family  in America will share. 

House: 2 stories,  1,950  sq. ft.  in house, 350 sq.  ft.  in greenhouse. 
Greenhouse glazing: 400 sq.  ft.,  lower-vertical, upper 60°. 
Rock beds: 2 under the ground floors, 2 ft.  deep x  10 ft.  wide x  19 ft.  long; 24 yds. of 4-6"  rock. 

The  Balcombs,  along 
with  the  designers  Susan and 
Wayne  Nichols,  and  the  au(cid:173)
thor  of  Passive  Solar  Energy 
Book,  Ed  Mazria,  make  up 
Passive  Solar  Associates. 
They  run  excellent  technical 
design  seminars  all  over  the 
country.  For 
information 
write:  Passive  Solar  As(cid:173)
sociates,  P.O.  Box  6023, 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501. 

Parallax  Corporation, 
Hinesburg,  Vermont 

The  design  team  of  the 
Parallax  Corporation  has  be- 
come a national leader in solar greenhomes and commercial structures built at or below the cost of conven(cid:173)
tional  energy  inefficient  buildings,  Most of  their  work  is in the cloudy  and cold  region  of  upper New 
England. Here, they have to deal with climates in excess of 8000 degree days and storms that can block the 
direct sunlight for 5-7 days in January. The greenhouse is a natural choice for such climates because it 
makes the most of diffuse  weather conditions. 

Figure  131 

The  solar  greenhouse  (Fig.  131) is built  below  the  living  space  of  the  structure.  The  other  solar 
component  in the home is the direct gain  living room above the greenhouse. The living room features a 
massive core  fireplace  that absorbs the heat streaming through the south windows. Another  feature  is a 
heat  recovery  system.  This  is simply  a fan  linked to a differential  thermostat  that taps warm  air at die 
ceiling level and blows it down through the rock storage whenever the thermostat senses that the ceiling 
air is warmer than the thermal storage. A good example might be a cold January night when die occupants 
were enjoying  a nice toasty  fire.  In a conventional  home  very  hot air would stratify  at the ceiling, and 
increased  heat  loss  would occur.  A Parallax  home would use mis "nighttime  heat gain"  to charge die 
thermal storage. Ingenious and inexpensive heat saving. The same mode is operant on a clear winter day. 
The greenhouses can either charge me tiiermal storage or be linked directly to the living space. Again, 
this is controlled by thermostats mat direct die heat where it is most needed. Notice die built-in shading for 
the greenhouse glazing in die house. Because die summers in upstate Vermont can get very hot and sticky, 
this  structure  is designed  so me greenhouse  is  diermally  isolated  from  me  living  spaces  during Uiose 
periods. 

Parallax also uses various glazings to meet specific needs. These homes have Acrylite SDP acrylic 
glazing in the greenhouse and double glass panels in die living spaces. This gives die owners a nice view 
out  and  lets  die  plants and me mermal  mass of  me greenhouse  enjoy  die benefits  of diffuse  radiation. 
One of  die most  impressive  aspects of  Parallax  structures  is meir building cost.  Most people  still 
believe  that  solar homes  must be appreciably  more expensive  than conventional  structures.  The  home 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

123 

shown here was built below the cost of regular housing at the time of its construction (1977-78) by licensed 
contractors with no previous solar building experience. Here are some  specifics: 

The greenhouse is 36 feet long with glazing 8 feet high. The rockbed behind the greenhouse contains 

1000 cu.  ft.  of rocks. The 2,300 sq.  ft.  house was built for $56,000 and is 65% solar heated. 

Doug Taff and Bob Holdridge, principals in Parallax, have written some excellent technical papers 
on passive and hybrid solar heating and solar use above the 48° latitude zone. See the Passive Conference 
Technical  Publications. 

David  Wright 
The  Sea  Group 
P.O.  Box  49, 
Sea  Ranch,  CA  95497 

David  Wright  continues 
to be  a leader in passive solar 
design.  Since  the first  edition 
of  this  book,  David  has been 
busy.  First  he  moved  to  Sea 
Ranch,  California—a  radical 
change  from  New  Mexico. 
Then  he came out with what I 
believe  is  the  most  readable 
book in the solar field: Natural 
Solar  Architecture.  Now  he 
heads  up Sea Group, a design 
team doing passive structures all over the 
world. 

Most of the solar homes he has done 
are 
'One-Zone'  structures.  However, 
they  are so tasteful  and sensitive to local 
microclimates and ecological criteria that 
they must be included. I've been in many 
of  Wright's  homes,  and  the  owners 
usually  designate  areas  toward  the south 
glazings as greenrooms and plant growing 
space. 

The  Clark  Kimbell  and  Charlotte 
Stone  home  in  Santa  Fe  (Fig.  132)  in(cid:173)
cludes a ' 'green room'' or plant area. The 
entire  room,  however,  acts  as  a  solar 
greenhouse,  it is designed to be a passive 
solar collector.  The  two-story  south  face 
is double  glazed  with commercial  storm 
doors.  The  continuous  east/north/west 
wall  is  adobe,  sheathed  with  styrofoam 
and  stucco.  The  north  comers  of  the 
house  are  rounded.  Wright  adopted  this 
feature  from  a " D"  shaped New Mexico 
pueblo  (Pueblo  Bonito).  The  configura(cid:173)
tion  cuts down on north wind  resistance, 
thus reducing heat loss. 

Figure  132 

Figure  134 

124 

CHAPTER VIII 

Along  with  Wright's  careful  calculation  and  use  of 
summer/winter sun angles, insulation and tightness are the most 
important  solar  features  of  this home. The  roof  and  sub-floor 
areas  are  heavily  insulated.  So  is  the  front  face,  with  an 
ingenious canvas-covered styrofoam shutter system. Wright has 
aptly dubbed this home the "adobe Thermos bottle." It is over 
80 percent solar,  with one wood stove supplying backup heat. 
It  is also  a delightful  living environment,  offering  all the 

creature comforts  within an ecologically  sound design. 

Figure  133  shows  another  Wright  designed  home.  This 
totally  passive dwelling is owned by a Santa Fe builder, Karen 
Terry. It has an unusual orientation for a solar building, a north-
south axis. The home has been designed and built so tastefully 
that you  really have to be looking for it to find  it. 

One of Wright's newer homes, Sundown, is at Sea Ranch. 
The main living area is to the lower right in the photo. This part 
of the house is sunken below grade and has sod and ice plant on 
the roof.  It is a direct gain structure, and the glass faces south. 
The above ground room on the left faces the Pacific, is a sleeping 
loft and ideal for observing the whales that swim by the window. 
Wright had the insulating barrier assembled by a sailmaker. It fits snuggly on tracks inside of all the 
large glass  surfaces  in the house.  If you  look carefully  at the home photo(Fig.  134), you can  see  these 
devices in various daytime shading positions. Figure  135 shows the insulating blanket. 

Sundesigns,  Gregory  Franta  AIA,  Glenwood  Springs,  Colorado 

Greg Franta has been actively  involved in the solar greenhouse field since its beginnings. He was a 
founder  of  the  Roaring  Forks  Research  Center  in Aspen  and  is  now  working  with  the  Solar  Energy 
Research  Institute  in Golden,  Colorado.  The  following  text  describes  one  project  he was  involved  in 
privately. 

The  Smith-Hite  Studio 
(Fig.  136), one of hundreds of 
solar greenrooms in the Rocky 
Mountains,  is  located  near 
Aspen,  Colorado, at an eleva(cid:173)
tion  of  approximately  7500 
feet.  The architect  is Gregory 
Franta,  AIA,  of  Sundesigns; 
the  owners  are  Debbie  Smith 
and  Henry  Hite;  and 
the 
builders  are  Richard  Farizel 
and Chuck Ravetta. 

The design of the Smith-
Hite  studio  integrates  a  600 
square-foot  weaving  studio 
with 
foot 
greenroom.  The  greenroom 
provides both solar heat collection and space for food production. All of the exterior walls have a thermal 
buffer  between the ambient air and the interior living/working space (Fig.  137). In general, the primary 
design  parameter of the studio greenroom was energy and resource conservation  in addition to the space 
functions. 

Figure  136 

a  224 

square 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

125 

The greenroom  has 312 square feet of south-facing  glazing (15° E.  of S-).  Solar heat is passively 
absorbed  and stored  in 3300 pounds of contained water and over 50,000 pounds of gravel and concrete. 
The water storage is contained in thirty gallon plastic drums located along the north, east and west walls. 
The primary portion of the remaining passive storage is located  in the floor of the greenroom; a 4 inch 
concrete  slab tops  18 inches  of gravel.  Two inches of styrofoam  insulation is located below  the gravel 
storage to reduce heat loss into the ground. 

A system of moveable insulating louvres, "Sun-louvres", is incorporated into the roof glazing. The 
Sun-louvres provide movable insulation at night, act as heat boosters for the  hot-air collection system and 
provide  solar shades when  desirable.The 
Sun-louvres  have a black  heat-absorbing 
surface  on  the  top  side,  a  reflective 
surface  on the bottom,  and  insulation  in 
between.  In  the  open  position,  solar 
energy  is allowed  to penetrate  into space 
as  much  as  desired.  At  the  same  time, 
solar  energy  is  absorbed  on  the  black 
surface  of  the  louvres  to  boost  the  air 
temperature  in  the  higher  portion  of  the 
space. The hot air is pulled off the top of 
the greenroom by a single fan. The air is 
transported 
through  ducts  to  thermal 
storage under the floor of the studio. The 
air returns to the greenroom  after  it loses 
much of its  heat to the rocks, cooling the greenroom. At night, the louvres are in a closed position to reduce 
heat  loss.  Movable  insulating panels slide up to insulate  the vertical glazing. The passive  distribution 
system allows the natural flow of heat from either the storage bed or the greenroom into the studio. 

SMITH-HITE  STUDIO 

North T 

FLOOR  PLAN 

Figure  137 

The greenroom not only supplies heat to the studio, but also acts as a thermal buffer and reduces the 

heat loss. The glass wall with French doors located between the greenroom and studio allows the green(cid:173)
room temperatures to fluctuate with little effect  on the studio temperatures. This results in the greenroom 
buffering  the south wall of the  studio from the ambient weather conditions. The north, east and west walls 
of the studio also have thermal buffers: an earth-berm covers most of the  north wall; an air-lock entry and 
mudroom  are located on the east wall; and, a garage is attached  to the west wall. 

Other  passive  and  active  heating  components  are  incorporated  into  the  studio.  Skylights  with 
movable  insulating panels provide direct solar gain onto the thermal mass of the floor and north wall. A 
heat recovery system transports the hot air from the top of the  studio into storage. The only auxiliary heat 
source is a wood burning stove. 

In addition to the energy conservation measures, other resource conservation applications have been 
designed  into  the studio.  A dry organic waste  treatment  system,  "Humus Toilet",  is used to conserve 
water. The other plumbing fixtures are water-conserving fixtures. Recycled doors and windows have been 
incorporated  into  the  design.  Indigenous  and  non-energy  intensive  building  materials  have  been  used 
whenever  applicable.  The  Smith-Hite case  study  is one  of  many  individual  solar greenrooms  having 
impact  in the Rocky Mountains. 

Clemson  University-Rural  Housing Research  Unit,  Clemson,  South  Carolina  29631 

The  Rural  Housing  Research  Unit  at  Clemson  has  been  one  of  the  few  universities  in  the  U.S. 
seriously examining  solar greenhouse design and performance. Their approach to building  greenhomes 
incorporates more active collection and control features than most in this book. In a paper,' 'Construction 
and Performance  of a Solar Greenhouse-Residence," M.  Davie, et al., give some realistic examples of 
problems encountered when the solar home designer meets the builders at the site: 

126 

CHAPTER VIII 

"The  coordination  be(cid:173)

insulation  and 

tween the various trades offers 
a good  insight into the various 
inherent  construction  prob(cid:173)
lems. The activities associated 
with 
the  rock  storage,  for 
example,  not  only  concerned 
itself with the placement of the 
ballast,  but  also  with  the  in(cid:173)
stallation  of 
vapor barriers, monitoring ap(cid:173)
paratus, and supply and return 
ducts.  Due to the difficulty  in 
getting  dump  trucks  close  to 
the  building  enclosure,  the 
ballast  was  dropped  outside 
the foundation wall.  It  was 
subsequently 
shoveled  by 
hand into its position in the bin 
at considerable  expense  to the contractor.  In addition,  the placement of ductwork  after  the ballast  was 
positioned provided a further expense since the rock had to be removed to allow the installation of a 1' x 2' 
(300mm x 600mm) distribution  plenum. 

Figure  138 

"The  original  prototype  called  for  a  manufactured  lean-to  glass  greenhouse.  To  comply  with  a 
request by the Department of Horticulture, it was necessary to order, erect and have services installed to 
allow for August planting. The greenhouse manufacturer implied the relative ease of erection of its green(cid:173)
house  units—this  proved  not  so.  Complications  pertaining  to  the  erection  procedure,  assembly  of 
component parts, fixing to house, etc., all required considerable labor and expense. A local distributor was 
subsequently  called  in to assist the contractor in erecting the structure." 

Based on the initial results of produce growing, some suggestions on greenhouse management  are 

made in the paper. 

"Media for this research was one-half peat and 
one-half  vermiculite.  Slow  release  fertilizers  used 
were  adequate  and  desirable  since  the  gardener  is 
relieved  from  concern  over  fertility.  Rates  were  5 
lbs. magampand  10 lbs. osmocotepercu. yd. Subse(cid:173)
quent  fertility  needs  should  be  added  with  soluble 
fertilizers  based  on  visual  observation,  although 
none were used in these tests. All beds had adequate 
drainage  to  permit  open  system  hydroponics  or 
drainage  of  excessive  water.  The  peat-vermiculite 
media  is  quite  light  and  lacks porosity.  The  media 
will be amended in the future with finely ground pine 
bark.  A  suitable  ratio  seems  to  be  1/3  peat,  1/3 
vermiculite, and 1/3 pine bark. There is concern over 
the expense of this media. The initial cost exceeded 
$200.  It  is  proposed  that  the  occupants  of  the 
residence  prepare  medias  from  more  inexpensive 

Figure  139 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

127 

materials. Leaf compost  (made at home), pine bark, rotted sawdust and builder's sand are local choices. 
Other areas  in the southern  United States might have rice hulls and other choices. 

'"Management  flexibility  of any home system should allow the operator freedom  to travel or leave 
home for extended periods. This was accomplished by combining an automated watering system with the 
slow release fertilizers. The system is simple and inexpensive, less than $100. It consists of a 7-day time 
clock, electric solenoid valve, pressure regulator, pressure gauge, lateral piping and trickle irrigation tube. 
Two trickle lines were placed in each bed and the system operated at 4 lbs. pressure. During cold winter 
months,  operation  time  was  only  30  minutes  per  week.  Hanging baskets  were  also  watered  with  the 
system. 

The authors felt, at the time of the paper's publishing, they had insufficient  data to accurately predict 
performance through the entire heating season. During one week in February, acknowledged as "sunnier 
than normal," the solar system accounted for 58% of the total heating with the house maintained at 68— 
70°F. They stressed in me conclusions of the paper that the pre-fab greenhouse kit was too expensive and 
labor  intensive  for  its  benefits.  A  new  greenhome  under  construction  in  the  program  is to  have  the 
greenhouse  built on the site. 

Specifications 
Area:  1,917  ft2  (176 m2) 
Orientation: Due South 
Wall:  1 x 8 (25mm  x 200mm) yellow pine boards, rough-sawn,  2 x6  (50mm x  150mm) studs at  16" 
(400mm) o . c,  W  (13mm) gypsum board Finish, 6"  (150mm) batt insulation 
Glazing:  Wood frame  wall, double glazed windows 
Floors:  1st  floor  - 2 x8  (50mm  x  200mm)  floor joists  at  16"  (400mm)  o.c.  with  4"  (100mm)  batt 
insulation  with vapor barrier faced down, %"  t & g plywood flooring,  various floor  finishes 
Rooj:  2 x6  (50mm  x  150mm)  wood  truss,  %"  (13mm)  plywood  sheathing,  building  paper,  asphalt 
shingles,  12" (300mm) batt insulation 

Greenhouse 
Gross Area: 396 ft2  (36.4m2) 
Growing Area:  134 ft2  (12.3m2)  bench, 58 ft2  (5,3m2) bed plus 80 ft2  (74m2) porch area 
Type: Proprietory lean-to greenhouse structure aluminum framed, fixed to a raised concrete block green(cid:173)
house foundation  wall 
Glazing: Double-strength greenhouse " B" single glazing on diree  sides. Continuous lapping glazed ridge 
vent. 
Ventilation: Wet pad evaporative cooler with capacity of 5500 cfm.  A 2 ft  (600mm  ) automatic wall 
shutter  at  each  gable  end,  thermostatically  controlled.  Wood  door  at  each  end  of  greenhouse  porch. 
Continuous ridge vent. 

Collector 

Type: Air-on-site construction 
Gross Area:  576 ft2  (53m2) 
Tilt: 60° off horizontal, oriented due south 
Construction: 23'A"  x 48" x Vs" (.6m x 1.2m x 3mm) thick, low-iron, tempered glass panels (total of 72 
panels—,  1" (25mm) airspace, 5 mil weather-resistant composite polyester film, 314 " (88mm) airspace, 
tempered rib aluminum  roofing  painted flat black, 6"  (150mm) batt  insulation. 

Storage 

Type:  Washed  railroad  storage ballast—2" minus (50mm) 
Weight: 94 lb/ft3  (1505 kg/m3) 

1 28 

CHAPTER VIII 

Heat Capacity:  19 BTU/ft3/°F  (1274 kJm3 °C) 
Volume:  1820 ft3—85  tons (1391m3) (86.3 tonnes) 
Container: Concrete block foundation enclosures with 2" (50mm) perimeter rigid insulation, 2" (50mm) 
rigid  insulation  beneath  northern  1/3  of  rock  bed,  1"  (25mm)  insulation  beneath  middle  1/3,  and  no 
insulation  beneath  southern  1/3 of bed respectively,  vapor barrier under entire bed. 
Auxiliary: Warm air type system with a Vh  ton air source heat pump,  lOkW strip heating 

Hot Water 

Collector type: %"  (19mm) copper pipe with 2"  (50mm) square continuous aluminum fins 
Length:  70 linear feet  (21m) 
Storage Site: Two-tank system. Total of 94-gallon (365 liters) capacity—42 gallon (159 liters) tank with 
electric element, 52-gallon  (197 liters) glass-lined tank. 

Controls 

Two-stage  heating  and  cooling  thermostat  for  solar  distribution  and  auxiliary  system  differential 
thermostat  for heat collection  control.  Set point  thermostat—outdoor air, cooling control. 

Ecotecture  Group, Cedric  Green,  University  of Sheffield,  England 

The British are the masters of experience in designing, building and managing greenhouses; or to use 
the  term  they created,  conservatories. Sir Joseph  Patton's creations, like the Crystal  Palace, still evoke 
memories of great curving arches supporting a glass fairyland. J.C. Loudon's studies of the effects of beam 
radiation on panes of glass are the foundation  of today's passive solar work. 

The climate of the British Isles is distinctly different  from most parts of the U.S. First, the percentage 
of  diffuse  overcast  sky conditions is considerably  higher  than almost  anywhere in this country.  This, 
combined with high latitude (and correspondingly low sun angles and very short days in winter) makes a 
high solar fraction  in December and January an impossibility. However, there are compensations which 
favorsolar.  While the cloudy, wet weathermakes for extremely coldfeeling conditions, the actual degree 
days  are  considerably  less  than  in  the  northern  United  States.  Another  factor  that  favors  solar,  and 

Figure  140 

By Cedric Green 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

129 

1 

Hoi  air  in  the conservatory  rises and enters 
the horizontal  duct at  the top  of  the heat 
store 

2  When the temperature of  this air is hotter 

than  the bottom  of  the heat store, a fan 
pushes it  down  the vertical  heat store  As  it 
passes through  the heat storage material (he 
air  gives up  its heat 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Another  fan assists  the flow  of  air  through 
the horizontal  heat store back  into  the 
conservatory after  giving up  its heat 

At  the bottom of  the heat store  the air  is free 
to enter  the air  space between  the vertical 
glazing and the black  metal sheet  The hot  air 
rises into  the top of  the heat store, sucking 
into  the space more air  from  the bottom  of 
the heat store by thermosiphonic  action 

Flaps at the  top  of  the heat store may  be 
opened by  occupants  to  release hot  air  to 
the living space. This may  be fan assisted at 
night 

Low cost  flexible solar  collector  under 
conservatory  glazing connected  to  first  hot 
water  lank.  The system may  be extended 
to cover  the length of  the  conservatory 
during summer, removing excess space heat 
to heal domestic  water 

7 

Cooker  fumes recirculation  unit 

8  Waste hot  water  holding  tank  under  floor 

of  services unit 

9  Warm air  from  top of  court  conservatory  is 

drawn down  with  the hot  air  produced  in 
vertical high level collector  and pushed  into 
the heat store under  the  floor 

10 

Electronic  'black  box'  automatically  switches 
fans and  flap  mechanisms according to 
temperature differences  in spaces and slores 

Figure  141 

particularly greenhouses, is a year round need for heat in many locations. I was in Scotland in late July and 
nearly  froze  to  death.  Everyone  was  wearing  wool  sweaters,  and  the  oil  burners  were  going  in  all 
restaurants and homes. 

The design shown here, takes into account these two considerations. Notice that the glazing is tilted at 
a 45° angle. This is an angle that favors both diffuse  sky collection and heating over the course of an entire 
year. The building has the section on the right complete. The center conservatory and the remainder of the 
house on the left are to be completed shortly. Initial observations indicate that the conservatory/residence 
should  obtain over 60% of its heat from  the sun throughout the year (Fig.  140). 

The  entire  project  at  Sheffield  involves  much  more  than  a  solar  greenhouse.  It  is  intended  to 
demonstrate the feasibility and attractiveness of a style of living in an urban context that uses a minimum of 
now-renewable  resources in long term consumption and construction. 

1.  RESOURCE  AND ENERGY CONSERVATION 

The approach adopted has resulted from a critical evaluation of the economics of energy conservation 
systems  with  the  conclusions  that  the  most  cost-effective  and  adequately  efficient  do  not  need 
complex mechanical  technology, but are semi-passive naturally and structurally  integrated methods 
aided by simple electronic controls. 
Consumption of energy is reduced to the minimum by: 

a  high standard of insulation; 

130 

CHAPTER VIII 

b  ventilation control by weatherstripping and using plant-filled conservatories as ' 'filters''  and air(cid:173)

c 

d 

locks; 
solar energy collection using air as a collection and transfer medium, small containers of water and 
fireclay blocks as a short term storage medium, conservatories as a low cost means of providing 
a large area of glazing, and plants as solar converters, filters, humidifiers  and food; 
solar  water  heating  in  summer  diverting  heat  gain  by  means of  low  cost  "blind"  collectors 
shading the interiors. 

Consumption  of water is minimised by: 

reuse of washing  waste water for wc  flushing; 

e  collection and storage of organically filtered rain water for washing and watering; 
f 
g  use of shower and spray taps; 
h 

solar distillation  to produce drinking water. 

Constructional conservation  is achieved by: 
j  use of timber as a basic construction  and finishing material; 
k  use of recycled or processed waste materials; 
1  collection of reject materials and containers (for water); 
m  elimination of processes involving heavy mechanical plant; 
n  designing  for construction  by hand processes aided by small  power tools. 

2.  ECONOMY OF CONSTRUCTION 

Related closely  to resource conservation,  capital costs have been reduced to the minimum  to allow 
extra capital costs of the energy conservation system to be paid back by energy savings in the shortest 
posible time viz. 7 years at present rates of fuel cost inflation in the area of study. This represents 19% 
p.a.  return on capital investment after deduction of mortgage interest. 

Savings  in capital cost are achieved by: 

integration  in construction of all ducts, heat storage enclosures, etc.; 

a 
b  provisionof solar collectors as useful space in the form of conservatories with consequent savings 

c 

in circulation  and heated areas; 
standardisation  and  repetition  of  components  and  rationalised  dimensions  to use standard  off-
the-peg materials and components; 

d  off-site  component  prefabrication  of complete frame and panel construction,  rapid site erection 

and creation of weatherproof  enclosure; 

e  potential  for owner-builders,  either  buying  complete  kit-of-parts  or doing  their own  prefabrication 

from  detailed manual, thus making further  construction cost economies by providing own labour. 
simplification  of  planning details  and careful  calculation  to minimise  spans and  member sizes; 

f 
g  use of insulation  as structural core of sandwich panels; 
h 

small capacity  back-up heating system resulting from  lowered thermal  consumption. 

Sundwellings  Demonstration  Center,  Ghost  Ranch,  Abiquiu,  New  Mexico 

The  Sundwellings  Project  at Ghost Ranch is an opportunity  to test Uiree passive solar applications 
(direct gain, Trombe wall, solar greenhouse) against a control unit. The project brought some of the best 
known  names  in New  Mexico solar design  together  under Peter van Dresser's coordination.  Although 
modest in funds, the Sundwellings program has had major impact as a model for solar training. It included 
the following goals: 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

131 

1.  A  Training  Program  to train  residents  of  Northern New 
Mexico  in the techniques  of design  and construction  of  solar 
heated  dwellings and solar water heaters. A  16-week program 
involving  sixteen  trainees  consructed  two of  the test  units. 
CETA  employees  from  Santa  Clara  and  Dulce  along  with 
Ghost Ranch employees from  Abiquiu completed  the construc(cid:173)
tion phase. 

2.  A  Demonstration  Center  open  for  permanent  public 
inspection  and education, the solar units demonstrate how low-
cost  passive  sundwellings  can  be  constructed.  Use  of  the 
rooms by guests at Ghost Ranch  will give "live-in*'  experience 
of the energy-conserving  performance  of the systems. 

3.  A Solar Testing Facility The buildings are identical in size, 
construction,  and  compass  orientation.  Only  the  systems of 
heat  collection  and  heat  storage  differ. 
Instruments  and 
monitoring  equipment  installed by trainees  under the direction 
of  the Los Alamos  Scientific  Laboratories  will  allow  precise 
evaluation  and comparison  of  the  systems.  This  is  the first 
facility  like this in the world. 

1 was involved in the design of the greenhouse unit and ran the workshops that put it up. At the time, I 
optimistically predicted that the solargreenhouse would outperform the other units. (I had a vested interest, 
of course.) The technical consensus was against me. It was predicted that the direct gain would be first, 
Trombe wall second, and the greenhouse third. After two winters of testing and analyzing, I'm happy to 
say my prediction  came true. The greenhouse does approximately  80% of the heating for its units.  (The 
direct gain is second, and the Trombe wall is third.) I'm not too smug, however. The greenhouse has about 
30% more collector area than the other units. 

This larger area for solar collection is a primary advantage a greenhouse has over other passive solar 

applications. 

L*SCOt-ITC 

Greenhouse  unit  at 
Ghost Ranch:  Draw(cid:173)
ing  shows  construc(cid:173)
tion  details  common 
to all four  Sundwell(cid:173)
ings  units.  Green(cid:173)
house  is sunken 2% 
feet  into  ground for 
frost  protection, has 
double  plastic  glaz(cid:173)
ing.  Warm  air  from 
greenhouse  rises in(cid:173)
to 
through 
vent  in wall;  cool air 
sinks 
into  green(cid:173)
house to be warmed. 
Adobe  wall  behind 
it  warms  room  and 
greenhouse at night; 
heat is also stored in 
other walls and floor. 
Greenhouse  can be 
closed off to  prevent 
unwanted  heat  gain 
or loss. 

room 

Figure  142 

Reprinted  with  permission  from  Solar  Energy  Handbook, 

published  by  Popular  Science  Time  Mirror  Magazines, 

Inc. 

132 

CHAPTER VIII 

GHOST RANCH ROOM TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS 

.. 

-ATTACHED GREENHOUSE 

_ • • •« 

/ 

^ " " - D I R E CT  GAIN 

jT 

N \

.. 

\ 

CONTROL' 

-OUTSIDE AMBIENT 

\ 

I 

CLEAR DAY 
CONDITIONS 

30 r 

20  -

10  • 
• 

3 

-

n 

GHOST RANCH 

FEBRUARY. CLEAR DAY 

i  1 

• 

 
 

C
C
A
A
T
T
T
T

< 

1  3 
h 
* 
I 
I 
I 
I 
  F 

L
O
R
T
N
O
C

How  temperatures  compare  in  the  four 
Sundwellings 
at  Ghost 
Ranch,  in the mountains  of  northern  New 
Mexico,  during  two  clear  February  days: 
The  buildings  were  all  unoccupied  and 

dormitories 

totally  unheated—except  by  the   sun— 
during  this  period.  Temperatures  were 
measured 
four  buildings— 
greenhouse,  direct   gain,  Trombe  wall, 
and  control—with  globe  thermometers. 

inside 

the 

Figure  143 

Reprinted  with  permission  from  Solar  Energy  Handbook, 
published  by  Popular  Science  Time  Mirror  Magazines, 

Inc. 

Difference between  building  temperature 
and  average  outside  temperature  is  one 
measure  of  solar-heating  performance. 
The  bar chart  above shows this  difference 
for  the  four  Ghost  Ranch  buildings  on  a 
clear  winter  day.  Here  the  solar  green(cid:173)
house  does  best,  despite  having  larger 
losses through the glazing, because it also 
receives  much  more  sun  through 
the 
larger  glazed  area. 

Figure  144 

Ekose'a,  573 Mission St.,  San  Francisco CA  95105 

One energy conserving structure receiving wide attention is the Tom Smith house which overlooks 
Lake Tahoe from  the California  side. The house was designed by Lee Porter Butler and built by a local 
contractor at $28.50 per square foot,  less than local construction cost levels using conventional building 
designs  ($37.00/sq.  ft.).  The  house  is  approximately  1,800  square  feet  (includes  330  square  feet  of 
greenhouse  space) and has three bedrooms, two baths, a kitchen, and combined  living-dining  area. 

The  house  is  100 percent  passive,  utilizing  no fossil  fuels,  electricity  or mechanical  systems  for 
comfort  maintenance,  and  maintains  comfort  levels  of  temperature  and  humidity  year-round.  The 
contractor employed conventional building mettiods with readily available building materials to construct 
the home in the style preferred by the owner. The house meets or exceeds all codes, health/safety standards 
and financing  requirements. 

The  technology  itself  is elegant  and simple. The south  side of the house is a greenhouse/solarium 
area. The greenhouse is part of the active air space extending not only over the glazed openings, but also up 
over the ceiling  in what would otherwise be dead  air space, through the attic, down the opposite wall 
(usually  the north wall) and underneath the floor through the crawl space back around to the greenhouse. 
This forms the complete 'thermal envelope' within which air is free to circulate back and forth depending 
on the relative density of the air (due to temperature differences)  in the vertical areas of the envelope. Thus, 
the main  living areas are surrounded by a gently moving circle of air. 

The flywheel or inertial effect in the thermal envelope works by air convection. During times of solar 
gain, the cooler, denser air on the north side of the house falls forcing the warmer, expanded and lighter air 
in the  greenhouse to rise and circulate over the ceiling space to be cooled again on the north  side. The 
circulating air affects  and is affected  by the surface temperatures of the building materials and earth mass 
which  make up the interface of the thermal envelope. 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

133 

At night, or during periods of heat 
loss,  the  flywheel  effect  works  in 
reverse as the south face glazed green(cid:173)
house  cools  faster  than  any  other 
portion  of  the  thermal  envelope.  The 
earth  mass  then  serves  to  warm  the 
cooler air falling out of the greenhouse, 
this warmer air circulating up the north 
face and across the ceiling, once again 
to fall  through  the greenhouse. 

During  periods of solar gain, the 
mass  of  the  house  and  earth  storage 
system  absorb  excess  heat.  During 
periods  of  heat  loss,  the  mass  of  the 
system  releases  stored  heat  to  the 
active  air  space  which  minimizes 
temperature  effects  on  the  interior 
living areas. 

reports 

that 

from 

Tom  Smith 

the 
experience  of  living  in  this  house  is 
very  different 
conventional 
houses in that the air is fresh, rich and 
warm,  there are no drafts  and no cold 
spots in the house. Some other benefits  include the constant and healthful  humidity level of 50% to 60% 
year-round, the absence of dust, the quietness of the house, and the livability of the greenhouse area (which 
can  be used about 75% to 80% of the time year-round). 

Figure  145 

While it may be easy to understand how and why the house works in the winter, it is equally important 

to  realize  that  the  house  successfully  cools  in  the 
summer, also without the use of backup systems. This is 
accomplished by the dual effect of venting warm air out 
of  the  upper  portion  of  the  greenhouse  space  and 
drawing  cool  air  into the crawl  space  by means of an 
underground duct on the north  side of the house. (See 
Fig.  149, p.  134). 

A  case  history  analysis  of  the  house  is available 
from  Tom  Smith  and  Lee  Porter  Butler  for  $18.95, 
prepaid.  Ekose'a  also  offers  a  Preliminary  Planning 
Package  which  includes  ten  preliminary  plans  for 
houses  located  in  four  widely  differing  climatological 
regions  of  the  United  States  and  Canada,  explanation 
and  illustration  of  design  concepts,  principles  and 
methodologies,  a  checklist  of  design  considerations, 
presentation  of  the  type  of  modifications  necessary  to 
build a standard plan Ekose'a house in another climato(cid:173)
logical  area,  glossary  of  terms,  and  answers  to 
frequently asked questions. The price of the Preliminary 
Planning  Package  is $65, prepaid.  Send payments  for 
any desired materials to: Ekose'a, 573 Mission St., San 
Francisco, CA 94105. 

Figure  146 

134  CHAPTER VIII 

The diagrams shown refer to a generic design rather than this particular house. 

During  the  day  (Fig.  147)  the  sun 
enters 
the  greenhouse/solarium  south 
envelope  space  heating  the  air.  At  the 
same  time,  cold  outside  temperatures 
cool  the  air  in the  north  envelope  space. 
The  colder  air  is heavier  than  the  warm 
air.  The  heavier  air  is  pulled  down  by 
gravity  pushing the earth-tempered  air in 
me  crawl 
the 
greenhouse  space,  which  pushes  the 
warmer air in the greenhouse up and over 
the attic space. 

space  up  and 

into 

At night  (Fig.  148), the greenhouse 
loses  heat  faster  than  other  parts  of  the 
envelope because of the large glass areas. 
This colder air falls  into the crawl space 
where  it is warmed  by the earth and then 
pushed  up  the  north  envelope  space  and 
over  the  ceiling  and  back into the top of 
the greenhouse. 

During hot summer conditions (Fig. 
149),  the  roof  prevents  the  sun  from 
striking  the  ceiling,  thus  reducing  heat 
gain.  East  and  west  glazing  is held  to a 
minimum.  The  attic  space  heats  up  as 
usual,  but  since  the  air  is  allowed  to 
escape, there is a constant flow of cooler 
air entering  the house through  the use of 
underground pipes. 

Heat 

Heal Loss (a 
North Face of 
Envelope Helps 
Drive  Gravity 
Convective  Loop 

1 

Heat Gain from 
Sun Ifi  South 
Face Drives 
Convective Loop 

Heat Absorbed by Earth in Crawl Space 

WINTER-DAY-HEAT  GAIN 

Figure  147 

Max.  Heal  . 
' 
• 
Greater Heal Loss 
(a  Large Glass Area 
Causes Loop to Flow 
in Reverse 

A AA  

A 

A

AA 

A

AA 

Earth Supplies Heat to Air in Conv. Loop 

WINTER-NIGHT-HEAT  LOSS 

Figure  148 

Cooling Tubes 30 Ft. Long Ea. 
1668 Sq.  Ft. Total Surface Area 

* 

Fresh Air 

Introduction of Fresh 
Air to Living Space Is 
by Opening Windows or 
Doors to Envelope Space 

Average Air  Temp, 
in Envelope  r 
Cooler than Outside 
Due to Thermal Lag 
Mass Air Cooling 

Pre-conditioning  Tube Supplies  78°F (a  Base Air Steady Stale 

ENVELOPE  VENTILATION  &  COOLING 

Figure  149 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

135 

Rick's  Cafe,  Solar  Power  Supply,  Inc.,  Denver,  Colorado 

is  called 

inside 

The greenhome concept is being used in commercial applications. This is Rick's Cafe in Denver (Fig. 
150) where President Carter had dinner on National Sun Day in 1978. The design work was done by Solar 
Power  Supply  of  Evergreen, 
Colorado. An innovation  used 
here 
the  neutral 
density  collector.  The interior 
panels  of  the  upper  double 
glazing is a gray-colored plexi(cid:173)
glass. The darker color of  the 
interior  plexiglass  absorbs 
radiation  and  causes  high  air 
temperatures  in  between  the 
glazing. The heat is then taken 
out of the glazings at the apex 
and  blown  down  to  rock  bed 
storage  under  the  floor  of  the 
cafe  (Fig.  151).  While  this is 
not  as efficient  as  using  regu(cid:173)
lar  double  glass  in  handling 
the  warm  air 
the 
greenhouse,  it  was done for a 
specific  purpose  here.  The  cafe  has  patrons  all 
through  the late morning and early afternoon  period 
throughout  the entire year.  By reducing solar trans(cid:173)
mission,  the  inside  light  is softer  and  temperatures 
are less extreme.  It's a good  idea for  a greenhouse 
which has continuous daytime occupancy. 

Figure  150 

Helion,  Inc. 
Box  445,  Brownsville 
California  95919 

1.  Solar  Greenhome  1 is  the  first  of  several 
greenhomes to be constructed by Helion. A series of 
design studies paved the way to a simple structure— 
primarily  post  and  beam/blockwall.  Design  work 
was  done  by  Jack  Park,  with  input  from  Marianne 
Langhorn and Helen Park. 

2.  A  solar  greenhome—the  term  started  at 
Helion—is 
the  best  combination  of  dwelling 
structure  and  solar  greenhouse  for  climate  control 
and food  production. 

3.  Principal solar heat gain is from  greenhouse 
glazing  to  the  16"  thick Trombe  heat  storage  wall 
which  doubles  as  a structural  wall.  Secondary  heat 
gain  is by optional glazing on the sloping south wall 
of the loft.  Helion has chosen insulated sliding glass 
windows  for  the  first  version  of  this  dwelling  to 
enhance summer ventilation—mild summer climates 
will not demand additional ventilation. 

Figure  151 

1 36 

CHAPTER VIII 

Figure  152 

4.  Secondary heat storage is produced by the structural north block wall—with the insulated curtain 
wall outside of it—and  (10) ten or more tons of fist-sized washed river rocks under the floor.  Primary air 
flow  is through these rocks into the greenhouse. 

5.  An optional  wood deck allows construction  of Greenhome  1  on a sloping site, as was Helion's 

prototype. 

6. A loft  over vestibule provides a small  guest sleeping quarters or additional storage space. 
7. Roofing material is corrugated aluminum sheets cut to just under 21*0" long for the main roof, 2'-
0"  long  for the greenhouse and 12'-0" long for the vestibule. The steep slopes of these roofs makes this 
material  difficult  to install, but with careful  installation this yields a lifetime,  fire  resistant roof. 

8. All vents penetrate sidewalls, rather than the roof membrane. 
9. Greenhome  1 is a  flexible,  expandable  structure,  designed  for an absolutely  minimum  cost, 

thermally efficient  dwelling. 

Helion sells blueprints for Greenhome  1. Write to the address above. 

Hamilton Migel, Santa Fe, N. M. 

Hal  Migel  is a designer and builder of exceptional talent.  I first  became  aware of his  professional 
skills seven oreight years ago when every adobe mudslinger I knew was saying, "Have youseen  the detail 
work  in Migel's  newest house?*' Attention  to detail, function  and form  personifies  his work. 

Migel was the first person in this region to demonstrate that a greenhouse could be the primary heating 

unit for a large home (2500 square  feet).  He did it with some revolutionary  innovations. 

The double-walled  clear face  is separated (or inflated)  by a small fan and is supported by thin steel 
ribbing. The entire clear wall can be detached from the front  of the house in late spring, leaving a lovely 
outdoor garden in full bloom. Removing the cover also provides a clear view to the outside (also see Solar 
Room, p. 157). 

Warm air is ducted from the greenhouse apex to a rock storage bed underthe house, then back into the 
unit to complete  the loop. Radiant  heat from the concrete slab over the rock bed warms the house. The 
system provides approximately 80 percent of home heating. 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

137 

Figure  154 

Independent  Greenhouses 

In this section we'll look at freestanding  solar greenhouses, both large and small, and at some of the 
work  going  on  in  research  institutions  to  make  conventional  greenhouses  more  energy  efficient  and 
productive.  It's important to realize that the criteria for success in these greenhouses are quite  different. 
The  home  owner  will  desire  a  small  structure,  usually  between  100-200  sq.  ft.,  that  will  allow  for 
gardening throughout the year with a minimum of expense and upkeep. The commercial grower, on the 
other hand, is in it as a profit making business. To date, commercial growers have been unwilling to spend 
vast amounts of money making their greenhouses more energy efficient.  Greenhouse farming has never 
been  a  big  money  maker,  and  current  uncertainties  in  fuel  availability  make  their  reticence  easy  to 

138 

CHAPTER VIII 

understand.  So,  any  improvement  in energy  conservation  they  might  make  must  be  weighed  against 
capital investment, depreciation and a long list of other factors that are found in any business. The newest 
entry in the solar greenhouse field is the community greenhouse. This is an exciting concept to which we 
will devote part of this section. 

Brace  Institute,  McDonald  College  of  Mi-Gill University,  Quebec,  Canada 

Tom  Lawand  and his colleagues at Brace Institue were dealing with a specific  problem when they 
began their pioneering efforts  in solar greenhouses in early  *70's. In their locale are many small  farmers 
trying to earn a living by truck farming vegetables and with seasonal sales of flowers and seedlings. The 
area is characterized by both short growing seasons and killing early frosts. The institute knew that small 
greenhouses  could  greatly  aid  these  farmers  but didn't  want  to substitute  one problem  for  another  by 
recommending energy-intensive conventional designs. The outgrowth of these challenges was the design 
shown here. It is apparent by the relatively small amount of glazing that mis is a design specific to a high 
latitude  and limited growing season. However, the principles of good thermal greenhouse design began by 
Brace  have  evolved  and  spread 
throughout 
the  solar  greenhouse 
field.  Besides optimizing  the tilt of 
the  north  wall  and  their  work  with 
reflective  interior  walls,  Brace  has 
recently 
involved  with 
materials and mounting systems  for 
movable 
the 
greenhouse. 

insulation 

been 

in 

Much of the  Institute's effort is 

directed  toward appropriate techno(cid:173)
logies in third world agriculture and 
housing.  More information  on their 
publications and blueprints of these 
greenhouse are available by writing 
them.  Inquire  as  to  the cost of  the 
publications and include a S. A.S.E. 

*In  The Southern  Hemisphere,  The Glazed  Wall  Faces  North 

'SOUTH 

Figure  155 

The Brace Greenhouse—General Principles 

•  The peak line is oriented east-west. 
•  The north wall is insulated to reduce heat losses. 
•  The north wall  is inclined toward  the sun at an angle of 68°, chosen to avoid shadows at the summer 

solstice at the 47°  latitude. 

•  The south roof is glazed and inclined at 35°. This angle is not optimal for capturing solar radiation but 
forms a configuration  that is convenient for the operator who must stand and work within the structure, 
yet avoids the large volume of air that would have to be heated in a higher peak. 

•  The interior of the north wall is covered with a reflective surface, which serves to increase the amount of 

radiation reaching the plant canopy. 

Reed  E.  Maes,  Environmental  Research Institute,  Ann Arbor,  Michigan  48107 

The innovations found in the Maes greenhouse could have long range repercussions for cold climate 
food  self sufficiency.  Reed Maes who conceived, financed  and constructed this 6000 sq. ft.  structure on 
his own, had stringent criteria for the operation. First of all, he feels that it is mandatory that northern states 
reduce their dependency on outside sources for their fresh food in winter. Next, in order for the concept to 

THE  STATE OF THE  ART 

139 

be  viable  for  the  small  farmer  and 
grower  it  had  to  be  low  in  cost 
initially  and easy  to  manage.  Last, 
Reed knew that a small, commercial 
operation could not afford to pay the 
heating  bills  a conventional  green(cid:173)
house  in  this  severe  climate  area 
would  incur and  stay cost-competi(cid:173)
tive  with  Southern  California  and 
Mexican produce. 

The result of his labors in this 
structure  are  innovative  in  both 
technical features and management. 

Figure  157 

55  Gallon  Water 
Storage  Druma 

Insulated 
Footing 

Light  Gal"-Insulated  Winter  Carden  Design  Layout 

Figure  158 

Figure  156 

"The  winter  garden  is  58  meters  long  in  the 
east-west  direction  to  take  advantage  of  the  winter 
sun and is 9.1 meters wide. It has an area of 532 M^ 
or approximately 6000 ft  . An A-frame is basically 2 
x  4  wood  construction  using 24 ft.  lengths  for  the 
long triangular  members. The lower 8 feet  contains 
most  of  the  framing,  while  the  upper  level  only 
supports  the  polyethylene  cover  and  the  venting 
mechanism.  The lower third of  the south wall used 
transparent fiberglass on the inner surface, and when 
this is coupled with the outer layer of polyethylene it 
results in a loss factor of about R-1.5. The ceiling is 
constructed  of  2  inch  thick  foil-faced  polyurethane 
sheets  that  have  an R value of  about  16. The north 
wall  uses  standard  construction  materials  and  also 
has  a loss  value  equivalent  to R-16. Therefore,  the 
only high thermal loss surface of the garden is the 8 
ft.  high south wall. This configuration  results in heat 
losses less than 25% of a similarly sized conventional 
greenhouse. 

"In the low energy greenhouse it is also neces(cid:173)

sary to reduce ground losses around the perimeter of 
the structure to a low level. This insulated footing  is 
especially  important  because  the  ground  is  the 
important  thermal  capacity  of  the  garden  and  the 
main  source  of  stored  heat.  The  5  cm  styrofoam 
insulated footing was installed below the frost line to 
a depth of  1.2 meters. Water drum and gravel trench 
storages  were  also employed  to add  to the  thermal 
capacity  of  the  garden.  The  200  liter  drums  were 
placed  along  the  north  wall,  whereas  air  was 
circulated through the rock storage with a number of 
circulating  fans  placed  at  intervals  extending  the 
length of the garden. The gravel storage was found to 
be  very  inefficient  and merefore  the fans have been 
used very little. 

140 

CHAPTER VIII 

"'The  severe  Michigan  winter  of 
1977-78 was a good  test of the structural 
advantages  of  an  A-frame.  Snow  loads 
during  the  winter  were  shed  from  the 
steep slopes with no melting heat required 
from  the  interior.  Also,  the  wind  loads 
and  blizzards  were  survived  without 
mishap. 

"'The  garden  areas  were  planted 
with  lettuce,  broccoli,  radishes,  garlic, 
onions,  cauliflower  and  spinach  in  Oc(cid:173)
tober.  These  crops  matured  during  the 
winter  with  no  added  heat,  and  second 
crops  of  lettuce  and  spinach  were  har(cid:173)
vested. Venting is required on most sunny 
days  because  the  excess  heat  cannot  be 
adequately stored. 

Figure  159 

"For test purposes, the greenhouse was divided into two 29-meter sections in mid-February.  It now 
has a cold weather section and a section heated by a furnace to maintain a temperature of 62°, adequate for 
warm weather crops such as tomatoes and cucumbers. The tomatoes and cucumbers ripened in early May. 
The heat losses have been monitored since the heat was turned on. The degree-days during this time frame 
were 3500 and the heat required was 76 KWHR/M2 or  12,000 BTU/ft2.  This projects to about twice this 
amount on a yearly basis and is very modest compared to conventional greenhouses." 

In  addition  to his technical  innovations  Reed has developed  a marketing strategy  for the produce. 
Because all of the vegetables are organically grown, the production is contracted through a local food co(cid:173)
op.  So, local residents can get organic home-grown  food throughout the year in Ann Arbor. 

The  Herb  Shop 

This  unit  might  be 
considered  the  mother  of 
solar  greenhouse  design 
(Fig.  160).  As  far  as  I 
know,  it  was  the first such 
commercial  greenhouse  in 
the  United  States.  The 
design  is based on the work 
of  the  Brace  Institute  (in 
Canada) and T. A. Law and. 
Joan  Loitz, 
the  owner, 
adjusted  the  angle  of  the 
front  face and the  reflective 
wa]]  t0   correspond  to 

Figure 160 

frack 

the latitude of Santa Fe, New Mexico. The north wall is at a 78° angle (angle of the sun at summer solstice) 
and is insulated with 4" of fiberglass.The interior is paneled with Masonite and painted with a glossy white 
enamel. The rafters extend from the roof peak to the ground and were originally uncovered for the lower 10 
feet. Joan covered this area with corrugated Lascolite to make a greenhouse' 'preheater'' or' 'buffer zone" 
and cold frame area. It stays about 25 degrees colder than the main greenhouse at night. This addition cost 
her 90 cents per square foot and gave her an extra 480 square feet of growing space. 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

1 41 

Occasionally a customer will challenge Joan about her use of supplemental gas heating. She replies 
that she's in the business, not playing games, and that the heater is the most cost-efficient  way of backing 
up a system that's 80 percent solar. Joan estimates that it would cost her $3,000 to install an active solar 
system to capture the 20 percent non-solar power that the gas company furnishes. Her average $32 a month 
gas bill for the eight-month cold season compares to $ 160 a month for a similarly sized conventional green(cid:173)
house  in the area,  and  bears out  the effectiveness  of  her design.  Incidentally,  she's  running 70 degree 
nighttime lows, which is considerably  higher than those maintained in non-commercial  greenhouses. 

Some  thermal  storage  is provided  by  sixteen  55-gallon  drums that  also double  as  table  supports. 
Although  these drums  receive little  direct sunlight,  they do contribute to heating when the ambient air 
drops below their temperature  and help to stabilize temperature  fluctuations. 

One drawback to the design of this unit is that the entire clear area approximates a normal angle to the 
summer sun. This may be all right for Quebec, but it creates overheating and plant-burning problems in 
Santa Fe. Joan has used some ingenious low-cost methods to combat this problem. One of them is to attach 
a  $1.98  misting  nozzle  to  a  hose  and  hang  it  in  front  of  the  air circulating  fan.  This  will  lower  the 
temperature  10 degrees in  10 minutes; she turns it on several times during a summer afternoon.  She also 
trains scarlet runner beans up the west wall to block some of the afternoon  sun. 

Joan  and  I  have  often  worked  together  in  planning  community  solar  greenhouse  systems.  Her 
particular expertise is in organic growing methods and biological control of insect pests (see Chapter VII). 
She ships  100 varieties of organic solar-powered herbs all over the world. You can order from the address 
given below. 

Owners: Joan Loitz, The Herb Shop,  1942% Cerrillos Rd., Santa Fe, NM 87501 
Designers: Brace Institute of McGill  University,  and Ms. Loitz 
Builders: Joan Loitz and  friends 
Floor Area:  1600 square feet 
Clear Area:  1042 square feet (greenhouse); 480 square feet (cold frame)  =  1522 total square feet 

University  of  Arizona 
Environmental  Research 
Laboratory 

This research center is concen(cid:173)
trating on the development of inte(cid:173)
grated  systems  that  provide  power, 
water  and  food.  Staff  members  at 
the  laboratory  are  experimenting 
with aquaculture and vegetable pro(cid:173)
duction  within 
polyethylene-
covered  greenhouses.  Plastic-lined 
tanks  contain  shrimp  that  feed  on 
organisms 
living  among  water 
hyacinths in the pond (Fig.  161). 

An 

interesting 

secondary 
project  that is being developed is an 
insulating greenhouse cover similar 
to the BeadwallR  that injects liquid 
foam between the plastic layers at night (see Fig. 45). 

Figure  161 

Another facility created by the Environmental Research Laboratory expands the ecosystem approach 
to include desalination of sea water and nutrient preparation for the greenhouse use. This ambitious project 
is  being  carried  out  in  collaboration  with  the  University  of  Sonora  and  is located  at  Puerto  Penasco, 
Mexico.  In this design, waste heat from engine-driven electric generators is used to desalt the sea water. 

142 

CHAPTER VIII 

The  fresh  water  is  then  piped  to  vegetables  within  controlled-environment  greenhouses of  air-inflated 
plastic. The researchers state: 

"The  concept  is  applicable  to  vast  regions  where  almost  nothing  grows—and  where 

desalted water remains prohibitively expensive for open-field agriculture. The principal advan(cid:173)
tage of the concept for arid regions is extreme conservation of water. Moisture lost from field 
crops, by evaporation and transpiration, is enormous, of course. In a closed system this moisture 
can be captured. Estimates are that a plant within such a sealed-in environment uses only about a 
tenth as much water as it would need outdoors." 

Energy  Conservation  and  Solar  Applications 

to Conventional  Large Scale  Greenhouses 

Commercial growers who own conventional greenhouses are in trouble. Besides having to compete 
with  produce shipped  across the country (or from  other nations) they must try to stay competitive while 
paying huge fuel bills on energy gobbling greenhouses. Many of the larger growers, who measure the area 
under the glass in acres, are family operations owned and managed by the children or grandchildren of the 
people who built these durable units originally. It's ironic that structures of this quality of construction also 
represent such ineptitude of thermal design. 

Luckily,  there  are  people  who  have  chosen  to tackle  the  most  difficult  of  greenhouse  problems: 

making it technically  and economically feasible to heat these dinosaurs. 

Ohio  Agriculture  Research  and  Development  Center,  Wooster,  Ohio 

Here  are  some  excerpts  from  "Conserving  heat  in  glass  greenhouses  with  surface-mounted  air-

inflated plastic" by W.L. Bauerle and T.H. Short. 

"Steam flow  meters and recorders were placed in both the plastic-covered glasshouse compartment 
and an identical conventional glasshouse compartment to measure the total amount of energy used in each. 
Solar radiometers were placed inside and outside of each compartment to measure sunlight accumulation. 
Wind  measurements were recorded  to determine the total miles of wind per day across the experimental 
compartments. Total yield and fruit  quality data were recorded. 

"Measurements  of  energy  requirements  for  each  of  the two compartments  from  December  1975 
through  March  1976 (the 4 coldest  months  of the year  in Ohio) revealed that  the double  plastic  cover 
reduced the total heat use by 57%. 

' 'Glass and structural members of the conventional glass greenhouse reduced the solar radiation by an 
average of 35%. An additional reduction of  18% was measured in the double plastic-covered glasshouse. 
The  plastic  cover,  however,  tended  to  diffuse  the  light  more  uniformly  within  the  greenhouse  and 
structural shading was less apparent. 

"The daytime relative humidity  in the plastic-covered  glasshouse was approximately  12% greater 
than in the conventional glasshouse during the winter months when the vents were closed. High levels of 
humidity tend to reduce plant stress and improve pollen viability on a spring tomato crop. No difference in 
disease incidence was observed. 

"The total number of fruit on each plant was similar for both compartments. However, fruit  weight 
per plant was reduced in the plastic covered house by 6.5% for W-R 25,4.3% forM-R  13, and  10.3% for 
Hybrid  O.  (Hybrid O is not normally grown as a spring crop.) 

' 'The economic implications of these results have caused much grower interest in the double-cover 
system  for  glasshouses.  A  few  growers  have  already  tried  the system  and  have  encountered  technical 
difficulties  with installation.  Other growers have successfully  used this system for 2 years. 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

14 3 

Observations 

"The plastic should remain pressurized at all times. Normal operating pressure will keep the plastic 
from having wind ripples and make it feel soft to a gentle push. Many growers installing double plastic for 
the first time become alarmed at billowing after inflation. Considerable billowing is normal and effectively 
allows  the  outer  cover  to adjust  to variable  wind  and  internal  pressure  loadings.  If allowed  to remain 
deflated  for a number of days, the wind-whipped  plastic will slowly begin to tear near the fasteners. 

"The  effect  of  double covers on  paint  peeling has not been  fully  assessed.  However,  little or no 
peeling has been observed with air-inflated double covers. The inside cover is pressed so securely against 
the bars that it may actually protect the paint. Most grower experiences with plastic covers causing paint 
peeling  have  been  associated  with  single,  uninflated  covers  on  sidewalls.  Uninflated  plastic  covers 
typically  cause paint peeling by collecting moisture and hammering the paint on windy days. 

"Heavy  snow  loading  on  gutter-connected  houses  may  be  a  major  problem.  Generally,  an  air-
inflated  plastic  cover  tends  to  distribute  snow  loads  much  better  than  glass.  Normal  snow  and  ice 
accumulations melt off slowly as long as the cover remains inflated and effectively insulated. If the cover is 
temporarily deflated,  the melting rate is greatly increased. Large snow loads tend to naturally deflate the 
cover in the heaviest loaded areas. The probability  of glass breakage under these  circumstances is not 
known  Neither is it known whether glass breakage would occur under the same circumstances without the 
plastic.  It is most likely that the plastic will still maintain the integrity of the roof even if some glass does 
break. 

_. 

"Obviously there are risks which must be taken in applying double plastic to glass greenhouses,  the 
potential  heat  savings  of  57%  indicated  by  OARDC  research  makes  the  risks  economically  worth 
consideration and in some cases necessary. It is most important that growers first cover only a small area to 
get experience. Growers should also be sure to contact their insurance company before proceeding. The 
Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center can only verify the energy and crop responses under 
the glasshouse and double-plastic  covered glasshouse conditions. 

' 'There have not been any engineering analyses of the structural responses to the double-plastic cover 

system,  and OARDC cannot be held responsible for any failures. 

Figure 162 

•t 

144 

CHAPTER VIII 

"To  date,  no  serious  failures  have  occurred  as a result of  double  plastic  over glass  greenhouses 
located  in heavy snowfall  areas. It is anticipated that further  growth trials and observations will be made 
known  to the industry for future  use." 

Cook  College,  Rutgers  University,  New Brunswick,  New  Jersey 

The staff at Cook College has been addressing the problems of heating commercial greenhouses of the 
newer double-inflated  polyethylene  variety. These low cost units now comprise a major  fraction  of the 
market. The growers who use these greenhouses are often raising flowers and ornamentals that demand a 
much  narrower  temperature  range  than  found  in  a  home  greenhouse.  (65°  lows  and  82°  highs,  for 
instance.) For that reason, the applications are more intricate than most in this book. Cook College had the 
opportunity  to put different  systems together that had been  tested seperately  before  in the  "Kube  Pak" 
demonstration.  This 58,000 sq.  ft.  facility  is at the Kube Pak Garden Plants in Allentown, New Jersey. 
Here is the system description from a paper by Mears, Roberts, Kendall and Simpkins of the Rutgers team. 

"An insulation system being utilized at Kube Pak is a movable horizontal curtain which encloses the 
growing  area  at  night and opens during  the day  to allow normal  lighting conditions  in the greenhouse. 
Substantial  heat  savings  are  obtained  with  properly  installed  single-layer  thin-film  curtains.  Curtain 
insulation  systems are currently being utilized with conventional heating systems to reduce heat loss and 
several companies are marketing systems. The system is installed at Kube Pak is based upon mechanisms 
previously  utilized  for  pulling  black-cloth  shading  systems. Curtains are pulled  across  each  section of 
greenhouse by motor driven cables running just under the greenhouse gutters. Between the drive cables, 
located  10 ft.  (3m)  apart,  the curtain  is supported  by stationary  polypropylene  monofilaments.  As the 
curtain  is closed,  the leading edge  intercepts  the hanging  tail of the next curtain  sealing  each  section. 
"At  Kube  Pak there are four  new curtain  materials  under test: 4 mil clear  vinyl, 4 mil clear vinyl 
laminated  to 0.5  mil  aluminized  mylar,  6 mil black  vinyl,  and  6 mil black  vinyl  laminated  to 0.5  mil 
aluminized mylar. During the evaluation phase of the project, these materials will be monitored and their 
relative heat savings and mechanical performance  noted. 

"The porous concrete floor system is both storage and primary heat exchanger for the greenhouse. 
The floor is constructed of four layers: polystyrene board insulation, a vinyl swimming pool liner, gravel 
flooded with water, and a cap of porous concrete. The porous concrete forms a firm floor, a heat exchange 
surface,  and allows excess irrigation water to drain. The water provides thermal storage when mixed with 
gravel and is the heat transfer  fluid  for the solar collector and secondary heat transfer system. The vinyl 
liner contains the concrete, gravel and water. The insulation also serves as mechanical protection  for the 
liner during construction. 

' Temperatures in the floor are kept low to enable plants to be grown directly on the warm floor and to 
increase the efficiency  of the solar collectors. Low storage temperatures require that a large area of heat 
exchange  be provided.  This  is the function  of  the vertical  curtain  heat  exchangers  which  are made by 
connecting a water distribution  pipe to a horizontal support. A vinyl film is draped completely over this 
support.  When heat is needed, a thermostat actuates a pump which circulates warm water from  the floor 
through  the water distribution  pipe. As the water trickles down between the hanging curtains, the entire 
inside surface is wet. The water exits the bottom of the curtain and returns directly to storage through the 
porous concrete.  Strings  looped  under the curtain  are attached  to a movable cable.  When  the cable  is 
pulled,  the  strings  roll  the curtain  up like a porch  awning  for out of  the way  storage overhead.  These 
curtains are positioned over the walkways so that no plant growing space is required  for their use. 

' 'The solar collector consists of a frame covered with five layers (two clear tubes and a black sheet) of 
plastic film. The black plastic sheet, which is the absorber plate of the collector, is sandwiched between the 
two air-inflated clear greenhouse grade polyethylene tubes. The air spaces between the rear two layers and 
the front  two layers are kept inflated  with small blowers. The absorber plate is pressed between the two 
inflated polyethylene cushions which stabilize the structure and provide some insulation. There are three 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

145 

AID 

INSULATED  GREENHOUSE 

VERTICAL  CURTAIN 

i ' C H . H .K 

UOVAftLE 

INSULATION 

:  DISTRIBUTION  PIP1 

S R A V E L ' * * T ER  ST0RA4E 

PUMP  TO  SUPPL 

PLASTIC  L I N fd 

POROUS  CONCRETE 

LOOR 

PLASTIC  SOLAR  COLLECTOR 

OF  SOLA*  MCATEO 

« * E C N * 0 U 3E 

Figure 163 

flows 

frames  under  test  at  Kube  Pak:  a 
wooden frame  based  upon research 
prototype  designs,  and  steel  frame 
units utilizing greenhouse structural 
components. Three collector frames 
have  steel  greenhouse  roof  rafters 
previously  utilized  in  greenhouse 
structures  at  Kube  Pak.  The  fifth 
collector utilizes steel tubing used as 
roof supports in commercially avail(cid:173)
able  greenhouses.  Water  is  intro(cid:173)
duced along the top of the collectors 
through perforated header pipes and 
down  over  the  black  poly(cid:173)

ethylene  absorbing  layer.  The gutter at the bottom of the frame  collects the heated water which  returns 
to the greenhouse floor via a gravity flume. The collector orientation is south, and the slope is adjustable 
between  25° and 65° to compensate for seasonal changes in the sun angle above the horizon." 

The technical papers of Mears, Roberts, Kendall, and Simpkins (in various order of first authorship) 
are often  found in American Society of Agriculture Engineers (ASAE) publications and in the proceedings 
of the DOE-USDA  sponsored Solar Heated Greenhouse  Conferences. 

The  New  Alchemy  Institute,  Woods  Hole,  Massachusetts 

1.  Terraces  for  year-round  fruit  and  vegetable  production  employing  microclimates  of  heat 

and  light  to nurture a diverse  food-producing 

3.  Rock storage unit stores excess 
heat during the day for night 
ventilation and warming. Air 
from the top of the Ark is 
blown through 45 cubic 
yards of rock where it is stored 
for redistribution at night. 
Moving air also serves 

to break up poten(cid:173)

tially  harmful 

air stag(cid:173)
nation. 

ecosystem. 
2.  Solar ponds for intensive aquaculture of tilapia and other aquatic organisms. Algae  _ 
culture  in the  ponds absorb  sunlight  to drive  the aquatic food  chain.  Heat  absorbed-
passively by the ponds is re-radiated at night to help warm the bioshelter. 
4.  1  HP 3000 CFM  fan 
5.  Propagation  bench  for  producing  vegetable  seedlings,  valuable  free 

cuttings  and ornamentals. 
6.  Open  aquaculture  pond  for  greenhouse  irrigation  water  and 
maintaining fish  for observation and feeding experiments. 
7.  Observation  laboratory  housing environmental  monitors and 
instrumentation data recorders. 
8.  Vent  for  seasonal  climate  control,  closed  in  winter  to 
trap heat for storage, open in summer to allow excess heat to 
escape. 
9.  South  roof constructed of 2 layers of 
.040" translucent fiberglass  reinforced 
resin sheets with a  1" air space admits 
light to the interior and traps heat. In(cid:173)
sulating value: R-2.75. Light trans-
mittance: 75%. 
10.  North Roof of wood  frame 
construction with R-24 insula(cid:173)
tion. Interior painted glossy 
white to reflect  light onto 
growing beds. 
11.  Concrete 
perimeter walls with 
2"  extruded poly(cid:173)
styrene  foam. 
Insulating 
value: R-9. 

Figure  164 

146 

CHAPTER VIII 

For  over  a  decade  die  New  Alchemy  Institute  has  been  a  leader  in  research  and  application  of 
ecologically sound methods of food production and shelter. They have consistently maintained a standard 
of excellence in dieir scientific research and thequality of their publications. The Ark at Woods Hole is a 
working laboratory that also functions as an educational facility  for community outreach programs.  In it, 
experiments are conducted in a real world setting and open to scrutiny of die visiting public. The Institute is 
supported  entirely by private contributions and me revenue generated  by sales of publications.  You can 
subscribe  to  die  Institute  by  writing  diem  at  Box 432,  Woods  Hole,  Mass.  02543.  Please  enclose  a 
S.A.S.E. 

Design and construction  management for die New Alchemists is done by Solsearch of Cambridge, 

Mass. 

Ecotope  Group, 
2332 East Madison,  Seattle, 
Washington 

heaters, 

This  multi-disciplinary  group 
of  individuals has pioneered hands-
on workshops in solar greenhouses, 
water 
outreach 
education of solar technology. They 
have  developed  a  fine  group  of 
workshop  manuals  (see  Biblio(cid:173)
graphy)  as  a  result  of  extensive 
experience  in diis field. 

and 

_. 
,,,_ 
Figure  165 

The  greenhouse  pictured  here 
was one of dieir original projects at 
„ 
Pragtree Farm. Over die years it has 
served  as  a  working  laboratory  to examine bodi  me diermal concepts in die structure and aquaculture 
growing widiin. Fig.  166 shows an interior view of die greenhouse widi die reflective parabolic wall to the 
right. This wall acts to reflect low angle winter sunlight down to a fish tank below (Fig  167). The rela(cid:173)
tively  small  surface  area of the top of the tank (for the volume of water) can be insulated by either a 

K  J  .  , 

_ 

6  , 

Figure  166 

Figure  167 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

147 

clear insulating cover, such as Bubble Pak, or movable floating styrofoam insulation. The tank is designed 
to  provide  both  thermal  storage  for  the  greenhouse  interior  and  a  suitable  environment  for  the fish. 
Technical  evaluations  of  the  concept  by  Reichmuth  and  Straub  are  found  in  Solar  Energy  Society 
conference  proceedings. 

Another feature of the Pragtree greenhouse is the thermal chimney shown in Fig.  165. This functions 

like the example given in Appendix H (Vent Sizing) to help cool the greenhouse. 

David  J.  MacKinnon,  University  of Northern Arizona,   Flagstaff,  Arizona 

Dave MacKinnon is well known in solar energy circles for his technical papers on light physics in the 
greenhouse  and his field work  and  writings  for Rodale  Press. This  small  unit in Flagstaff  has been the 
working laboratory for much of his efforts over the last five years. Here are some excerpts from his recent 
papers: 

1. The Greenhouse as a Solar Collector 

"As  a result of  this study,  certain  conclusions 
can be reached on the thermal characteristics  of the 
Rodale solar greenhouse in Flagstaff and solar green(cid:173)
houses in general. 

During the monitoring period reported here, the 
greenhouse  air  temperatures  never  dropped  below 
40°F and remained 30°F to 40°F above ambient in 
winter and 20°F to 30° in spring. 

A very rough energy analysis performed on two 
clear  days,  one  in  winter  and  the  other  in  spring, 
showed that 34% of all solar irradiation entering the 
greenhouse  was absorbed  by the growing beds,  the 
floor  and the water walls. 

Even  though  the greenhouse seemed  to collect 
and store adequate heat in the midle of winter,  some 
excess heat was always vented on a clear day. 

2.  The Greenhouse as a Microclimate for Plants 

Figure  168 

Temperatures  at plant level stayed between 50°F and 85° for the majority  of the winter and spring. 
However,  different  microclimates  within  the  greenhouse  itself  were  recognized  from  our  study.  Soil 
temperatures  are  much  colder  near  the  south  glazing  in  winter.  Although  interior  air  temperatures 
increased  with  height  during the day,  little stratification  occurred during the night and cloudy  periods. 
Apparently  the  radiant  heating  from  the  water  storage  maintained  a surprisingly  uniform  temperature 
environment. 

3.  The Thermal Contribution of East and West Wall Storage and Floor 

Water storage along the side walls and earth at floor level provide an important addition to the thermal 
capacity of the greenhouse. A rough calculation shows that the sidewalls and the floor (including growing 
beds) each provided  roughly 25% of the total stored energy. 

Horizontal  insulation  beneath  the  greenhouse  soil  is  probably  not  worth  the  effort  or  expense. 

Perimeter insulation  is still  recommended. 

south(double 
glazed wall 

5oz. Filon 
fiberglass 

insulation 

north 
roof 

148 

CHAPTER  VIII 

4.  Proper Placement of thermal 

Storage 

Our study  indicates the impor(cid:173)
tance  of  proper  placement  of 
storage. By stacking 5 gallon honey 
tins on the east, west and north walls 
surrounding  the  plant  beds,  there 
exists a significant radiant exchange 
from  storage  to  the  plant  environ(cid:173)
ment,  dampening  fluctuations  and 
stratification 
in  air  temperatures 
during cold winter nights. 

5.  The Use of 5 Gallon Honey Tins 

as Thermal Storage 

Relatively  small  water  filled 
containers  in  a  tight  fitting  wall 
seem  to  make  a  very  effective 
passive  storage  system.  These  containers  are  small  enough  to  reduce  the  vertical  stratification  of 
heat common  in larger storage vessels, such as 55 gallon drums, but large enough to allow convection to 
rapidly  place absorbed heat into the interior of the wall. 

Figure  169 

6.  Shading of the Greenhouse by East and West Walls 

Shading of the greenhouse  interior by the east and west walls and north roof becomes  increasingly 
evident as the spring equinox approaches. While greenhouse light levels remain quite adequate for heating 
the  greenhouse,  loss  of  light  to the  plants  in  morning  and  afternoon  limits  plant  photosynthesis.  One 
solution to this problem might be the use of removable insulating panels on the east and west walls that can 
be taken off  in spring  to increase the light to the plant beds (Fig. 26, p. 33). This approach for summer 
growing would require removal of insulating panels on the north roof as well. 

Another paper examines the effects  on light of the opaque north wall of a solar greenhouse: 
Under almost all conceivable lighting conditions the specular north wall (shiny surface) is better than 
a diffusing  north wall (white paint). However, snow reflection  under cloudy conditions brings the light 
fluxvalues at the ground from  a diffuse  wall nearly to those of the specular wall. 

It  is  also  true  that  an  opaque  north  wall,  even  if  reflecting,  cuts  out  diffuse  light  totals  in  the 
greenhouse, but the amount is far less than one might expect, particularly if a specular surface is employed. 
Not to use some sort of insulated and reflecting  north wall makes little sense no matter what the external 
lighting environment  may be. 
Final Note 

Long wave, infrared  light energy will interact with the diffuse  and specular wall in a way similar to 
visible  light energy.  Therefore  energy  from  radiant sources will be reflected  from  a specular wall more 
effectively  than a diffuse  wall. If this source is located at the ground or along the north wall, the specular 
north wall will reflect  more energy to the south glazing and out the greenhouse than the diffuse  wall. The 
presence  of  the specular  diffuser  and  glazings  opaque  to long  wave  infrared  will  help reduce  this loss 
during the day. But even more importantly when specular walls are used, the potential for this loss points to 
the need of insulation  or a radiation block on glazed walls during the night. 

MacKinnon's  technical papers are found  in the Passive Conference  Proceedings and the Marlboro 

and  Plymouth  Solar Greenhouse  Proceedings. 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

149 

Wesley  and  Frances  Tyson 

I  designed  and  built 

the 
Tyson's  solar  greenhouse  for  them 
shortly  after  they moved from  New 
Jersey to Santa Fe. After examining 
their property, 1 told the Tysons that 
there was no way to attach the unit to 
their  home  without  demolishing 
several  trees.  Frances  didn't  really 
care,  as  she  considers  most  of  the 
large imported trees surrounding her 
home water mongers anyway.  But I 
didn't want to be the assasin. So, we 
decided  to  build  an  independent 
greenhouse  on  a  hillside  near  the 
home. At that location the unit could 
be sunken about 4 feet into the hill- 
side and the north wall bermed (earth piled against the wall above grade. See Fig. 29, p. 35. 

Figure  170 

This  unit has  proven  to be the best  in a long series  of  my designs  and  contains several  important 
innovations  that  seem  to  work  well  together.  The  tilted  back  wall  (after  the  Brace  Institute  design) 
guarantees  that the  plants  get sufficient  north  light  (reflected)  all year. The wall  is a tight sandwich of 
insulating  materials.  From the inside out  it contains: ¥t"  sheetrock,  textured  and painted glossy  white; 
aluminum  foil;  6"  fiberglass  insulation;  %"  Celotex  siding; 6-millimeter  black  polyethylene;  and  1" 
overlapping rough lumber (Fig.  170). 

The south wall is at a 75-degree angle to the horizon and is framed up on a low (16")  concrete-filled, 
pumice  block  wall.  The  southern  skin  is  approximately  110 square  feet.  The  south-sloping  roof  has 
alternating clear (fiber acrylic) and opaque (tin, insulation, sheetrock) panels. A roof vent is set into one of 
the solid panels and is opened by an automatic heat piston. 

The roof  may  be the key  to the successful  performance  of  the structure.  My brother-in-law,  Paul 
Bunker, collaborated with me on the design. Because alternate sections of the roof are insulated, the unit 
stays  warmer  in  the  winter  and 
much  cooler  in  the  summer.  The 
solid  roof  sections  are also  perfect 
for  mounting  hinged  movable 
panels 
insulation  were 
needed.  In this  greenhouse  there is 
only  50  square  feet  of  clear  roof 
approximately  normal  to  the  sum(cid:173)
mer sun. 

if  extra 

Another important factor in the 
design  of  the  Tyson  greenhouse  is 
that  it  is oriented  25 degrees  south(cid:173)
east  of  due  south.  This  angle  was 
determined  mostly by the lay of the 
land and our desire to alter the natu(cid:173)
ral environment as little as possible. 

Figure 171 

150 

CHAPTER VIII 

Since very few morning rays would enter the greenhouse through the east wall at this orientation, the east 
wall is 70 percent opaque and insulated. The inside of this solid wall is reflective (tomatoes that are situated 
directly in front of it show excellent blossoming and fruit  set). The west wall is clear. 

This greenhouse was designed to contain ten water drums and have movable insulating panels on the 
roof. With these provisions, I estimated that the unit would maintin 50 degree interior temperatures at —10 
degrees  outdoors.  With  only  four  drums  installed  and  without  the  styrofoam  panels  in  place,  the 
greenhouse held a43 degree low at -4°Foutside. That's truly remarkable, and I can only attribute it to the 
roof design and the mass of the insulated block wall (it has an inch of styrofoam on the outside surface). 
Frances Tyson is an experienced gardener. For years she had a large organic garden back in New 
Jersey. Frances uses growing techniques that would make a chemically oriented gardener turn over in his 
sodium  nitrate.  She uses relatively  "hot"  manure,  heavy  green  mulch,  never sterilizes  anytiiing, and 
plants extremely densely. I've never seen a greenhouse that could match the level of production she gets 
out of the space she has. Some of Frances' techniques are discussed in Chapter VII. This amazing woman 
also finds time to build solar collectors out of beer cans, and to speak to anyone who will listen about the 
development of solar energy and the abolition of nuclear power. 

Owners: Wesley and Frances Tyson 
Designer: Bill Yanda 
Builders: Paul  Bunker,  Susan and Bill Yanda 
Floor Area:  180 square  feet 
Clear Area: South  face  =  110 sq. ft.; south roof  =  50 
sq. ft.; east wall  =  25 sq. ft.; west wall  =  50 sq. ft. 
Main Function: Vegetable production for personal use. 

Thermal 

Storage:  Pumice 
block  walls  filled  with  concrete  = 
aproximately  7000  pounds;  220 
gallons of water (enclosed drums) 

Material Costs:  $5.00 per 

square  foot(1977) 

Barbara  and Peter  Voute 

The Voute' s greenhouse is the geometry of many of the community structures found on pp.  152-3. To 
my knowledge,  this was the first design of its type built in the U.S., and it's a good one (/"provision for 
north lighting is included in the roof. Actually, the design which is very old is one of a large number of 
geometries studied by J.C. Loudon in Remarks on the Construction of Hothouses published in 1817. 

The soutli face is at a 65 degree tilt, and the clear roof section slopes away from the front (toward the 
north). The two clear panels running the length of the roof are used only in the summer for north lighting. In 
the winter they are covered  with rigid styrofoam  to reduce heat loss. 

In designing this unit, I experimented with a glazed direct-gain wall. I think it's a good idea that needs 

fiirther development. This is how it works. 

The coldest area in the greenhouse is in the extreme south bed at ground level. I knew mat if the earth 
there could be heated, the plants would do better through the long, cold, winter nights. The south face is 
framed  up on a 16" high by 10'' thick concrete wall. I painted the outside of this low wall dark brown and 
glazed it with one layer of fiberglass acrylic material. It was well sealed on the top and bottom. Heat is 
transferred  through  the  concrete  to  me  earth  bed 
directly behind it. (This is like a Trombe wall but has 
no vents for air circulation.) 

The results were that the young plants nearest 
the  wall  showed  faster,  healthier growth  than  those 
farther  back  in  the bed.  However,  the  stored  heat 
wasn't  enough  to carry  some  of  them  through the 
coldest winter nights. When the outside temperatures 
dipped  to  — 7°F,  a  patch  of beans  in the  front bed 
froze.  Nothing else was damaged,  including tomato 
plants  situated  centrally  in the unit.  But Dr. Voute 
was  disappointed  and  he  bought  a  small  electric 
space heater calibrated to turn on at 45 degrees. 

Figure  172 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

151 

To improve the performance  of the direct-gain wall I would:  1) make it thinner; 5"  would be thick 
enough for strength and would provide a higher rate of heat transfer to the front bed;  2) double glaze the 
south  low wall; this would prevent  such rapid conduction  losses back through the wall  at night; and  3) 
insulate the lower clear wall (at night). 

The Voute's grow some beautiful  flowers and vegetables in this greenhouse. The soil mixture they 
use is 1/3 city sludge from the sewage plant, so occasionally they'll have a healthy tomato or chili plant pop 
up in an unexpected place. Dr. Voute has also developed a rather intense personal relationship to his unit. 
To paraphrase  him: "The damn thing's like a spoiled pet or child; it needs attention all the time. I think 
we'll  skip December and January  growing next year and take a vacation from  it." This is said lovingly, 
believe it or not. 
Owners: Peter and Barbara  Voute 
Designer: Bill Yanda 
Builders: Paul  and James  Bunker,  Bill and 
Susan  Yanda 
Floor Area:  160 square  feet 
Clear Area: 128 sq. ft. (south face); 40 sq. ft. 
ft.  (east and west walls); 32 sq. ft.  (roof) 

Thermal Storage: 3 cubic yards of concrete 
in walls (approximately  12,000 pounds) and 
330 gallons of water 
Supplementary  Heat: Electric space heater 
Material Costs: $4.00 per square foot (1976) 
Main  Function:  Vegetable  and 
flower 
production  for home use. 

Community Solar Greenhouses 

USDA Solar Outreach Program 

Figure  173 

There is a new sense of community building emerging across the United States with solar greenhouses 
the crystallizing nucleus. A greenhouse building workshop, such as the one above, held in Pittsboro, North 
Carolina,  brings citizens from  diverse backgrounds together for a common goal: learning to design and 
build  a  solar  greenhouse.  Now  there  are  a  large  number  of  trained  solar  crews  out  working  in  their 
communities building and teaching. You can be a part of this educational experience. It is the best possible 

152 

CHAPTER VIII 

way to learn the technical specifications  and practical techniques involved in building a solar application. 
We've  included a listing of'hands-on" solar training groups in the Bibliography, p. 201. 

These  community  greenhouses,  though  small  by  commercial  standards,  are  helping  to  create  a 
consciousness of food independence and self reliance, often  within the urban setting.  In most cases, the 
structures were built by previously unemployed youth or poverty victims, and skill training is one of their 
primary  goals.  Another goal  for these projects is economic self-sufficiency;  produce from  the unit must 
support  its  management  upkeep.  These  structures  represent  a  bold  step  in  the  quest  for  energy 
independence and meaningful  employment in the solar  future. 

La Jar a.  Community Action Program, 
Arnie  and Marie Valdez 

This  greenhouse  is  one  of  several  similar 
designs  built  by  the  industrious  Valdez  family. 
Arnie  and  Marie,  from  San  Luis  Colorado,  are 
well  known  in  the  western  U.S.  for  their  work 
with  migrant  workers  and 
the  National 
Farmworkers Organization.  They conduct design 
and  building  workshops  for  water  heaters,  crop 
dryers  and  flat  plate  collectors,  as  well  as 
greenhouses. This greenhouse  is  16' wide by 36' 
long  and  has  a  65°  south  glazing.  Notice  the 
airlock,  which  also  serves  as tool  storage  on the 
east side. 

Figure  175 

Citizens for  Citizens Project 
Fall River,  Mass. 

Designed  and  built  by Mike  Hurly.  One of 
the main goals is to involve urban families of the 
area  in  year  round  gardening.  The  1000  sq.  ft, 
structure contains 3000 gallons of water in drums. 
Coldest  temperature  in  '77-78  was  38°  at  0° 
outdoors.  Normal  winter  lows  were  the  4 5 °-
50°F range. Heavy emphasis is on spring seedling 
production  to  complement  the  urban  gardening 
program. 

Figure  174 

Colorado Rocky Mountain School, 
Carbondale,  Colorado 

This  two-zone  greenhouse was designed by 
Ron  Shore 
(now  of  Thermal  Technology 
Corporation)  and  built  by  students  as  an  inter(cid:173)
disciplinary  project  at school. It incorporates 350 
sq.  ft.  of  south  glass  and  1575 gallons of  water 
storage.  A  1/3  horsepower  fan  pushes  1,500  cu. 
ft.  per  minute  of  air  through  129,000  pounds of 
rock  storage.  The  effects  of  this  mass  and  rock 
storage  is  evident  in  the  fact  that  the  coldest 
temperature yet recorded in the structure was 38°F 
at  -29°F. 

Figure  176 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

153 

Montachusetts  Opportunity  Council, 
Leominster,  Mass. 

This  project  headed  up  by  Dennis  Jaehne 
serves  two  groups.  Land  for  the  greenhouse  was 
donated  by  the  local  school  system,  and  students 
receive  training  there.  Also,  senior  citizens  have 
individual garden plots within the greenhouse that 
they  manage. 

Figure  178 

The  National  Center for  Appropriate  Technology, 
Butte,  Montana 

Figure  177 

Jaehne  has  written  a wonderful  paper on  the 
frustrations,  accomplishments,  and  promise  of 
this  project.  It  is  published  in  the  3rd  National 
Passive  Solar  Conference  Proceedings  and  is 
mandatory  reading  for  any  person  or  group 
considering  such  an  undertaking. 

has 
research 

The  National  Center 
actively 
and 

for  Appropriate 
Technology 
supported 
solar 
greenhouse 
implementation. 
Recently,  they  have  begun  a  national  monitoring 
and evaluation  program that should  supply  a great 
deal  of  needed 
information.  This  16'  x  40' 
greenhouse  is  a  research  facility  in  Butte.  There 
are  two  sections  to  the  greenhouse  separated  by 
the  center.  One 
the  vestibule  entrance 
experiment 
four  55-gallon  drums 
plumbed  in  series  and  mounted  directly  over  the 
entrance.  The  incoming  water  is  at  43°F.  The 
black drums act to preheat the water to  7 0 ° - 8 0 °F 
during the spring-fall  period. The warmer water is 
used  for  crop  irrigation. 

in 

involves 

Figure  179 

Figure  180 

1 54 

CHAPTER VIII 

Solar Greenhouse  Manufacturers 

This section reviews commercial manufacturers of thermally efficient greenhouses (and units that can 
be easily modified  to become true solar greenhouses). We will also mention producers of innovative and 
important accessories such as movable insulation and thermal  storage systems. 

The  Vegetable  Factory,  Long  Island,  New  York 

«^__^_ 

Vegetable  Factory  offers  a 
complete  multiple-purpose  struc- 
ture  consisting  of 
framework, 
panels  and  accessories.  It  can  be 
utilized as a solar-panel greenhouse 
for  growing;  or  serve  as  a  highly 
efficient  passive  solar  collector  for 
heating.  To  operate  the  unit  as  a 
passive  solar  collector,  a  heat-
storage system  should be added. 

On  Nantucket 

Island,  off 
Massachusetts,  Wade Green  uses a 
Vegetable  Factory 
solar-panel, 
lean-to  greenhouse  as  a  passive 
collector attached to a Trombe wall. 
The 
cinderblock 
wall, constructed witfi air vents at top and bottom for natural convection air currents, is painted black to 
assure the highest degree of heat absorption. At night, an aluminized mylar curtain is drawn in front of the 
wall  to keep the collected air and heat inside. During the daytime, the curtain is removed to once again 
allow the solar energy to collect and warm the house (Fig.  182). 

concrete-filled 

Figure  181 

In  Mr.  Green's  published  New  York  Times 
article of March 9,  1978, he states: "At the end of a 
sunny  day,  the  wall  is  nearly  as  hot  as  a  steam 
radiator, and slowly gives off its warmth throughout 
the  night."  Mr.  Green  also  confirms  that  with  his 
passive  system,  even  without  the  benefit  of  extra-
storage capacity, heating-fuel  costs are reduced 40 to 
50 percent. 

Vegetable Factory also offers standard-size and 
custom  panels, without the framework  of the house, 
for do-it-yourself  solar collector projects. 

In many applications, complete greenhouses, or 
special  panel  construction  has  been  substituted  for 
roof  tops.  Fig.  183 shows  the  "solar  office"  of  a 
New  York  doctor.  In  this  application,  the  solar 
panels help heat the office,  creating both a conducive 
growing room for plants and flowers, and a pleasant 
consulting room for patients. 

Many schools and institutions are now utilizing 

solar-panel  Vegetable  Factories  as  "greenhouse 
classrooms."  As  an  energy  saver,  the  greenhouse 

Figure  182 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

155 

pi  m 
—  «w 

collects solar energy which supplies 
additional  heat  to  a  school,  and  at 
the  same  time  provides  the  proper 
atmosphere  for plant  and  vegetable 
gardening as a real  learning experi(cid:173)
ence. 

The  shatterproof  quality  of 
both  the  acrylic-fiberglass  and  GE 
Lexan panels  is an  important  safety 
factor  where  children  are  con(cid:173)
cerned. 

For  complete  literature  and 
pricing  information,  write  Vege(cid:173)
table  Factory,  Inc.,  Dept.  SG,  100 
Court  Street,  Copiague,  Long  Is(cid:173)
land, New York  11726. 

Solar  Technology  Corporation,  Denver,  Colorado 

Figure  183 

Solar  Technology  Corporation  (SOLTEC)  designs,  manufacturers,  and  markets  solar  homes, 
building systems,  and  solar products  for residential, commercial  and  industrial  applications.  Over five 
years of intensive solar engineering and product development has produced a diversified  line of products. 
Their on-going product development program is directed towards providing innovative solar products for 
the continuously expanding  domestic and international  solar market. 

SOLTEC is currently manufacturing and making its SUNUP1"1 solar building system and the SOLAR 

GARDEN1"1 greenhouse. 

•  SUNUP011 collectors employ air as the heat transfer fluid and have a variety of uses (or space and 
water  heating.  Collectors  may  be  mounted  on  south  roofs  or walls  of  most  buildings,  or on  ground-
mounted  solar furnaces.  Solar sauna and pool heating applications  using  the SUNUP1"1 collectors  are 
possible. 

•  The 

SOLERA1"1 

solar 
building  system  is  a  prefabricated, 
modular,  expandable 
"walk-in" 
collector  that  provides  clean  solar 
heat  to  homes  while  serving  as  a 
solarium,  home  addition,  or  pool 
enclosure.  SUNUP  collectors  may 
also be used in SOLERA to increase 
performance  and convert it to sauna 
and water heating uses. 

•  SOLAR  GARDEN  compo(cid:173)
nents transform  SOLERA  into a so(cid:173)
lar  greenhouse,  which  provides 
year-round  solar  heated  growing 
space  for  flowers,  fresh  fruits  and 
vegetables,  as  well  as  heated,  hu(cid:173)
midified,  oxygen-rich  air  to  at(cid:173)
tached homes (Fig.  184). 

Figure  184 

156 

CHAPTER VIII 

Figure  185 

The mult-functional  SOLERA may be easily and inexpensively surface-mounted  to new or existing 
homes  in  freestanding,  attached  or  abutted  positions.  With  a  modest  amount  of  building  experience 
anyone can install this adaptable solar energy system. 

The SOLERA low-temperature solar collection system traps the incoming solar radiation with highly 
insulated  wall  panels  and  south-facing  thermo-windows.  Optional  inner  windows,  pop-in  panels  and 
hot-air collectors reduce heat losses at night and during cold weather. 

Solar heat is stored passively by direct radiation absorption on the black-painted  surface of thermal 
storage  tanks. Thermal  transfer  and  storage efficiency  is improved  by using a combination  blower,  air 
handler and duct network. 

Heat  is drawn  into attached homes with fans or by natural air circulation  through open windows or 
door.  A conventional  hot-air heating system may also be used to distribute solar heat within the home. 
Cooling of the unit and attached homes is achieved with many optional systems including manual roof 
vents,  exhaust  fans,  nighttime  cool  storage,  and  evaporative  cooling.  Passive  heating  and  cooling 
techniques enable the SOLERA to operate without electricity, although thermostatically controlled  fans 
allow greater temperature control. 

Solar  Technology  Corporation  (SOLTEC)  has  an  on-going  research  and  product  development 
program  directed  towards  advancing a diversified  product  line including commercial  solar greenhouses 
and  higher  temperature  solar  systems.  They  also  offer  solar  consulting,  design  and  custom  building 
services. 

Four Seasons Solar Greenhouses, 672 Sunrise Highway, West Babylon, New  York 

Four Seasons is a company offering  a wide range of features in solar greenhouses. They are one of the 
few manufacturers  with a triple glazing option of GE Lexan, plus a triple glass system. They also sell hot 
water collectors and air exchange systems custom designed for their product. 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

157 

Figure  186 

Solar  Room,  Solar  Resources,  Inc.,  P.O.  Box  184, Taos,  New  Mexico 

Since  the  first  edition  of  this  book, 
the Solar Room has proven itself to be one 
of the best buys in " BTUs for the buck''. 
Literally  millions  of  American  homes 
could save heating dollars immediately by 
the  installation  of  a  Solar  Room.  Every 
time  a leading national politician or  offi(cid:173)
cial gets on television  to say  that the na(cid:173)
tion  is  '"still  waiting  for  cost  effective 
solar  heating,"  the  president  of  Solar 
Resources, Steve Kenin, fires off about a 
dozen  irate  letters  telling  them  where  to 
go visit a satisfied  Solar Room customer 
to find out the truth. 

With  or  without  national  political 
endorsement,  the  Solar  Room  continues 
to  make  more  and  more  solar  converts. 
The product comes in kit form and can be 
erected  by  a  couple  of  novices  in  3-5 
hours. Basically, the Solar Room is an air 

Figure  187 

158 

CHAPTER VIII 

tension structure which gives it a tremendous amount 
of strength for its very light weight. The double skin 
is  one  continuous  piece,  so  air  infiltration  thrugh 
cracks  or joints  is  practically  non-existent.  Besides 
the greenhouse model shown here, the company also 
manufacturers  and  distributes  a  system  that  only 
extends  a  few  inches  and  transforms  the  covered 
south wall into a solar collector. 

Here is Steve Kenin's explanation of his product: 
"The  Solar  Room  is  a  device  that  turns  the 
southern side of a home into a solar heater. Made of a 
special plastic, a Solar Room can supply 35 to 65% of 
home  space  heating  needs.  With  heat  storage  and 
insulation  options,  its  heating  capacity  is  greatly 
increased.  The  Solar  Room  is available  in kit  form 
and  is  designed  to  be  an exterior  room,  seven  feet 
wide and as long as space permits: 20, 30 or 40 feet. 
The  longer  the  Solar  Room,  the  more  heat  is 
collected. 

Figure 188 

"Not only a heat collector, the Solar Room is a versatile, inexpensive addition to the home, costing 
$3.50 to $4.50 per square foot of floor space. It is an airtight, thermally efficient  space, and can serve as a 
greenhouse, a winter playroom for children or as a foyer to the house where coats, boots and bicycles can 
be stored  out of the winter  weather.  As a greenhouse, the Solar Room  is an especially  efficient  space, 
providing warmth for the household and fresh  vegetables for the dinner table. In the spring the garden can 
be started early in the greenhouse and transplanted outside when danger of frost  is past. 

' 'The Solar Room is also a 'take-down' room. Because of its effectiveness  as a heat collector it is not 
needed during warm weather, and has been designed to take down during the summer months. The initial 
installation  requires  less than  a day's  time,  and  after  that  removing  the Solar  Room  in the spring  and 
putting it back again in the fall takes only a few hours. When not in use, it takes up little storage space. 
' 'The Solar Room kit is made possible by the use of a special plastic that resists the disintegrating rays 
of the sun and lasts for years, special aluminum extrusions that hold the plastic in place, the best grade of 
clear heart  redwood  that will  not rot  in contact with the ground or in moisture, and galvanized  ribs that 
support  the plastic skin and will not rust. The Solar Room is double-glazed,  which means there are two 
layers of plastic with an insulating 'dead-air'  space in between.  It has withstood winds over 60 miles per 
hour." 

1 will add that the air supported,  slippery glazing also sheds heavy snow  loads quite effectively  (as 
proven  by Wisconsin and Michigan customers). The portability of the Solar Room makes it particularly 
attractive  to renters who desire a greenhouse and pay their own utilities.  Anyone serious about  saving 
money on heating bills who does not have the time or capital  for custom building should investigate the 
Solar Room. 

Helion,  Inc.,  Brownsville,  California 

Mobile homes are prime candidates for solar greenhouse additions. If the mobile home has its long 
axis  oriented  east-west,  a  large  area  of  southern  wall  will  be  available  for  the  greenhouse/collector. 
Because of  the  narrow  width of  the home, air circulation  and communication  to the living area will be 
optimum.  A major portion of winter heating needs will be met by the greenhouse alone. 

Jack  Park  of  Helion,  Inc.,  has designed  many  solar greenhouses and  sells blueprints  for  a mobile 
home retrofit.  Helion also produces a microcomputer for home and agricultural energy management and 
monitoring. 

Jack Park, Helion, Inc., Box 455, Brownsville,  California 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

159 

The following manufacturers market movable insulation systems that greatly  improve 

the  thermal  efficiency  of solar greenhouses and  other  solar  applications. 

Figure  189 

Appropriate  Technology  Corporation 
Brattleboro,  Vermont 

The Window Quilt Insulating Shade 

increases 
the  R-value  of  double  glazing  up  to  5.5  when  in(cid:173)
stalled.  It is made from  a polyester fabric quilted  for 
extra strength (Fig.  190). The ATC quilt can operate 
at  angles  up  to 45°  and  includes  a track  system  at 
both edges to insure a complete seal. For information 
on  distributors  in  your  area  contact:  Appropriate 
Technology Corp., P.O. Box 975, Brattleboro, Ver(cid:173)
mont 05301. 

Thermal  Technology  Corporation 
Snow mass.  Colorado 

The Curtain Wall consists of a number of layers 
of  thin,  reflective  material  rolled down by motor to 
cover  large  collecting  surfaces.  Radiation  from  the 
structure's, thermal mass (in winter mode) or from the 
sun  (in  the  summer  mode)  is  intercepted  by  the 
curtain  and  warms  the air  between  the layers. This 
causes  it  to  occupy  more  volume,  inflating  the 
curtain  as  air  expands  within 
its  multilayered 

Figure  190 

160 

CHAPTER  VIII 

envelope  (Fig.  191).  Storage  area  and  power  con(cid:173)
sumption  for  the  automated  curtain  is  minimal.  A 
curtain 24-feet  long x  16-feet high can be stored in a 
6-inch  diameter  roll.  For  details  and  thermal 
performance  data,  contact:  Thermal  Technology 
Corporation,  P.O.  Box  130,  Snowmass,  Colorado 
81654,(303)963-3185. 

Curtain  Wall 

Curtain Cover Tube 

Curtain Roller  Tube 
with Internal Motor 
at Either End 

Deflation Groove 

Is  Company, 
Guilford,  Connecticut 

This  insulating  window  shade  is applicable  to 
vertical glazings and may be purchased in sizes up to 
a  maximum  width  of  66  inches  and  length  of  96 
inches. The shade is made up of five layers of plastic 
film that separate when rolled down to form a series 
of  dead air spaces  (Fig.  192). The interior layers of 
the  shade are  made of metalized film to cut radiant 
losses. The  IS high  "R"  shade in combination with 
double glazing  has been  tested  to produce an  R-15 
barrier. Extruded plastic head and jamb frames (Fig. 
193) contain  the  shade.  If desired,  the builder may 
construct  wooden  enclosures  (from  IS  Company 
plans) to meet specific  needs. 

Smooth Level Surface Required 
at Bottom-Adjustable Limit Switch 
in Tube to Set Bottom of Curtain Drop 

A Fully Automated  Self-Inflating 
Movable Insulation System 

Figure  191 

2-Part Extruded  Plastic 
Head Frame for Easy Ac(cid:173)
cess. Made with Integral 
Head Seals 
Compact Single Roll De(cid:173)
sign with Strong Spring 
Return 
5 Layers Expand to Form 
Dead Air Spaces that Slow 
Conveclive and Conduc(cid:173)
tive Energy Transfer 
Radiant Energy Flow 
Greatly Reduced with Low 
Emittance Materials 
Permanently Shaped 
Spacers Conform Tightly 
When Rolled Up Yet Sepa(cid:173)
rate the Layers  When Pul(cid:173)
led Down 
Extruded Plastic Jamb 
Frames with Integral 
Jamb Seal 
Thermally Effective 
Summer Thru Winter at 
Windows & Sliding Glass 
Doors 

Patented and 
Patents Pending 

Figure 192 

Figure  193 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

161 

Zomeworks,  Albuquerque, 
New  Mexico 

Zomeworks  and  its  president,  Steve 
Baer,  need  no introduction  as innovators in 
the  field  of  solar  energy.  Three  of  this 
company's  developments  have  important 
implications to solar greenhouses. 

The  BeadwallR  system  seen  in  the 
Monte  Vista  greenhouse  was  completed  in 
1973  (see  Fig.  194).  It  was  invented  by 
David  Harrison  of  Zomeworks  and  solves 
the  tricky  problem  of  how  to  combine 
movable  insulation  and  light-transmitting 
clear  surfaces.  In  this  system,  insulating 
styrofoam  beads  are  blown  in between  the 
two  panes  of  glazing  (3'*  apart)  when 
temperatures drop below tolerable levels. In 
the morning, or when temperatures rise, a photocell switch tells the motors to evacuate the cavity, and the 
beads are sucked back into their storage containers. I've seen Dave get a standing ovation from audiences 
at solar conferences when he was demonstrating this device. The Monte Vista greenhouse was one of the 
first applications of Beadwall  and used six vacuum cleaner motors and storage bins to accommodate the 
beads. Besides greenhouse applications, this system can be retrofitted or newly installed in home windows 
to maximize direct  gain and almost eliminate heat losses. 

Figure  194 

Nightwall 

is a poor man's  Beadwall 

in  which  you  supply  the  motive  power  to 
move  panels. They are simply  rigid styrene 
or  styrofoam  sheets  that  are  cut  to  fit  the 
exact  dimensions of  window  or greenhouse 
clear  wall.  Zomeworks  supplies  magnetic 
strips with sticky backs, small metal contacts 
to  attract  the  magnets,  and  an  instruction 
sheet  to  help you  put  it together.  When the 
magnets are attached to the perimeter of the 
window  and the metal  strips are adhered to 
the styrofoam  panel, the magnetic force will 
tightly bond the insulation  to the window at 
night. You remove the panels in the morning 
for transmission of light and direct gain. As 
the clear areas in a greenhouse are the major 
source  of  heat  loss  in  the  structure,  they 
are  prime candidates  for Nightwall 
lation. The rigid panels could also do double 
duty  as  reflectors  behind  plant  beds  during 
the  day.  Nightwall  will  work  well  on  a 
vertical  or  almost  vertical  surface  in  a 
greenhouse.  Zomeworks  also  supplies  a 
chart  to  show  you  how  many  BTU's  the 
Nightwall1*  can  save  on  standard  sized 
windows in various parts of the country. It's 
amazing  what these simple applications can 
do for you. 

instal(cid:173)

Figure  195 

162 

CHAPTER VIII 

A third Zomeworks  product  with greenhouse potential  is Skylid 

. It's a device that uses counter(cid:173)
balanced weights and freon containers to open high vents or skylights. Steve uses Skylid in his home and 
greenhouse (Fig.  195). Six Skylids operate 240 square feet of insulated louvres to prevent heat loss. Baer's 
greenhouse also has six 30-gallon  drums for thermal storage and 30 tons of rocks. This greenhouse is a 
single-glazed  structure and has held 32-degree  minimums  in 5 degree outdoor  lows.  Baer is also using 
Skylid"  mechanisms as passive trackers for concentrating collectors. 

These active and passive  improvements provide important options for the solar greenhouse owner. 
As we noted in Chapter V, the beginner might consider the simpler, passive approach first.  If you do want 
one of the more complex active systems, Zomeworks is definitely the place to go for it. They also sell plans 
for' 'bread box' * water heaters. For more information, write to: Zomeworks, P.O. Box 712, Albuquerque, 
New Mexico 87103. 

One  Design,  Winchester,  Virginia 

Traditionally,  oil drums  full  of water have  been the simplest  form  of water containment  for  solar 
greenhouses. Now there is a new, engineered, mass produced water module that can be stacked high with 
negligible  pressure,  buried  in  crushed  stone  as  greenhouse  floor,  placed  under  planting  tables,  or 
anywhere within the structure. 

The  modules,  by  One  Design,  Inc.,  of  Winchester,  Virginia,  are  made  of  fiberglass  and  were 
specifically designed to offer placement versatility of application, to eliminate the high pressure associated 
with vertical tubes, and to offer  higher mass by using rectilinear shape. Toward these goals five genera(cid:173)
tions of  waterwall modules were developed and tested in homes in northern Virginia and Pennsylvania. 
The result of these demonstration/test  houses is a glass-fiber  module suitable for widespread  utilization. 
The modules are made of glass reinforced polyester, one tenth of an inch thick. The black, absorbing 
pigment, as well as an ultraviolet stabilizer, is contained in the fiberglass resin. As they are stacked, each 
unit receives a lid. They are then filled with water via a standard garden hose connection. No plumbing is 
necessary. 

The  rectilinear  configuration 
provides  27%  more  mass 
than 
tubular containers in a given area. In 
addition,  earlier  vertical  designs 
proved to be problematic due to high 
water pressure. The horizontal con(cid:173)
figuration reduces water pressure to 
a negligible level (less than  1  lb. per 
sq.  in.) 

Figure  196 shows four stacked 
modules  deployed  for  collection 
(size  of  wall  approximately  94"  x 
100" x 20'). The units can be con(cid:173)
cealed  between  an  interior  finish 
wall  and  the  south  glass.  When 
placed  between  a  greenhouse  and 
living space, they can be drained of 
water and nested out of the way  for 
summer  storage.  In  this  way  a 
greenhouse area can be joined to the 
living area during summer months. 

Figure  196 

THE STATE OF THE ART 

163 

The  modules can  also be buried in crushed stone, the top of which provides the floor surface  of a 
greenhouse. They are then filled with water and are out of the way, Modules can be stacked as intermediate 
and north walls when roof apertures admit sunlight. They can be stacked as room dividers and can be retro(cid:173)
fitted into add-on  greenhouses. 

Product  Specifications 

Length 
Width 
Height 
Weight Empty 
Weight  of Contained 
Water 
Heat Storage Capacity 
at 40° Rise 

Model A  Model B 
94 in. 
16.5 in. 
24.5 in. 
24 lbs. 

94 in. 
20.5 in. 
24.5 in. 
30 lbs. 

800 lbs. 

1,000 lbs. 

31,500 

40,000 

Wall Thickness 
Material 

Heat Extractor Rate 

Water Pressure at 
Bottom of Stack 

Model A  Model B 
.01  in. 
.01 in. 
Ultraviolet  stabilized 
fiberglass 
Determined by 
installation 

% lb/in2 

3A  lb/in2 

Kalwall  Solar Components,  Manchester,  New  Hampshire 

Kalwall  manufactures  and distributes a full  line of  solar products and accessories.  Many are quite 
relevant  to  greenhouses,  as you  will  see  if you  get their  catalog  listed on  p.  200.  One line,  however, 
warrants particular note at this point. These are the heat storage tubes that are filled with water and used in 
greenhouses and other solar applications. The following  information on them is reprinted from p. 33 of the 
1979 catalog. 

Sun-Lite* Storage Tubes & Containers 

Sun-Lite Tubes and Tanks have been utilized  by a number of research groups and colleges experi(cid:173)
menting in the field of aquaculture. When ordering tubes or tanks, please specify the use, such as "heat 
storage" or  "aquaculture." 

Friction fit caps and/or black coating either  180° or 360° around the tube are available on a custom 

basis.  Please refer  to the catalog price guide. 

Sun-Lite** Storage Tubes are a key component  in Kalwall's Solar Furnace. 

o 
i 

H 

45  g a l. 

o 
I 

1 
M 

22  g a l. 

o 

7 

c 
I 

_ 

h8H 

123  g a l. 

64  g a l. 

Figure  197 

72S  e a l. 

1 64 

CHAPTER VIII 

Average  Properties 

Diameter of Tube 
Height 
Volume 
Wall  Thickness 
Material 
Weight Empty 
Weight of Contained  Water 
Heat Storage  Capacity 

12" 
8  ft. 

6.28 ft. 3 
.040" 

Sun-Lite1* 
10 lbs. 
392 lbs. 

392 BTU/40°F. 

15,630 BTU/40°F. Rise 

18" 
10 ft. 

17.67 ft.3 

.040" 

Sun-LiteR 
20 lbs. 
1102 lbs. 

1102 BTU/°F. 

44,080 BTU/40°F. Rise 

Typical Heat Extraction Rate(') 
(1) Typical Heat Extraction Rate—stored heat energy can easily be extracted by passing air over the surface of the 
tube. This rate depends on motor, fan and ducting used. The listed extraction rate is estimated for 500 feet per minute 
with adequate air volume, and the tubes at 30° above air inlet temperature. 

1,400  BTU's/Hour 

2,100  BTU's/Hour 

ALTERNATE  GLAZING  METHODS 

Wood 

COTMHtoiM Climpmg B«< 

S I MI   / Aluminum 

Cyro  Acrylite  SDP 

This  is  a  fairly  new  product  on  the  American 
market and one that we've been very pleased with. The 
lightweight ribbed acrylic panels are attractive, high in 
solar transmission,  and have about the same heat  loss 
characteristics as double glass. The material diffuses the 
light quite well and, because it is acrylic, should have a 
long  life.  Here's  a perfect  roof application  because of 
the light weight and strength of  the product.  It is 5/8" 
thick  and  comes  in  4  x  8,  10,  12'  panels.  In  small 
quantities, 
the  manufacturer  CYRO  Industries  of 
Wayne,  New  Jersey  will  refer  you  to  their  local 
distributors. 

Heat Motor and Solar Fan 

Two  other  products  we've  used  extensively  and 

can endorse are the Heat Motor and the Solar Fan. 

The Heat Motor is a temperature activated piston 
that  is  mounted  in the  roof  of  the greenhouse  to push 
open a vent or series of vents. Its opening can be regu(cid:173)
lated and set by turning a collar at the top. This gives a 
great  deal  of  control.  It  can  be set  to open  anywhere 
between 60°F— 100°F or, in a winter mode, not to open 
at all. The ram at the top will push 50 pounds 12 inches. 
By proper  mounting on the hatch,  a full  open position 
much larger than  12 inches can be achieved. There are 
other  similar  heat  pistons  available  (Solar  Vent  and 
Thermofor are two good ones). However, for strength and dependability, the Heat Motor is hard to beat. I 
once disregarded  the instructions and didn't mount a safety chain on a vent unit. A heavy wind blew the 
vent open and completely disemboweled the Heat Motor, pulling out the internal contents (a sticky grayish 
gunk)  and  depositing  them  all  over  a greenhouse  roof.  My  brother-in-law,  Paul  Bunker,  collected  the 
innards by scraping them up with a Red Devil knife. He shoved them back into the Heat Motor and screwed 
down the collar. Four years later the thing just keeps on opening and closing everyday. 

Figure 198 

THE STATE OF THE  ART 

165 

The Solar Fan made by the William Lamb Co. is a high quality air mover powered by a small photo(cid:173)

voltaic array. The company sells it primarily as an attic ventilator, but it is perfect for a small greenhouse. 
The  12-volt D.C.  unit can push over 600 cfm quietly and dependably. In the Solar Sustenance Office  we 
have designed a mount that gives it three operating modes. In the photo it is in the exhaust mode moving air 
out of the greenhouse in the summer. Come fall, when heat is needed by the office, the fan is pivoted 90° to 
blow apex greenhouse air to the back room fifteen  feet away. The third mode is a switch that directs the 
power down a line to charge a  12-volt battery. The attribute I enjoy most about the fan is its high quality. 
There's  nothing second  rate about it. The heavy  little motor runs without a sound and must have sealed 
bearings because I can't find anywhere to oil it. (I don't anticipate the need, either.) The photovoltaic array 
is totally  sealed against weathering. 

Finally, a built-in feature makes the unit unique. Because it is linked directly to the sun, the Solar Fan 
regulates itself. The fan works the hardest when the sun is brightest. So it's going full tilt on a bright day to 
charge an adjoining  room or exhaust outdoors. When it gets cloudy, the Solar Fan slows down or stops 
completely.  It's  like  having  a  tiny  little  brain  linking  the  power  of  the  sun  to  the  spinning  of  a  fan 
blade—for  your  benefit.  Both  of  these  products  demonstrate  remarkable  and  totally  beneficial  use of 
technology. 

For  the  owner-builder,  many 
of  these  products  are  hard  to  find. 
Here's  a checklist of things to do in 
order to locate diem. 
•  Most  of 

these  manufacturers 
would prefer that you make small 
purchases  through  one  of  their 
regular  distributors.  You  can 
write them and ask who's selling 
the  equipment 
borhood. 

in  your  neigh(cid:173)

•  Look  under Solar Products in the 

Yellow  Pages.  There  is  begin(cid:173)
ning to be quite a healthy little in(cid:173)
dustry  in  solar  stores  and  retail 
distributors.  Look  first  for  the 
store  that  sells  a  variety  of  pro(cid:173)
ducts, not just one line they want 
to  push  down  your  throat.  Ask 
them to give you their experience 
wiuh the product or the names of 
previous  customers  you  can 
contact. 

•  Here's  the  name  of  one  distrib(cid:173)
utor uiat carries most of the pro(cid:173)
ducts 
listed  here  at  excellent 
prices, and will drop ship them to 
you. 

Brother Sun 
Solar Greenhouse Glazings 
and  Supplies 
Rt. 6,  Box  10A 
Santa Fe.N.M.  87501 
(505)471-1535 

Heat Motor and Solar Fan in Operation 

Figure  199 

166 

CHAPTER VIII 

Specializes  in  Acrylite,  Lasco-
lite,  Double  Glass  Units,  Heat 
Motor and Solar Fan. 

In the Bibliography  (p. 200) you 
will find a listing of good catalogs 
that  sell  equipment  mail  order. 
You  will  usually  pay  a  slightly 
higher  price  doing  business  this 
way,  but  it  may  be  worth  it  in 
time  savings  and  being  able  to 
examine  a  wide  range  of  pro(cid:173)
ducts. 

Photovoltaic Array for  Solar Fan 

Figure  200 

APPENDIX A 

YANDA'S HOME HEATING 
CONTRIBUTION CHART 

Using the Home Heating Contribution Chart 

The chart  and the procedure that follows  will give the heat output of the attached  solar greenhouse 
throughout  an entire heating season as a percentage of the total heating requirements of the home.  It is 
designed for owner/builders, contractors, and workshop people who are planning add-on greenhouses but 
have neither the time nor the money for a sophisticated design analysis or access to computer models. The 
results  of  several  dozen  tests have  been compared  to monitored greenhouses  in the field  and  computer 
simulation models. They have been found to be accurate to within  10% of high solar fractions  and 25% of 
lower  solar  fractions.  After  you've  used  the chart  a  few  times you'll  be able  to compute  a  predicted 
performance  for any greenhouse in any climate in about five minutes. 

A Few  Words of  Caution... 

By not  using common sense you can exceed  reasonable performance  estimates.  For instance, this 
procedure assumes you have a good solar site with no appreciable shading to the south. You will have to 
reduce the solar fraction  proportionally  to any 9 AM-3PM  winter shading at the site. Also, please don't 
assume  that you  can  double  the performance  of  a solar greenhouse by simply doubling the area of the 
glazing. This can be achieved at low solar fractions, but if your design is providing 60%  as is, doubling the 
size won't get you  100% solar heating with 20% to give to neighbors. 

I  wouldn't  build  a  new  solar  greenhome  with  this  chart  alone.  You  can  use  it  to extract  ideas, 
incorporate them into the initial design phase, and then take your rough concept  sketches to a competent 
solar engineer and/or architect.  The professional's  estimate and the chart's prediction  should be within 
10—15% of each other. 

About  the  Procedure 

In various categories on the chart choose the point value shown if you  are close to that condition. For 
instance, if you have a massive wall but it's not the optimum thickness recommended in the text, you can 
take  less than the 8 points given to that entry.  (The 'super'  and 'well'  insulated home entries are the two 
hard choices listed. Take no points for a poorly insulated home.) 

Let's work a couple through with explanations. 

Step I  Totalling  Points on the  Chart 

Our example is a solar greenhouse with 200 square feet of south glazing to be added to  1,200 square 

foot home in Charleston, South Carolina. The greenhouse is within  15° of true south. 

1) Solar  Conditions.  Go  to the Degree  Day Chart  on p.  181. Note the  months 
with  over  200  Degree  Days.  From the possible  sunshine  chart on p.  180 average this 
period  (Nov.-Mar.)  and find 61.6% winter solar conditions.  Estimating from the range 
given, take  17 points 

2)  Latitude. Charleston  is a little below 33°N. 23 points 

3)  Collector  Tilt. Calculate  the degrees  from  the horizontal  that the majority of 
your south facing  glazing will be and take that point value. Our example will have a 60° 
tilt. 8 points 

17 

23 

8 

168 

APPENDIX A 

Home Heating Contribution  Chart 

Category 

Max 
Point 
Choices  Value 

Category 

Max 
Point 
Choices  Value 

1 

1 

1 

Solar Conditions 
20-29% 
30-39% 
40-49% 
50-59% 
60-69% 
70%+ 
Latitude 
+50° 
49-45° 
44-41° 
40-36° 
35-30° 
Collector Tilt 
10-30° 
31-44° 
45-60° 
61-90° 
Night  Insulation 
for Glazing 
Radiant  Barrier 
R  1-3 
R4-8 
R8-I0 
Relationship with Home  2 
Integral-home  surrounds 
GH 
Two story high GH 
Indented  on east or west 
corner 
GH dropped below  frostline 
Add-on  to south wall 
Protected  by wind barrier 
Wall  Between  Home and 
GH 
1 
Massive material, optimum 
thickness;—medium to dark 
color 

1 

3 
4-5 
6-10 
11-15 
16-20 
21 

3 
4-7 
8-10 
11-19 
20-25 

2 
5 
8 
10 

5 
5 
8 
10 

12 
6 

5 
3 
3 
2 

10 

2 

Home Construction 
Super insulated  and winter(cid:173)
ized exceeds local FHA 
standards 
Well  insulated-meets  local 
FHA  standards 
Isolated  thermal  storage 
under home  floor-with  fan 
circulation 
Interior  thermal  mass  in 
home-brick  floors,  fire(cid:173)
place, etc. 
Air  Exchange  with  Home 2 
Fan assist to  adjoining 
rooms 
Good  communication with 
home 
Windows/doors  adequate 
size 
High/low  vents in series 
Other Factors 
GH used as main entry on 
home 
GH shut off  from  home at 
night 
Home thermostat off on 
clear winter days 
No existing windows at GH 
site 
Home heating needs in May 
and  Sept. 
Air lock on GH 
For 7000+Degree Day/ 
and/or 50°+  Latitudes only 2 
Summer heating needs 
Used with no thermal mass-
Dec.-Feb. 
Constant  snow cover in 
winter 

3 

TOTAL POINTS 

10 

7 

6 

3 

7 

4 

3 
3 

6 

4 

4 

3 

3 
2 

6 

5 

5 

HOME HEATING  CHART 

169 

4)  Night Insulation.  These points only apply if the insulating barrier is well sealed 
and  regularly  applied  in  the  coldest  months.  In  Charleston,  we  really  won't  need  it.  0 
points 

5)  Relationship  with  Home. 

It  will  be  a  simple  add-on  (3  points)  and  will  be 

below  the  negligible  frostline  (3 points) 

6)  Wall Between.  No points for our  case. We have a standard frame home with no 

significant  thermal  mass.  Leave  the wall  a  light color  for  the  plants 

7)  Home Construction.  It's a well (but not super) insulated home. (7 points.)  We 
aren't  going  to  build  in  a  rockbed  and  don't  have  any  other  interior  thermal  mass  in 
communication  with  the greenhouse 

8)  Air  Exchange.  A  fan  in  an  adjoining  window  is planned  (7  points)  and  the 

greenhouse  has good  air  communication  with  most  of  the  home  (4 points) 

9)  Other  Factors.  Some  of  these  entries  involve  home  management  as  much 
as greenhouse  design,  but they  are very effective  in boosting performance.  For example, 
using  the greenhouse  as an airlock  is worth  6 points.  If you  can get your family  to  use it 
half  the  time  in  winter,  take  3 points.  For this example,  let's  say that  this  isn't  possible. 
We  will take two of the available three choices: 'greenhouse shut-off  from  house at night' 
(4 points)  and  'thermostat  off  on  clear  winter days'  (4 points) 

10)  7000  D D + / 5 0 0  Latitude  +.  Two  choices  are  available  to  cold  climate 

dwellers  but  our  Charleston  example  isn't  even  close  to this category 

0 

6 

0 

7 

11 

8 

0 

Step  II  Degree  Day  Factor 

From  the  list  below  estimate  the factor  that  matches your degree  days.  (Chart  p.  181) 

Degree  Days 

Degree  Day  Factor 

TOTAL  POINTS  80 

2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
6000 
7000 

1.20 
1.17 
1.14 
1.11 
1.08 
1.05 

Charleston  has 2033 degree days which  would be a  1.20 degree day factor.  A location with 2500 DD 

would  be  about  1.185,  2850  is  1.175,  etc. 

Multiply  the points  by  the Degree  Day  Factor. 

Points X  Degree  Day  Factor  =  New  Points 

80  X 

1.2 

= 96 

Step  III  Orientation  Factor 

From  the  list  below  multiply  the new points by  the closest orientation  factor.  Orientation  here  is the 

number of  degrees  from  true south  your greenhouse/collector  glazing  faces. 

1 70 

APPENDIX A 

Degrees from South 

Orientation Factor 

0-15° 
15-30° 
3(M0° 
40_50° 
50-60° 
60-70° 
70-80° 
80-90°(Due east or west) 
90°+ 

1 
.94 
.87 
.80 
.73 
.65 
.50 
.36 

Find another place to build 

Our example  is within  15° of true south. 

New points X Orientation  Factor =  Total point value 

96  X 

1 

= 96 

Step  IV  The  Heating  Value 

From the Key below, choose the range in which your total point value falls. 

Key 

Point  Value 
120-135 
105-120 
90-105 
75-90 
50-75 

Range 
4+ 
3 + 
2+ 
1+ 
0-1 

96 points puts the example in the 2+  range. By interpolation we will find the exact place in this range. 
The 2+  range contains  15 points. (105-90=  15) The low point of the range is 90 and our place. 96. is 
6 points above that. (96-90=6)  Divide 6 by the points in the range.  15. (6+ 15=.40) Add the .40 to the 
range, 2, to get a heating factor;  2.40. 

The heating factor  is then  multiplied  by the square footage of south glazing  in the greenhouse. Our 

example has 200 square feet of south glazing. 

Heating  factor  X South  Glazing  =  Heating  Value  (in  square  feet  of  home  heated) 

2.4 

X 

200 

480 

Step  V  The  Solar  Fraction 
To find out how the greenhouse will effect  your home heating needs, divide the heating value by the 

total square footage  of the home. 

For the example. 

Heating  Value  *  Square  Footage of Home  =  Solar Fraction 

480 

+ 

1,200 

=  .40 or 40% 

In  this  case,  the  solar  greenhouse  in Charleston  will  take  care  of  about  40% of  the total  heating 

requirements  for the  1,200  square foot  home. 

HOME HEATING CHART 

1 71 

Now, let's move the same basic greenhouse and house to a colder climate, Boston, Mass., and see 

how  it does. 

Step  I  Totalling  Points on  the  Chart 

1)  Solar Conditions. Averaging October through May  we get 53.6% 
2)  Latitude. 42°N 
3)  Collector Tilt. Same..  .60° 
4)  Night Insulation.  No 
5)  Relationship  with home. Same 
6)  Wall Between. Same 
7)  Home Construction.  Same 
8)  Air Exchange. Same 
9)  Other Factors.  We will  shut  it off  from  the home at night  (4) but we're not 
certain that we'll turn off the home thermostat on clear winter days. So, no points for that 
entry.  We do have slightly over  200 degree days in May. (3 points) 

10)  7000+Degree  Days/50°+  Latitude. No 

12 
9 
8 
0 
6 
0 
7 
11 

7 
0 

TOTAL POINTS 

60 

Step  II  Degree  Day  Factor 
From the list on p.  181-2 Boston, with 5634 degree days (from chart p.  181) has a degree day factor of 

about  1.09. 

Points X Degree Day Factor  =  New Points 

60  X 

1.09 

= 

65.4 

Step  III  Orientation  Factor 
Our greenhouse is within  15° of south and the list on p.  170 gives that orientation factor as 1. 

New Points X Orientation  Factor  =  Total Point Value 

65.4 

X 

1 

= 

65.4 

Step  IV  Heating  Value 
The Key on p.  170 shows 65.4 in the lowest range, 0-1.  Interpolation gives us a heating factorof  .616 

in that range. 

Heating Factor X Square Feet of Greenhouse Glazing  =  Heating  Value 

.616 

X 

200 

123.2 

Step V  Solar  Fraction 
For the solar fraction  we simply divide the Heating  Value by the total square feet of the home. 

Heating  Value  -=- Square Footage of Home  = Solar Fraction 

123.2 

+ 

1200 

= 

.102 or 10% 

A  10% contribution will help, but we can greatly improve it. Suppose and R-5 insulating barrier was 
added (8 points) and we found a way to use the greenhouse as the primary entrance for the home. (6 points) 
This would bring our Step 1 up  14 points and would result in a 23% solar fraction, or nearly 14 of our home 
heating  . Not bad for a small greenhouse in Boston! 

A P P E N D IX  B  

SUN MOVEMENT  CHARTS 

The charts can be used to determine: 

1)  The hours of direct sunlight your greenhouse will receive at any time of the year. 
2)  How obstructions will shade the unit. 
3)  The altitude of the sun at any moment. 
4)  A visualization  of the sun's rays striking a flat or tilted plane. 

You will need: 

1)  A small  piece of graph paper. 
2)  A cheap protractor. 
3)  A straight edge. 

Some definitions  are in order: 
1)  Sun Path: The apparent (from our viewpoint) movement of me sun through die heavens. On our 

charts, the sweeping east-to-west lines are the sun's path on the 21st or 22nd of each month. 

2)  Altitude:  The  height  in  degrees  of  the  sun from  a  true  horizon.  Altitudes  are  shown  on  the 

concentric  circles at 9° intervals in the upper right of the charts. 

3)  Azimuth: The distance  in degrees east or west of true  south  shown on the radii of the charts. 
4)  Hour-of-day: The nearly  vertical lines represent  the solar (not time zone or daylight  savings) 

times of day. They are noted across the top of die sun path line. 

1)  Find the chart nearest your latitude. 
2)  On apiece of graph paper draw a scale model of the  floor plan of your greenhouse. A size ofabout 

one half by one inch fits easily on the chart. Cut it out. You may want to cut out scale drawings of your 
home and any obstructions. To  be  accurate, all models must be measured and positioned to the same scale. 

3)  On the greenhouse model mark the  junction of all  solid and clear walls. 
4)  Place the model on die chart. By using the azimudi angles, position the model in its actual orienta(cid:173)
tion. In our example, the site is facing true south so the model is parallel to the 90° east-90° west azimuth 
line. The greenhouse center should be in the exact center of the  chart. If you have included a house, trees or 
other obstructions orient them to scale and position mem on die chart. 

5)  The first  objective  is to examine the duration of sunlight me greenhouse will receive at various 
times  of  uie  year.  Choose  a mondi  and  follow  its sun  padi,  noting  die number  of  hours  die model  is 
receiving direct sunlight. Solid walls and obstructions will shade die incoming light at certain times of day 
(see Figure 210). Observing the hours of shading will allow you to design clear and solid walls to best suit 
your particular location. 

6)  Next, to determine any solar altitude, find die point at which a chosen hour-of-day  line intersects 
the sun path line. Now find the nearest concentric circle and follow  it around to me degree marking in die 
upper right. That's die sun's altitude. When you're in between circles, estimate. 

7)  To better visualize die angle of incoming light, place die flat edge of a protractor across die time-
of-day/sun padi intersection you are studying widi the midle of die  protractor over the center of die chart. 
Take a straight edge and connect die center of die protractor to die determined solar altitude angle on die 
edge. That's where the sun is at in diat moment of time (see Fig. 212). 

8)  A side view of die greenhouse cut out of paper is helpful  in determining light patterns dirough clear 
roof areas and sides (Fig. 202). By repositioning the solid/clear areas in the model, you should be able to 
get maximum winter sunlight for your location and also obtain some summer shading. 

9)  This same procedure can be used for any solar application. 

SUN MOVEMENT CHARTS 

1 73 

APPENDIX  B 

SUN MOVEMENT CHARTS 

175 

176 

APPENDIX B 

Figure 208.  Graph paper cutout of greenhouse plan is oriented on chart. Point at which hourof day (10:00 
a.m.)  and day of year (Sept.  21) intersect  is located. 

Figure  208 

SUN MOVEMENT CHARTS 

1 77 

S UN  CHART 
3 6 *N  LATITUDE 

Tru.  Norlh 

Mn2l  , 

^-iuorim.'— »M 

v-vX" 

Figure  209 

aiMuo*  «%#• 

Azimuth  onQl« 

, HoutoKkw 

Figure 209.  Azimuth line (radii) closest to the above intersection  is noted and extended onto the cut out. 

Jon  21 

figure  210 

Figure 210. Shadow cast by partial east wall will run parallel to the azimuth line at this time of day. 

1 78 

APPENDIX B 

Figure 211.  To determine the length of the shadow and shade from solid roof section, locate altitude-angle 
circle closest  to intersection  of hour and day. 

Figure  211 

Figure 212.  Noting the altitude angle (45°) on the chart, center your protractor over the cutout (along the 
azimuth  line) and find the altitude angle on it. 

Figure  212 

5gte;*y\ 

SUN MOVEMENT  CHARTS 

179 

*3P 

Figure 213 

Figure 213.  Simulated light ray (the pencil) running parallel to this altitude angle indicates the length of 
shadow cast by scale cutout of obstruction. 

Note that at this hour on the fall/spring equinoxes the shadow falls short of the greenhouse and 
would therefore not shade the interior. On December 21, however, the altitude angle at  10:00 a.m. would 
be about 25°. The shrub would then present a shading problem, at the time of year when maximum light 
and heat are essential. 

APPENDIX C 

AVERAGE PERCENTAGE OF POSSIBLE SUNSHINE 

FOR SELECTED LOCATIONS 

B
E
F

  <  a 
E < 

  3 

P
E

  g  0 z 

<  S

LOCATION 

ALA.  BIRMINGHAM 

MONTGOMERY 

ALASKA,  ANCHORAGE 

FAIRBANKS 
JUNEAU 

NOME 

ARIZ  PHOENIX 

YUMA 

ARK.  LITTLE  ROCK 
CALIF.  EUREKA 

FRESNO 
LOS  ANGELES 
RED  BLUFF 
SACRAMENTO 
SAN  DIEGO 

SAN  FRANCISCO 

COLO  DENVER 

GRAND  JUNCTION 

CONN.  HARTFORD 
D C.   WASHINGTON 

FLA  APALACHICOLA 

JACKSONVILLE 
KEY  WEST 
M I A MI  BEACH 
TAMPA 

GA.  ATLANTA 
HAWAII  HILO 
HONOLULU 
LIHUE 

IDAHO  BOISE 

POCATELLO 

ILL  CAIRO 
CHICAGO 
SPRINGFIELD 

IND.  EVANSVILLE 

FT.  WAYNE 
INDIANAPOLIS 

IOWA.  DES  MOINES 

DUBUQUE 
SIOUX  CITY 

KANS  CONCORDIA 

DODGE  CITY 
WICHITA 

KY.  LOUISVILLE 
LA.  NEW  ORLEANS 

SHREVEPORT 

MAINE.  EASTPORT 
MASS.  BOSTON 
MICH.  ALPENA 

DETROIT 

GRAND  RAPIDS 
MARQUETTE 
S. STE.  MARIE 
MINN,  DULUTH 
MINNEAPOLIS 

MISS.  VICKSBURG 
MO.  KANSAS  CITY 

ST.  LOUIS 
SPRINGFIELD 
MONT.  HAVRE 

HELENA 
KALISPELL 

NEBR.  LINCOLN 

NORTH  PLATTE 

NEV.  ELY 

LAS  VEGAS 
RENO 
WINNEMUCCA 

N.H.  CONCORD 
N.J.  ATLANTIC  CITY 

 

N
A
J

43 
51 
39 
34 
30 

44 
76 
83 
44 
40 

46 
70 
50 
44 
68 

53 
67 
58 
46 
46 

59 
58 
68 
66 
63 

48 
48 
62 
48 
40 

37 
46 
44 
47 
42 

38 
41 
56 
48 

55 

60 
67 
61 
41 
49 

48 
45 
47 
29 
34 

26 
31 
28 
47 
49 

46 
55 
48 
48 
49 

46 
46 
28 
28 
57 
63 
61 

74 
59 
52 
48 
51 

49 
53 
46 
50 
32 

46 
79 
87 
53 
44 

63 
69 
60 
57 
67 

57 
67 
62 
55 
53 

62 
59 
75 
72 
67 

53 
42 

48 
48 

56 
61 
56 
61 
39 

48 
83 
91 
57 
50 

72 
70 
65 
67 
68 

63 
65 
64 
56 
56 

62 
66 
78 
73 
71 

57 
41 

48 
59 

63 
69 
58 
68 
37 

53 
88 
94 
62 
53 

83 
67 
75 
76 
66 

69 
63 
67 
54 
57 

71 
71 
78 
73 
74 

65 
34 

46 
67 

64  m  62 

47 
53 
49 
51 
49 

44 
47 
56 
52 

58 

60 
66 
63 
47 
50 

54 
51 
56 
43 
42 

37 
40 
44 
55 
54 

50 
57 
49 
54 
58 

55 
55 
40 
40 
59 
63 
64 

77 
64 
60 
53 
57 

58 
59 
53 
54 
55 

51 
49 
56 
52 

58 

62 
68 
64 
52 
57 

58 
52 
57 
52 
48 

48 
47 
50 
60 
55 

57 
59 
56 
57 
61 

58 
58 
49 
49 
60 
64 
68 

78 
69 
64 
55 
58 

64 
65 
56 
58 
61 

55 
55 
59 
58 

59 

63 
68 
64 
57 
63 

60 
52 
56 
56 
52 

54 
52 
54 
58 
57 

64 
60 
59 
60 
63 

60 
60 
57 
57 
60 
62 
65 

8J 

75 
70 
53 
59 

< 
5 
66 
73 
50 
55 
34 

51 
93 
97 
67 
54 

89 
68 
79 
82 
60 

70 
61 
71 
57 
61 

77 
71 
76 
68 
75 

68 
31 
64 
51 
68 

66 
71 
63 
64 
67 

62 
62 
62 
60 
63 

65 
68 
66 
64 
66 

69 
51 
59 
59 
58 

60 
53 
54 
58 
60 

69 
64 
64 
53 
63 

L
U

z 
5  J
62 
67 
66 
72 
45 
51 
45 
53 
28 
35 

48 
94 
98 
72 
56 

94 
69 
86 
90 
60 

75 
69 
79 
60 
64 

70 
63 
70 
62 
66 

68 
41 
66 
60 
75 

72 
77 
69 
69 
73 

69 
68 
66 
63 
67 

73 
74 
73 
68 
64 

78 
53 
62 
64 
65 

66 
56 
59 
60 
64 

73 
70 
68 
69 
65 

32 
84 
92 
71 
51 

97 
HO 
95 
96 
67 

68 
68 
76 
62 
64 

64 
62 
69 
65 
61 

62 
44 

67 
58 
89 

82 
82 
73 
76 
78 

74 
74 
75 
73 

75 

79 
78 
80 
72 
58 

79 
55 
64 
70 
69 

72 
63 
63 
68 
72 

69 
76 
72 
77 
78 

59 
59 
58 
58 
63 
64 
67 

85 
77 
76 
51 
62 

63 
63 
60 
60 
69 
72 
79 

91 
82 
83 
56 
65 

77 
77 
77 
77 
76 
78 
79 

84 
90 
90 
57 
67 

65 
69 
39 
35 
30 

26 
84 
91 
73 
46 

97 
81 
94 
95 
70 

63 
68 
72 
60 
62 

63 
63 
71 
67 
64 

63 
38 
70 
59 
86 

81 
79 
70 
72 
76 

69 
70 
70 
67 

72 

76 
78 
77 
69 
60 

80 
57 
63 
64 
66 

67 
57 
58 
63 
69 

72 
73 
68 
72 
75 

74 
74 
73 
73 
71 
74 
81 

86 
89 
90 
58 
66 

66 
69 
35 
31 
25 

34 
89 
93 
71 
52 

93 
80 
89 
92 
70 

70 
71 
77 
57 
62 

62 
58 
65 
62 
64 

65 
42 
70 
67 
81 

67 
71 
32 
28 
18 

35 
88 
93 
74 
48 

87 
76 
77 
82 
70 

70 
71 
74 
55 
61 

74 
58 
65 
62 
67 

67 
41 
68 
58 
66 

58 
64 
33 
38 
21 

.16 
84 
90 
58 
42 

73 
79 
64 
65 
76 

62 
67 
67 
46 
54 

66 
61 
69 
65 
67 

60 
34 
63 
51 
46 

66 
73 
61 

78 
48 
75 
56 
65 
47 
73  M  53 
52 
73 

67 

64 
68 
64 
61 
67 

72 
76 
73 
68 
64 

79 
54 
61 
52 
61 

58 
47 
45 
53 
60 

74 
70 
67 
71 
64 

63 
63 
61 
61 
67 
72 
81 

92 
86 
86 
55 
65 

58 
64 
64 
55 

65 

70 
75 
69 
64 
70 

77 
50 
58 
44 
54 

50 
38 
36 
47 
54 

71 
67 
65 
65 
57 

57 
57 
50 
50 
66 
70 
73 

K4 

76 
75 
50 
54 

41 
48 
53 
44 

53 

64 
70 
67 
51 
60 

65 
37 
48 
24 
35 

31 
24 
21 
36 
40 

60 
59 
54 
58 
48 

48 
48 
28 
28 
59 
62 
67 

83 
68 
62 
43 
58 

c <  < 
1 
79 
76 
57 
50 
59 

76 
77 
53 
44 
51 

z 
5 

84 
80 
62 
56 
67 

61 
65 
64 
63 
65 

61 
62 
63 
66 
69 

67 
68 
74 
67 
55 

59 
65 
62 
62 
60 

_1 
5 
76 
76 
63 
54 
70 

63 
66 
67 
59 
62 

73 
71 
73 
78 
72 

71 
71 
78 
83 
70 

79 

68 
64 
64 
62 

54 
62 
58 
64 
67 

58 
59 
62 
66 
62 

61 
63 
65 
63 
52 

57 
61 
61 
57 
58 

7.1 
69 
65 
61 
64 

70 
66 
68 
63 
76 
68 
66 
73 
66  M 

68 
65 
73 
75 
62 

65 
60 
87 
67 
69 

60 
73 
53 
67 
67 

48 
53 
64 
47 
67 

72 
55 
56 
58 
58 

60 
59 
65 
61 
56 
59 
59 

74 
69 
86 
82 
72 

73 
66 
87 
75 
76 

69 
78 
59 
66 
66 

48 
48 
68 
46 
72 

74 
55 
60 
64 
64 

65 
68 
74 
67 
63 
62 
62 

7.1 
69 
83 
81 
76 

78 
75 
78 
78 
72 

74 
82 
62 
66 
65 

50 
62 
82 
48 
86 

86 
56 
63 
70 
70 

73 
70 
76 
76 
73 
65 
65 

3 
< 

75 

75 
61 
SI 
67 

61 
64 
63 
59 
62 

69 
67 
69 
75 
68 

68 
68 
78 
81 
65 

77 
63 
61 
61 
62 

66 
65 
72 
73 
59 

74 
68 
85 
81 
79 

78 
80 
78 
78 
71 

75 
82 
59 
66 
62 

46 
56 
79 
44 
84 

86 
53 
60 
65 
66 

67 
68 
75 
74 
71 
67 
67 

81 
74 
58 
47 
60 

54 
64 
56 
62 
63 

62 
59 
60 
65 
68 

62 
66 
74 
74 
55 

68 
62 
62 
62 
60 

67 
64 
66 
69 
64 

70 
69 
73 
79 
70 

67 
69 
80 
74 
70 

69 
84 
51 
63 
63 

48 
53 
68 
47 
72 

74 
55 
60 
58 
60 

62 
69 
72 
67 
65 
61 
61 

g  2  5  Z 
< 

80 
74 
54 
43 
51 

79 
74 
39 
29 
31 

70 
69 
38 
26 
28 

76 
74 
53 
44 
53 

45 
61 
47 
64 
64 

59 
56 
57 
60 
60 

54 
60 
68 
62 
42 

42 
58 
61 
54 
59 

68 
68 
61 
66 
64 

69 
65 
71 
76 
70 

70 
66 

82 
70 
74 

67 
73 
43 
64 
64 

41 
36 
53 
38 
59 

61 
51 
53 
52 
56 

56 
60 
67 
60 
57 
63 
63 

30 
53 
29 
59 
62 

49 
44 

39 
48 
46 

32 
44 
64 
46 
28 

28 
47 
53 
39 
50 

68 
64 

52 
58 
53 

58 
55 
72 
76 
57 

54 
58 
80 
63 
62 

55 
56 
25 
60 
58 

31 
28 
28 
26 
33 

38 
41 
37 
40 
41 

44 
65 
61 
53 
45 
63 
63 

31 
50 
26 
48 
52 

48 
45 
46 
48 
39 

25 
35 
57 
37 
23 

18 
43 
49 
30 
44 

57 
51 
49 
54 
41 

45 

42 
66 
70 
49 

44 

52 
73 
58 
49 

49 
49 
24 
51 
50 

27 
24 
22 
23 
20 

29 
33 
29 
40 
.18 

39 
63 
62 
52 
38 
65 
65 

49 
59 
50 
58 
61 

59 
58 
59 
63 
57 

50 
55 
68 
60 
48 

51 
57 
57 
51 
56 

66 
63 
63 
64 
57 

64 
59 
73 
76 
63 

61 
63 
80 
68 
63 

62 
69 
46 
62 
61 

41 
45 
58 
40 
60 

65 
48 
48 
55 
56 

57 
66 

69 
64 

56 
65 

48 
59 
50 
61 
64 

57 
60 
58 
63 
56 

52 
54 
64 
61 
49 

51 
57 
58 
50 
56 

72 
68 
62 
62 
59 

64 
60 
66 
75 
60 

57 
63 
85 
66 
61 

58 
68 
47 
63 
63 

48 
48 
63 
45 
63 

70 
47 
49 
56 
53 

56 
61 
66 
61 
57 
66 
66 

u 
Q 

44 
48 
29 
29 
18 

30 
77 
83 
47 
39 

47 
72 
50 
44 
71 

54 
65 
58 
46 
47 

53 
53 
66 
65 
61 

47 
36 
60 
49 
37 

36 
46 
41 
45 
42 

38 
39 
48 
40 

50 

58 
67 
59 
39 
46 

60 
40 
48 
22 
29 

22 
24 
22 
40 
40 

45 
52 
44 
48 
46 

43 
43 
20 
20 
55 
58 
62 

75 
56 
53 
43 
52 

LOCATION 

z 
< 
59  N.  MEX.  ALBUQUERQUE 
64 
45  N.Y.  ALBANY 
44 
30 

BINGHAMTON 
BUFFALO 

ROSWELL 

CANTON 
NEW  YORK 
SYRACUSE 

41 
85 
91 
62  N.C.  ASHEVILLE 
49 

RALEIGH 

78  N.  DAK.  BISMARCK 
73 
75 
77 
68  OHIO,  CINC1NATTI 

DEVILS  LAKE 
FARGO 
WILLISTON 

CLEVELAND 
COLUMBUS 

66 
67 
69  OKLA.  OKLAHOMA  CITY 
56  OREG  BAKER 
PORTLAND 
58 

ROSEBURG 

65 
62  PA.  HARRISBURG 
PHILADELPHIA 
71 
PITTSBURG 
67 
68  R.I.  BLOCK  ISLAND 

COLUMBIA 

60  S.C.  CHARLESTON 
39 
65  S.  DAK.  HURON 
54 
66  TENN.  KNOXV1LLE 

RAPID  CITY 

MEMPHIS 
64 
NASHVILLE 
65 
59  TEX.  ABILENE 
60 
64 

AMARILLO 
AUSTIN 

57 
59 
62 
57 
63 

BROWNSVILLE 
DEL  RIO 
EL  PASO 
FT.  WORTH 
GALVESTON 

SAN  ANTONIO 

67 
71  UTAH.  SALT  LAKE  CITY 
69  VT.  BURLINGTON 
59  VA.  NORFOLK 
RICHMOND 
59 

69  WASH.  NORTH  HEAD 
50 
57 
51 
53 

SEATTLE 
SPOKANE 
TATOOSH  ISLAND 
WALLA  WALLA 

YAKIMA 

49 
47  W.  VA.  ELKINS 
PARKERSBURG 
47 
55  WIS.  GREEN  BAY 
56 

MADISON 

MILWAUKEE 

64 
65  WYO.  CHEYENNE 
61 
63 
62 

LANDER 
SHERIDAN 
YELLOWSTONE  PARK 

PR.  SAN  JUAN 
PR.  SAN  JUAN 

Z <  Cc 

< 
2 

70 
69 
43 
31 
32 

37 
49 
31 
48 
50 

52 
53 
47 
51 
41 

29 
36 
57 
41 
27 

24 
43 
45 
32 
45 

58 
53 
55 
58 
42 

44 
42 
64 
71 
46 

44 
53 
74 
56 
50 

48 
48 
34 
50 
49 

28 
27 
26 
26 
24 

34 
33 
30 
44 
44 

44 
65 
66 
56 
39 
64 
64 

72 
72 
51 
39 
41 

47 
56 
38 
53 
56 

58 
60 
55 
59 
46 

36 
44 
60 
49 
34 

32 
52 
56 
39 
54 

60 
57 
62 
62 
49 

51 
47 
68 
71 
50 

49 
55 
77 
57 
50 

51 
53 
43 
57 
55 

37 
34 
41 
36 
35 

49 
37 
36 
51 
49 

48 
66 
70 
61 
51 
69 
69 

72 
75 
53 
41 
49 

50 
57 
45 
56 
59 

56 
59 
56 
60 
52 

45 
49 
63 
56 
41 

40 
55 
57 
45 
47 

65 
62 
Ml 
63 
53 

57 
54 
73 
75 
57 

51 
61 
81 
65 
55 

56 
61 
48 
60 
59 

42 
42 
53 
39 
51 

62 
42 
42 
55 
52 

53 
64 
71 
62 
55 
71 
71 

60 
60 
53 
53 
64 
68  The average monthly  percentage of sunshine 
72  available  in cities throughout  the United States. 
available  in cities throughout  the United States. 

82 
76 
74 
52 
60 

A P P E N D IX  D   MONTHLY TOTAL HEATING DEGREE 
DAYS (BASED ON 65 DEGREES F) FOR 
LOCATIONS AROUND THE NATION. 

182 

APPENDIX D 

APPENDIX E 

HEAT  DISTRIBUTION  IN THE ATTACHED  GREENHOUSE 

ON  A CLEAR  WINTER  DAY 

The following diagrams show the approximate heat distribution for two greenhouses. Example A is 

one attached to a frame  structure, B is on a structure with a massive contiguous wall. 

When you examine the two diagrams you see that the patterns are identical except  for the F and G 
categories. The heat being conducted through the wall of a massive wall structure gives that example about 
a 20c/c edge in its capability to heat the attached structure over a similar greenhouse on a frame building. 

The energy amount is for  I sq.ft.  of south glazing. 

Example A 

Greenhouse on a Frame Structure 
2-3 ga.  water per sq. ft. glazing 

is the diermal mass inside greenhouse 
100%  (1600 BTUs)  Strikes  Surface 
20%  (  320 BTUs)  Transmission  Losses 
5%  (  80 BTUs)  To Photosynthesis 
25%  (  400 BTUs)  Evaporation, Conduc(cid:173)
tion and Convection 
(infiltration)  Losses 
5%  (  80 BTUs)  Foundation  Losses 
25%  (  400 BTUs)  Thermal  Mass inside 

5%  (  80 BTUs)  Absorbed by north 

greenhouse 

15%  (  240 BTUs)  Convection  to home 

wall 

100%  1600 BTUs 

Example B 

Greenhouse on a Massive Wall 

Wall contains 5 gal. water per sq.  ft.  glazing 

or masonry  equivalent 

100%  (1600 BTUs)  Strike  Surface 
20%  (  320 BTUs)  Transmission  Losses 
5%  (  80 BTUs)  To  Photosynmesis 
25%  (  400 BTUs)  Evaporation, Conduc(cid:173)
tion  and Convection 
(infiltration)  Losses 
5%  (  80 BTUs)  Foundation  Losses 
5%  (  80 BTUs)  Thermal  mass inside 

greenhouse  (floor and soil) 

25%  (  400 BTUs)  Absorbed by  massive 
wall—for  house and 
greenhouse 

15%  (  240 BTUs)  Convection  to home 

100%  1600 BTUs 

A 
B 
C 
D 

E 
F 

G 

H 

A 
B 
C 
D 

E 
F 

G 

H 

Figure 214 

Figure 215 

APPENDIX F 

THERMAL STORAGE CAPACITY 
AND GREENHOUSE PERFORMANCE 

The following  formula will allow you to estimate the total heat storage of a greenhouse, as shown in 

Chapter VI. 

By  totaling  the  amount  of  thermal  mass  in  the  greenhouse  we  can  get  an 

estimation of how much total  storage capacity  we have. 

Qst 
V 
d 
c 
At 

=  Total heat storage  Qst  =  V x d x c x^/\t 
=  Volume in cubic feet  (ft3) 
=  Density  (lb/ft3) 
=  Specific  heat constant 
=  Specific heat (BTU/lb°F) 

We're going to make some assumptions here in A1 based on field experience. 

Material 
Water 

Placement 
55 gal. drums 

No. 
Units 
6 

Water 

25 gal. drums 

6 

V* 

330 gals. = 
44 cubic  ft. 

150 gals. = 
20 cubic ft. 

(From chart p. 37) 

dx 
62.5 

ex 
1.00 

Ar= 
20 

62.5 

1.00 

Qst 
55,000 

43,750 

24,948 

38,160 

4,788 

35 

30 

30 

10 

Stone 

Brick 

Earth 

1 

24 cubic ft. 

165 

.21 

Planter 
1 ft. wide x 8 ft. 
long x 3 ft.  high 

Floor 
4"  x  160 sq.  ft. 

1 

53 cubic ft. 

120 

MHanters 
1 2 ^ x 2 x4 

3 

24 cubic ft. 

95 

.20 

.21 

This amount of storage would take the greenhouse through 2 days of heavy overcast with about 30°F 

rise over outdoor air temperatures. 

Total Thermal Storage in BTUs  =  166, 646 

APPENDIX G 

HEAT CALCULATIONS FOR 
GREENHOUSES 

A more conventional way (than my chart. Appendix A) of predicting the thermal performance of a 
solar greenhouse  is found  in the following  article  from Alternate Sources of Energy Magazine #36  by 
Kolstad and Grimmer. Their method gives a wall credit to the attached greenhouse, but, it should be noted, 
it does not consider using night insulation. 

Heat Losses 

Heat losses in a tight (no air leaks) greenhouse will be due primarily to heat conduction to the outside. 
The simple physical  law governing conductive losses states that the rate of heat loss through a surface is 
proportional  to the temperature difference  between the two sides of that surface: 

Q  =  U x A x  AT 

where Q is the amount of heat passing through the surface in a 
unit  of  time;  A  T  the  temperature  difference  across  the 
surface; A the area of the surface and U the thermal conduc- 
tance, a constant for the particular substance (of a given thick-  (Derived from ASHRAEdata)  U(=l/R) 
ness). To give an example, if Q is measured in BTU/hour, a 
normal double glazed window has a thermal conductance U 
of approximately  .69. If the area, A , is one square foot and 
AT  is 30°F (outside averages 35°F, inside 65°F), then 

WithRll  insulation 
With R22 insulation 
With R33 insulation 

Thermal Conductance 

1.  Frame roof or wall 

(BTU/hour/°F/ft^) 

Table I: 

0.07 
0.04 
0.03 
1.13 

0.69 
0.56 
0.36 
0.49 

Q  =  .69 x 30 x 1 = 20.7 BTU/hour. 

2.  Single glass 
3.  Double glass 

With small air space 
With  1"  - 4"  airspace 

So,  if we know the temperature difference  between the 
inside  and outside of  the greenhouse  and know  the thermal 
characteristics  (U) of  the greenhouse  material,  we can find 
the  daily  heat  loss.  Thermal  conductances  of  various  sub(cid:173)
stances  are  given  in Table  I.  Experience  with  solar  green(cid:173)
houses in the sun and cold Southwest has lead to the conjec(cid:173)
ture  that  typical  double  glazed  greenhouses  maintain  a  30°F  temperature  elevation  over  their 
surroundings.  How  accurate  this  may  be  in  general  is  not  known  since  it  depends  on  many  factors, 
particularly  the weather.  Nevertheless,  let us use it as the temperature difference,  AT,  in the equation 
above, recognizing that our results may not be too precise. 

4.  Triple glass 
5.  Solid wooden doors 
6.  Footing insulation (R5) 

(per linear foot) 

0.4 

Heat Availability 

Suppose we  now  wish  to build a greenhouse onto a particular dwelling.  We can easily  utilize the 
above discussion  to obtain  a rough estimate of how much  useful  heat we can expect to obtain from  our 
greenhouse and consequently  how much we can expect to save on our heating bills. 

Step I: House Heating Needs 

Find the amount of heat usually required by the dwelling on a monthly basis through a typical heating 
season  (in, say,  million of BTUs). This can be done by examining previous heating bills (remembering 
that furnaces burning oil or gas  are usually only 60 percent efficient), or by doing a load analysis such as we 
discussed in the context of the  greenhouse heat losses above .This need only be done for the  actual heating 
season,  say  October-April.  An  important  factor to include  is that by placing a greenhouse against  an 

1 86 

APPENDIX G 

outside wall, you are reducing heat losses through that wall. This credit should be subtracted from your  real 
heating  needs. The credit can be estimated by considering that the greenhouse reduces the temperature 
difference over the wall by 30°F. Thus die monthly savings is 30 days xUx  Area x 24 hours x 30, where U 
is the thermal conductance of the house wall. 

Step II: Greenhouse Gains 

The  monthly  energy  incident  in sunlight  must  be  corrected  for  a) the tilt  and  orientation  of  the 
greenhouse  glazings  and  b) the  transmission  efficiency  of  the glazing.  The  solar  flux  on a horizontal 
surface ranges from 350-2000 BTU/day during the winter over the US. More precise data can and should 
be obtained  for  your paticular  locale. This  must then be adjusted  for the orientation  of the greenhouse 
glazings with respect to the horizontal. This information (solar flux and correction factors) is published in 
many  of  the  good  solar  heating for  the homeowner  books  (refer  to the  Bibliography).  When  the  total 
incident light is determined based on total glazing area, a correction must be made for the losses incurred 
when the light passes through the glazing (and for coupling to the storage). A 50 percent efficiency  factor is 
probably  not a bad rule of thumb for double glazings. 

Step III: Greenhouse Losses 

Greenhouse losses will be assumed to be conductive losses. The total square footage of each of the 
major structural  members of the greenhouse (glazing, roof, walls, etc.) exposed to the outside should be 
determined. Using the conductances (U) from Table I and a temperature difference,  AT of 30°F, the total 
average heat loss in BTU/hourfor the greenhouse can be obtained by summing, for all the components, the 
product of the appropriate U, 30°F and the area of the component. (In practice, it seems that for a floor, 
instead of area, it is better to use exposed perimeter). This gives a daily "load" which may be as much as 
100,000 BTU/day or more. 

Step IV: Net Available Heat 

The last step is simple and consists of determining how much surplus heat (if any) will be available 

from  the greenhouse to use in the home. This is done on a monthly basis. Available heat from  the green(cid:173)
house  will  be  assumed  to be the monthly gain  less the monthly  loss.  (Providing the difference  is non-
negative.) The house can be assumed to utilize this up to the monthly requirements of the house (from Step 
I). To give a rough idea of cost savings, each million BTU of heat saved by using the greenhouse will save 
from  $3 to $15 (or more), depending on the fuel normally used for heating. 

An Example 

Suppose we live in Grand Junction, Colorado (39° North Latitude) and are contemplating building a 
greenhouse along the south side of our house. The greenhouse will be 20 feet long and will have 180 sq. ft. 
of  double  glazing  facing  south and  tilted at 60°  from  the horizontal.  The remainder of  the greenhouse 
consists of  176 sq.  ft. of wall and roof with 6 inches of fiberglass insulation (R22). The perimeter of the 
floor  (except for the house/greenhouse wall) is 36 ft. 

Step I:  House Heating  Needs 

By examining our fuel  oil bills for the past few seasons, we find average use of 

Heating oil 
Used  (gal) 

OCT 
27 

NOV 
63 

DEC 
85 

JAN 
99 

FEB 
90 

MAR 
63 

APR 
36 

HEAT  CALCULATIONS 

187 

Additionally,  the greenhouse covers approximately  160 sq. ft.  of house resulting in reduced losses 
through the house wall of  160 x 30 x 0.07 x 24 x 30 = 0.24 million BTUs/month (assume house wall has 
Rl 1  insulation). 

Using an average of  120,000 BTU/gal of fuel oil, we can translate the above oil use figures and the 

0.24  million  BTU saved per month figure  into real heating needs: 

Heat  Needs 
Wall Credit 
Net Heating 
Req. 

OCT 
1.9 
.24 
1.66 

NOV 
4.5 
.24 
4.26 

DEC 
6.1 
.24 
5.86 

JAN 
7.1 
.24 
6.86 

FEB 
6.5 
.24 
6.26 

MAR 
4.5 
.24 
4.26 

APR 
2.6 
.24 
2.36 

Total 
33.2 
1.7 
31.5 

D « , .l 

I I. 

i. 

,  \ . i ; n ; . , .. 

Step II: Greenhouse  Gains 

We have one glazing surface  in our example, a southern tilted surface. From The Solar Home Book 
we find  that for our location  (approx. 40° North Latitude), the following  average fluxes on the southern 
surface  (BTU/month/ft2): 

OCT 
Clear Day Flux  64294 
Mean  % Sun 
70 
Net Flux 

45000 

NOV 
57240 
60 

34350 

DEC 
55676 
60 
33400 

JAN 
60264 
50 

30100 

FEB 
60928 
60 
36550 

MAR 
67394 
60 
40450 

APR 
58680 
60 
35200 

Grand Junction  Solar Flux on Surface  (BTU/month/ft2) 

Multiplying  these numbers by our 50 percent transmission efficiency  and the square footage  of the 
glazing  (180  ft  )  we  obtain  an  estimate  of  total  heat  incoming  to  the  greenhouse  (in  millions  of 
BTU/month). 

Per ft^ 
Total 

OCT 
.0225 
4.05 

NOV 
.0172 
3.09 

DEC 
.0167 
3.01 

JAN 
.0151 
2.71 

FEB 
.0183 
3.29 

MAR 
.0202 
3.64 

APR 
.0176 
3.17 

Step  III: Greenhouse  Losses 

From  Table  I,  we  can  obtain  thermal  conductances  for  the  three  basic  greenhouse  structural 

components and estimate daily heat losses: 

Daily Loss for Glazings: 
Daily Loss for Roof and Walls: 
Daily Loss Through Floor: 

.56x30x  180x24 
.04 x 30 x  176 x 24 
. 4 x 3 0x  38x24 

72576 BTU 
5067 BTU 
10944 BTU 
88587  BTU/day 

for a total monthly  loss of 2.66 million BTUs. 

188 

APPENDIX G 

We summarize the previous steps below and obtain net monthly available heat (in millions of BTU): 

Step IV:  Net  Available  Heat 

OCT 

NOV 

DEC 

JAN 

FEB 

MAR 

APR 

4.05 

Greenhouse 
Gains 
Greenhouse 
Losses 
Net  from 
Greenhouse 
House 
Requirements  1.9 
.24 
Wall Credit 
1.63 
Net to House 

2.66 

1.39 

3.09 

2.66 

3.01 

2.66 

2.71 

2.66 

3.29 

2.66 

3.64 

3.17 

2.66 

2.66 

0.43 

0.35 

0.05 

0.63 

0.98 

0.51 

4.5 
.24 
0.67 

6.1 
.24 
0.59 

7.1 
.24 
0.29 

6.5 
.24 
0.87 

4.5 
.24 
1.22 

2.6 
.24 
0.75 

This indicates 6.02 million BTU were supplied to the house,  18 percent of total house requirements. 

Our purpose here has been to outline some ot the major considerations in a performance analysis of a 
greenhouse as a solar heating system. One should not be mislead that the add-on greenhouse will result in 
tremendous  monetary  or energy  savings  to the  user.  In order  to save  money  on one's  heating  bill,  a 
considerable investment in time and money must be made. What makes the attached solar greenhouse so 
attractive is its triple function—a  solar collector for home heating, a pleasant solar room in winter, and a 
source of food  and plants throughout the year. 

Taken together, the solar greenhouse becomes a very attractive option. 

Charles Kolstad is an applied mathematician!economist who has been involved with the economic 

analysis of energy systems since 1974. Derrick Grimmer is a natural ph ilosopher who has done research in 
low-temperature physics and solar energy. Both authors have been active in appropriate technology for a 
number of years and are directors of Appropriate Technology Research, a non-profit coalition of scientists 
in Santa Fe, New Mexico (P.O. Box  5852). 

APPENDIX  H 

VENT SIZING 

When  planning  openings  between  the  house  and  greenhouse  for  winter  heating  we are  trying  to 
achieve an airflow  that will:  1) put usable heat into the home (+75°F) and,  2) leave the greenhouse in an 
acceptable temperature  range (7(K80°F). A rate has been established that does bom of these things. The 
rule of thumb is to move 4-6 cubic feet per minute of  air per each square foot of south glazing. 

The following  formula  can be used to size vents, windows and doors for passive air circulation. 

16.6xa  V  A T xh 

Here's what the symbols stand for: 

a= 
16.6 = 
AT  = 

h = 

area in sq. ft. of the smallest vent in a high/low series. 
a factor accounting for passive air movement. 
the temperature  difference between the  high and low vent in Farenheit. This is often an 
assumption, 
the average height difference between high and low openings in feet. You can measure 
or estimate from center to  center. 

Let's  work the formula  with an example. We will plug-in some temperatures that are derived  from 
experience with attached greenhouses. For the vents we  will try  a window and door combination. The door 
is at the floor level of both the house and greenhouse. The window is located slightiy higher than the door. 
The door can act as the lower vent but only the bottom two feet will serve this purpose. Bom the window 
and door have about 6 sq. ft. of effective  vent area. Temperatures at the  bottom of the door, coming from 
the floor of the home, are 60°F. Temperatures at the window level will be around 85° on a clear winter 
day. Measuring, we find that there is 6 feet of vertical distance between the lower part of the  door and the 
center of the window. So: 

a  =  6 sq.  ft. 

A T= 
h= 

25° 
6ft. 

(16.6)(6)  V(25)(6)=  12.19.84cfm 

1220 cubic feet per minute will move through the openings. If the greenhouse has 200 sq.  ft. of south 

glazing, the size of the  openings is just about right. (200 x 6 =  1200). 

The equation can also be used to approximate the size and distance between the vents used for summer 
exhaust. Looking at the formula, it becomes obvious that the  most important factor is the square footage of 
the inlet and exhaust vents. Next in priority is the distance between vents. (The At   is something you have 
to live with in that the working greenhouse has certain temperature limits that can't be exceeded.) 

Here's another example. You have a greenhouse that is to be used throughout the summer. You want 
passive  venting  only.  You  desire to have  summer  ventilation  at the  rate of  one  total greenhouse air 
exchange per minute (a standard quantity  in cooling greenhouses). If you also have cold winters, a long 
series of smaller vents along the bottom and top of the  greenhouse isn't recommended because of greater 
infiltration  losses  along  the  perimeters  of  the  vents.  Outside  highs  peak  at  about  85°  and  the  apex 
temperatures  of  the greenhouse  can be  100°.  Your smallest  vent size is 6 sq.  ft.  The  vertical  distance 
between  the vents is 8 feet.  The volume of the greenhouse  is 1,600  cubic feet (16' L x 10H x  10'D) and 
that's what has to be moved on a per minute basis. 

a  =  6 sq.  ft. 

AT  = 

15° 

h  =  8 

(16.6)6  1/(15)(8) 

= 

1091.06 cfm 

190 

APPENDIX H 

1091 cubic feet per minute. You're far short of the goal. It would appear that we must increase die size 
of the  vents in order to get adequate air flow through them. That's correct and is probably the easiest way to 
solve the problem. But there's another passive solution, the thermal chimney. Suppose you were to build a 
plywood  stack  over  the  upper  vent to  a height of  10 feet.  This  would  increase your  average  distance 
between openings of  18 feet. Furthermore, what if you  painted it black? It's reasonable to assume that it 
would  raise temperatures inside the stack in summer to  110°. Then we would have: 

">fC" 

rV 

5 

\ 

a = 

6 sq. ft. 

A T=  25°  
18 ft. 

h=  

(16.6)6  V (25)(18) = 2112.83cfm 

2113 cubic feet per minute or even more than the amount 
we  needed.  That's  fine,  we'll  welcome  the  additional 
circulation  in summer. 

This  simple  example  should  point  out  what  happens 

when  either the distance between  vents and/or the tempera(cid:173)
ture  difference  is  increased.  The  equation  can  be  used  to 
approximate  air flow  in any  application  where  the heights, 
temperatures, and vent sizes can be estimated (trombe wall, 
attic ventilation, etc.). 

Figure 216 

APPENDIX I 

PLANTING  CHART 

Plant 

Varieties 

Location 

Tomato 

Earliana 
Marglobe 
Michigan  Ohio 
Early Girl 
Sweet  100 
Any small variety patio, 
cherry,  pear 

Front of green(cid:173)
house in 
spring. On 
back  wall in 
winter. 

Time  of 
Year  to 
Plant 

Early spring 
Mid-August 

Cucumber 

Toska 
Gourmet 

Clear side of 
Early Spring 
greenhouse in  Mid-August 
Spring.  Back 
wall  in  winter. 
Can stand 
some shading. 

Peppers 

Red Chile 
Any green, bell wax 

Full light area 

Early  Spring 
Mid-August 

Melons and 
Squash 

Leafy  Greens 

Watermelon 
Cantaloupe 
Pumpkin 
Honeydew 
Crookneck 
Zucchini 
Acorn 

Leaf  Lettuce 
Endive 
Kale 
Spinach 
Mustard  Greens 
Cress 
Chard 
Collards 
Chicory 
Celtuce 

Early Spring 

Need light and 
lots of  room. 
Front of green(cid:173)
house. 

Medium 
light. Cool. 

Any time— 
makes the 
most sense in 
late Fall, 
Winter, early 
Spring. 

Special  Instructions 

Need  full  photoperiod.  Pollinate 
by lightly tapping open blossoms 
or  shake  plant  vigorously.  Train 
plants  up  strings.  Trim  foliage 
severely  when 
infested  with 
insects  and  in  the  fall  to prevent 
shading of the greenhouse.Do not 
cut top growth until you are ready 
for plant  to stop growing. Toma(cid:173)
toes  are  perennials  and  will 
produce  for  a  long  time.  Pull 
suckers (found  in crotch of limbs) 
off.  They  can  be  rooted:  start in 
sand or vermiculite. 

Need  full  photoperiod.  Pollinate 
with a small brush or let the bees 
in.  Pull  off  first  several  feet  of 
blossoms  for  better  fruit  set. 
Train  on  string or twine.  Can be 
trained to climb all over the sides 
and roof of greenhouse. 

Adapt  well  to small container or 
beds.  Pollinate with small brush. 
Be  careful  not  to  over-water. 
Chile Peppers do not seem to get 
as  hot  as  they  do  outdoors; still 
delicious,  however. 

Trim  vegetation.  Grow  out  the 
vents—summer.  Will  cross  pol(cid:173)
linate: try to separate varieties by 
distance. 

Dependable  winter  producers. 
Head  lettuce  does  not  head  well 
in  greenhouse.  Plant  densely, 
thin as you eat. Leafy greens will 
grow  in  pots,  on  vertical  sur(cid:173)
faces,  almost  anywhere.  Plant 
under 
tomatoes  or 
cucumbers.  Can  be  cut  many 
times  while  growing.  Will  go  to 
seed if temperatures get too hot. 

trimmed 

Carrots 

Smaller varieties 

Sunny 

Fall 
Winter 
Early Spring 

Plant  thickly  and  thin  out.  Slow 
maturers.  Interplant  with  toma(cid:173)
toes. 

192 

APPENDIX I 

Plant 

Beets 
Turnips 

Varieties 

Location 

Any 

Medium Light 

Time  of 
Year  to 
Plant 

Fall 
Winter 

Radishes 

Any 

Any place 

Anytime 

Special  Instructions 

Do  well  in  shallow  boxes.  Plant 
thickly,  but  thin  to allow  root to 
become 
large.  Foliage  when 
small  makes good edibles. 

Don't  plant  more  than  you  can 
eat.  Excellent  indicator  of  soil 
viability:  should  sprout  in  3-5 
days. 

Broccoli 
Cauliflower 
Cabbage 
Brussel Sprouts 

Calabrese,  Italian 
Snowball 
Golden acre, Chinese 
Jade Cross 

Medium  light. 
Cool 

Late Summer—  Spatially  consuming  crops.  Do 
Early Fall for 
well  in pots. Transplant well into 
Winter heading  garden. 

Beans 

Eggplant 

Peas 

Onions 
Scallions 
Garlic-

Pole 

Burpee Golden 
Blue Lake 

Medium light.  Early  Spring. 
Up walls. 
Late  Summer. 

Great  on  north  wall  of  green(cid:173)
house. Train  on trellises. Climb(cid:173)
ers  can  be  used  on  greenhouse 
exterior  for  shade  (Red  Pole 
Beans). 

Black Beauty 
Early Beauty 

Light area. 

Early Spring, 
through Sum(cid:173)
mer. 

Pollinate  with  small  brush  or 
fingertip.  Transplant  from  gar(cid:173)
den  back to greenhouse  in  fall. 

Burpeeana  Early 
Blue  Bantam 
Snow 
Sugar 

Shady Areas. 
Cool. 

Fall 
Winter 
Early Spring 

Used  to  replenish  nitrogen  in 
soil. Four poles in comers, string 
lattices across. 

Any 

Medium  light 

Fall 
Winter 

Keep  soil  moist.  Fresh  tops  are 
great  in  salads,  trim  regularly, 
start seeds in greenhouse  for gar(cid:173)
den sets. Garlic is an insect fight(cid:173)
er,  either growing or ground into 
water solution. 

Like more water than vegetables. 

Strawberries 

Everbearing 

Shade. 
Under tables. 

Fall. 

Herbs 

Anise 
Basil 

We have had tremendous  success  with  all we have tried. They grow  in any  location,  but prefer 
medium light.  Most  will do well  in cold  weather. 

Borage 
Chives 

Caraway 
Chervil 

Coriander 
Tarragon 

Oregano 
Mint (all 
kinds) 

Parsley 
Sage 

Thyme 
Sweet 
Marjoram 

Dill 

Transplants  Out 

Best  for  transplant  from  greenhouse  to garden.  Don't  be deceived.  Start 6-8  weeks before  anticipated  last  frost. 
They  grow  fast.  Try  not  to disturb  root  system  any  more  than  possible:  melon  and  cucumber  roots  are  easily 
damaged.  Harden  off  by  exposing  to  outdoor  temperatures  two  weeks  before  transplanting.  Grow  in  small 

PLANTING CHARTS 

193 

containers  when you can: we have used Jiffy  pots (these need to cut before being put into the ground; they do not 
disintegrate quickly enough and the plant can become root bound), expanding peat pellets, styrofoam cups, milk 
cartons, MacDonalds' quarter pounder containers, tin cans. If possible, transplant on a cloudy day, shade and water 
well  after  transplanting.  Do not forget  that all of these seedlings plus flower and herb starts are big sellers  in the 
Spring. A small (160 square foot) solar greenhouse I built in Idaho sold $273.00 worth of seedlings its first Spring. 
That was over half the cost of the greenhouse. 

Melons 

Broccoli 

Eggplant 

Sunflowers  Celery 

Cucumbers 

Tomatoes 
Squash 

Peppers 
Com 

Transplants  In 

If you are careful,  you can transplant healthy garden crops back into the greenhouse in the fall. Be sure to check for 
insects and disease first.  Get all the root system you can, shade and water them in their new home. 

Tomatoes 
Marigolds 

Peppers 
Nasturtiums  Geraniums 

Eggplant 

Melons 

Onions 

Broccoli 

Petunias 

Pansies 

4^ 

m 
O 
jo 

• 

Daily Temperature Chart for Solar  Greenhouse 

Month  of:. 

Tempt 

:rature 

Ins 

ide 

Out 

side 

Date 

Hi 

Low 

Hi 

Low 

Clear 

WEA1 

HERCOND 

ITIONS (che< 

:k  one) 

Partly 
Overcast 

Overcast 

Rain 

Snow 

Wind 

Comments 

From Solar Sustenance  Team 

Santa  Fe, NM  87501 

Variety 

Date  Planted 

Date  Germinated 

Dates  of  Harvest 

Bed  Location 

o 

W 

From Solar Sustenance Team 

Santa Fe.NM  87501 

r 

Time Spent in Solar  Greenhouse 

Month  of: 

Date 

Amount  of  Time 

What  Done  (planting,  weeding,  fertilizing,  sitting  &  enjoying) 

Comments 

o 
X 
o 

*~..' 

From Solar Sustenance Team 

Santa Fe, NM 87501 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

197 

Appropriate  Technology 

Small  is Beautiful, E.F.  Schumacher,  Harper and Row,  1973 
Energy Primer,  Portola Institute, Dell Publishing Co.,  1978 
Radical Agriculture,  Richard  Merrill, editor, Harper and Row,  1976 
A Landscape for  Humans, Peter van Dresser, Biotechnic Press,  1975 
Architecture for  the Poor, Hassan Fathy, The University of Chicago Press,  1969 

General  Solar 

Direct  Use of the Sun's  Energy,  Farrington Daniels, Ballantine Books,  1964 
The Coming Age of Solar Energy,  D.S. Halacy, Harper and Row,  1973 
Solar Energy and Shelter Design, Bruce Anderson, Total Environmental  Action,  1973 
The Solar Home Book, Bruce Anderson, Cheshire Books,  1976 
Sunspots,  Steve Baer,  Biotechnic Press,  1975 
Sunset Homeowner's  Guide to Solar Heating, Lane Publishing Co.,  1978 
Natural Solar Architecture, a passive primer,  David Wright, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co.,  1978 
Other Homes and Garbage, Leckie, Masters, Whitehouse and Young, Sierra Club,  1975 
Home Grown Sundwellings,  Peter van Dresser, The Lightning Tree,  1977 
Solar Heated Buildings of North America, William Shurcliff,  Brick House Publishing Co.,  1978 
New Inventions in Low Cost Solar Heating, William A. Shurcliff,  Brick House Publishing Co.,  1979 
The Passive Solar Energy Book. Ed Mazria, Rodale Press, 1979 
Solar for  Your Present Home,  Berkeley Solar Group and Lynn Nelson, California Energy Commission, 

1977 

Handbook  of Fundamentals,  ASHRAE,  1972 (especially Chapter 59 for Solar Data) 

Solar Greenhouse Design and Construction 

The Unhealed Greenhouse,  D. Goold-Adams, Transatlantic Arts, Inc.,  1955 
The Complete Greenhouse Book, Peter Clegg and Deny  Watkins, Garden Way Publishing,  1978 
The Solar Greenhouse Book, James McCullagh, editor,  Rodale Press,  1978 
Your Homemade Greenhouse and How to Build It,  Jack Kramer, Cornerstone,  1975 
An  Attached  Solar  Greenhouse,  W.F.  and  Susan  Yanda,  The  Lightning Tree,  1976 (in  Spanish  and 

English) 

Vocational Region  10 Solar Greenhouse, Maine Audubon Society,  1978 
A Solar  Greenhouse Guide for  the Northwest, Ecotope Group,  1978 

Construction 

Building  Construction Illustrated, Francis Ching, Van Nostrand Reinhold,  1976 
The Owner Builder and the Code: Politics of Building Your Own Home, Ken Kem, Ted Kogon and Rob 

Thalon, Scribner's,  1976 

The Owner Built Home,  Ken Kern, Scribner's,  1975 
Low-Cost Energy Efficiem Shelter, Eugene Eccli, Rodale Press,  1971 
Dwelling House Construction, Albert Dietz, The M.I.T. Press,  1971 
Do-lt-Your self Housebuilding: Step by Step, MacMillan,  1973 
Basic  Construction  Techniques for  Houses  and Small Buildings Simply Explained, Bureau  of  Naval 

Personnel,  Dover 

From the Ground Up, Cole and Wing, Little Brown and Co.,  1976 
From the  Walls In,  Charles Wing, Little Brown and Co.,  1979 

198 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Periodicals  There are so many good periodicals out now. If you look, you will probably find an excellent 
newsletter or bulletin  published  in your locale. Listed  below  are a few nationally  distributed  publications 
that have  emphasized  passive  solar  and  solar greenhouse  work. 

Southwest  Bulletin,  New  Mexico  Solar  Energy  Association,  P.O  Box  2004,  Santa  Fe,  NM  87501 
Solar  Greenhouse  Digest.  P.O.  Box 2621,  Flagstaff,  AZ 86003 
Solar  Age  Magazine,  Solar Vision,  Inc., Harrisville,  NH 
Solar  Engineering  Magazine,  Dallas,  TX 
RAIN,  Portland,  OR 

Popular  Science  and  Popular  Mechanics  are  both  giving  increasing  emphasis  to  solar  and  passive 
applications. 

Alternate  Sources  of Energy,  Milaka,  MINN 
Mother  Earth  News,  Hendersonville,  NC 
Organic  Gardening  and  Farming,  Emmaus,  PA 
New  Roots,  Amherst,  MA 

Conference  Proceedings  are your best source of technical  information.  As a matter of  fact,  if you  are 
only  after  the technical  information,  skip going to the conferences  and just order the proceedings. 

Conference  on Energy  Conserving  Solar  Heated  Greenhouses,  Marlboro  College,  Marlboro,  Vermont, 

1978,  $9.00 

Great  Lakes  Solar  Greenhouse  Conference,  Chippewa  Nature  Center,  400  S.  Badour  Rd.,  Rt.  # 9, 

Midland,  MI  48640,  1978,  $7.00 

Conference  on  Solar  Energy  for  Heating  Greenhouses  and  Greenhouse-Residential 
Sponsored  by  Ohio  Agricultural  Research  Development  Center and  ERDA,  1977 

Combinations, 

Third  Annual  Conference:  Solar  Energy  for  Heating  Greenhouses  and  Greenhouse-Residential 

Combinations,  U.S.D.A./D.O.E.,  1978 

Passive  Solar  Heating  and  Cooling,  First  Passive  Conference,  National Technical  Information  Service, 

U.S.  Dept.  of Commerce,  Springfield,  VA   22161,  1976,  $10.50 

Passive  Solar,  State  of the Art.  Second  Passive  Conference.  Mid-Adantic Solar Energy Association,  2233 

Gray's  Ferry Ave.,  Philadelphia,  PA  19146,  1978,  $20.00 

Third  National  Passive  Solar  Conference.  For information  write: AS/ISES,  P.O.  Box  1416, Killeen,  TX 

76541 

Fourth  National  Passive  Solar  Conference.  For information  write: AS/ISES, P.O. Box  1416, Killeen, TX 

76541. 

Gardening 

How  to  Grow  More  Vegetables  Than  You Ever  Thought  Possible  on Less  Than  You Can  Imagine,  John 

Jeavons,  Ecology  Action  of  the Mid  Peninsula,  1974 

Gardening  for  People  (Who  Think  They  Don't  Know  How),  Doug  Moon,  John  Muir Publications,  1975 
The Postage  Stamp  Garden  Book,  Duane Newcomb, Hawthorn,  1975 
The  City  People's  Book  to Raising  Food,  Helga and William Olkowski,  Rodale Press,  1975 
How  to Grow  Vegetables  and  Fruit  by the  Organic  Method,  J.I.  Rodale and staff,  Rodale Press,  1974 
The  Encyclopedia  of Organic  Gardening,  J.I.  Rodale and staff,  Rodale Press,  1975 
The  Basic  Book  of  Organic  Gardening,  Robert  Rodale,  editor,  Rodale  Press,  1975 
How  to  Have  a  Green  Thumb  Without  an Aching  Back,  Ruth  Stout,  Cornerstone,  1974 
The  Gardener's  Catalog,  produced  by  Harry  Rottenberg,  William  Morrow  and  Co.,  1974 
Food  Gardens:  Indoors,  Outdoors  and  Under Glass,  produced by Harry Rottenberg, William Morrow and 

Co.,  1975 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

199 

Crockett's  Victory Garden, James Crockett, Little Brown and Co.,  1977 
Crockett's  Indoor Gaden, James Crockett, Little Brown and Co.,  1978 
The Green Pages,  Maggie Oster, editor, Tree Communications,  Inc.,  1977 
Organic Gardening Under Glass, George and Katy Abraham,  Rodale Press,  1975 
Hydroponic  Gardening,  Raymond  Bridwell, Woodbridge Press,  1972 
The Survival Greenhouse, James B. DeKorne, The Walden Foundation,  1975 
Beginner's  Guide to Hydroponics, James S. Douglas, Drake Publishers, Inc.,  1972 
Gardening Indoors Under Lights, F.H. Franz and J.L.  Kranz, The Viking Press, 1957 
The Solar Greenhouse Book, James McCullagh,  editor,  Rodale Press,  1978 
Winter Flowers in the Greenhouse and Sun Heated Pit, K.S. Taylor and E.W.  Gregg, Charles Scribner 

and Sons,  1969 

The Facts of Light,  Ortho Book Series,  1975 
The Complete Book of Greenhouse Gardening, Ian Walls, Quadrangle,  1975 
Grow Fruit in Your Greenhouse, George E. Whitehead, Faber and Faber, London,  1970 
What Every Gardener Should Know About Earthworms, published by Garden Way Research 
A to Z of Greenhouse Plants: A Guide for  Beginners, Paul Langfield,  Max Parrish and Co.,  1964 
Weeds: Guardians of the Soil, Joseph A. Cocannouer, Ecology Action 
Companion Plants and How to Use Them, Helen Philbrick  and Richard Gregg, Ecology Action 
Gardening  Without Poisons,  Beatrice Trum  Hunter,  Houghton Mifflin,  1972 
Common Sense Pest Control,  Helga Olkowski, Consumer's Cooperative of Berkeley,  Inc.,  1971 
Organic Plant Protection,  Rodale Press,  1972 
The Gardener's Bug Book, Cynthia Westcott,  Doubleday  and Co., Inc.,  1973 
Rodale Herb Book, Rodale Press 
A Modern Herbal,  M.A.  Grieve, Dover Publications,  1971 
Herbs and Things, Jeanne Rose, Grosset and Dunlap,  1969 
Composting: A Study of the Process and Its Principles, Clarence G. Golueke,  Rodale Press,  1972 

Seed Catalogs  There are many more seed companies man we could ever list here. Included are some little 
known  suppliers  with  unusual  specialties  and  some  well-known  seed  houses  for  their  more  complete 
selection. In ordering catalogs look for seed companies familiar with your climatic conditions that cater to 
home gardeners. 

Abundant Life Seeds,  Box 30018, Seattle, WA 98103 

Small  seed exchange for residents of the Pacific Northwest and California only.  Beautiful  origami 
catalog folded on one page for 500. 

Burpee  Seed Co.,  Clinton,  IA 52732 

Large well-known company  with wide selection of most vegetables and flowers. 

DiGiorgi  Co.,  Council Bluffs,  Iowa 51501 

Forage crops, old-fashioned  lettuce and other vegetables, open-pollinated  corn. 

Gurney's,  Yankton,  SD 57078 

Unusual  vegetables. Cold-weather vegetables and fruit trees. 

Hart Seed Co.,  Wethersfield,  CT 06109 

Largest selection of old-fashioned  and non-hybrid vegetables. Many hard-to-find  varieties available 
on request. 

J.L.  Hudson Seed Co.,  P.O. Box  1058, Redwood City, CA 94064 

One of the world's largest selection of flower  and herb seeds. 50* for catalog. 

Johnny's  Selected Seeds,  Albion, ME 04910 

Small seed company with integrity. Carries native american crops, select oriental vegetables, grains, 
and short-maturing  soybeans. Catalog: 50<J 

2 00 

BIBLIOGRAHY 

Lanark County North American Medicinal and Culinary Herbs, RR 2, Amonte, Ontario 

Canadian  seed house, good for cold-weather areas. Ask for free  organically-grown  vegetable seed 
price list. 

Meadowbrook Herb Garden, Rt.  138, Wyoming, RI 02898 

Bio-Dynamically  grown spices, herbs, teas and herb seeds. 

Nichols  Garden Nursery,  1190 North Pacific Hwy., Albany, OR 97321 

Unusual  specialities: elephant garlic, luffa  sponge, winemaking supplies, herbs. 

Park Seed Co.,  Greenwood,  SC 29647 

The best selection  of flowers.  Gorgeous, full-color  catalog available  free. 

Redwood  City Seed Co.,  P.O. Box 361, Redwood City, CA 94061 

Basic selection of non-hybrid, untreated vegetable and herb seeds. Expert on locating various tree 
seeds, including redwoods. Guide on saving.seed for 750. Catalog costs 250. 

R.H.  Shumway,  Rockford,  IL 61101 

Good  selection  of grains, fodders  and cover crops. 

Stark Brothers,  Louisiana, MO 63353 

Specializes  in  fruit  trees,  especially  dwarfs  and  semi-dwarfs.  Carries  many  developed  by  Luther 
Burbank. 

Stokes Seeds,  Box 548, Buffalo,  NY  14240 

Carries excellent  varieties of many vegetables, especially carrots. 

Sutton Seeds,  London Road, Earley,  Reading, Berkshire, England RG6  1AB 
For gourmet gardeners. Excellent,  tasty varieties, hot-house vegetables. 

Vilmorin-Andrieux, 4 Quai de la Megisserie, 75001 Paris, France 

Old,  respected  seed house specializing  in high-quality  gourmet  vegetables. Catalog in French. 

Arthur  Yates & Co.,  P.O. Box 72, Revesvy 2212, New South Wales, Australia 

Specializes in tropical varieties suitable for the southern hemisphere. International seed catalog free. 

Suppliers and  Catalogs 

Solar  Usage Now,  Box 306, Bascom, Ohio 44809 

A jam packed catalog of solar supplies. Ships mail order. 

Solarware,  Pawlet, Vermont 05761 

A new passive hardware catalog. 

A to Z Solar Products,  200 East 26th Street, Minneapolis, MINN 55404 

A good catalog and source book. 

Solar Age  Catalog, Solar Vision, Inc. Manchester,  New Hampshire 

Good access to products, ideas and people. 

Kalwall Catalog, 88 Pine Street,  Manchester,  New Hampshire 03103 

Greenhouse Supplies  The following companies have extensive catalogs carrying all types of greenhouse 
products and accessories. They deal primarily with large commercial operations. 

National  Greenhouse Company, Pana,  Illinois 62557 
Stuppy,  Inc., Greenhouse  Supply Division,  P.O. Box  12456, Kansas City, MO 64416 
Texas Greenhouse  Company,  2717 St.  Louis Ave., Fort Worth, TX 76110 
George J.  Ball, Inc., Box 335, West Chicago, IL 60185 

Glazing  Suppliers 

ASG Industries, Inc., P.O.  Box 292, Kinsport, TN 37662 

Glass glazing  information. 

CY-RO Industries, Berden Ave., Wayne, NJ 07470 
"Acrylite SDP" double skinned acrylic sheet. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

2 01 

Brother Sun, Rte. 6, Box  10A, Santa Fe, NM 87501 

Acrylite SDP, Lascolite, Lexan glazings and greenhouse components. 

Filon  Division  of  Vistron Corporation,  12333 Van Ness Ave., Hawthorn, CA 90250 

Fiberglass glazing. 

Kalwall Corporation, 88 Pine St.,  Manchester, NH 03103 
Fiberglass glazing, fiberglass water heat storage tubes. 

People Resource 

Rainbook,  Schocken Books, New York,  1977 
Citizens Energy Directory,  2nd edition,  1110 6th St., NW, Washington, DC 20001 

Hand  Held Calculator Programs for Solar Greenhouse  Performance 

These programs can quite accurately predict the performance of a greenhouse on a seasonal or daily basis. 
They are most appropriate for architects and engineers. 

TEANET  Total Environmental  Action, Inc., Church Hill, Harrisville, NH 03456 

$95.00 from  TEA 

PEGFLOAT  Princeton  Energy Group, 729 Alexander Road, Princeton, NJ 08540 

$75.00 combined with PEGFIX 

PEGFIX  Princeton  Energy Group, 729 Alexander Road,  Princeton, NJ 08540 

$75.00 combined  with  PEGFLOAT 

SUN-PULSE U  Joint Venture,  138 Mt.  Auburn St., Cambridge, MA 02138 

$100.00 from  above or McGraw Hill Book Co. 

Audio Visual  Materials 

Passive Solar Energy Slide Set, 6 slide sets. Set E is Attached Greenhouses prepared by the New Mexico 

Solar Energy Association, P.O. Box 2004, Santa Fe, NM 87501 

Solar Greenhouse Slide Series,  7 slide sets covering all aspects of the solar greenhouse prepared by The 

Solar Sustenance Team,  Rte  1, Box  107AA, Santa Fe, NM 87501 

Build Your Own Greenhouse-Solar Style, 16mm color/sound 21-minute film, available in French, Spanish 

and English.  Danamar Film Production, 275 Kilby, Los Alamos, NM 87544 

Regional  Contacts  This  list,  arranged  alphabetically  by state,  is constantly  changing  and expanding. 
These groups,  many  of whom run greenhouse construction  workshops, can put you  in contact with the 
right people in your area. If writing for information,  please enclose a SASE. 

Solar Greenhouse  Employment  Project,  Box 435, Tuscaloosa, ALA 35401 
Northern Arizona Council of Governments, P.O. Box 57, Flagstaff,  AZ 86002 
The Ozark  Institute, Box 549, Eureka Springs, AK 72632 
Habitat Center,  162 Christian  Drive, Pacheco, CA 94533 
SUNRAE,  257 Santa Monica Way, Santa Barbara, CA 93109 
Farralones Institute,  18290 Coleman  Valley Road, Occidental, CA 95465 
Grand Junction Public Energy Office,  250 North 5th, Grand Junction, CO 81501 
San Luis Valley  Solar Energy Association, P.O. Box  1284, Alamosa, CO 81101 
Domestic Technology  Institute,  12520 W. Cedar Drive, Lakewood, CO 80228 
Regional Rehabilitation  Institute,  157 Church Street, New Haven, CT 06510 
Institute  for Local Self Reliance,  1717 18th St.,  NW, Washington, DC 20009 
Design Alternatives,  1312  18th St.  NW, Washington, DC 20001 
Citizen's Energy Project,  1110 6th St.  NW, Washington, DC 20001 

2 02 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Solar Lobby,  1001 Connecticut Ave NW, Washington, DC 20036 
Claude Terry  and Associates, 929 Euclid Ave., NE #  1, Atlanta, GA 30307 
Center for Neighborhood Technology, 570 West Randolph St., Chicago, IL 60606 
Frankfort  Public Library, Frankfort,  IN 
Save the Children  Federation, Berea, KY 
Buck  Neelis, 242 Grand,  Lafayette,  LA 70503 
Maine Audubon Society, Gilsland  Farm,  118 Old Route  1, Falmouth, ME 04105 
New  Alchemists, Box 432, Woods Hole, MA 02543 
Massachusetts Energy Office,  Division of Conservation and Solar, 73 Tremont St., Room 849, Boston, 

MA 02108 

Northeast Solar Energy Center, 70 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02142 
Chippewa Nature Center, 400 S.  Badour Road, Rt.  #9, Midland, MI 48640 
Ingram County  Energy Office,  Cooperative Extension  Service,  121 E. Maple, Mason, MI 48854 
Center for Local Self Reliance, 3302 Chicago Avenue South, Minneapolis MINN 55407 
Solar Greenhome Associaion,  34 N. Gore, Webster Grove, MO 63119 
Montana Sunteam, P.O.  Box 216, Circle, Montana 59215 
Total  Environmental  Action,  Church Hill, Harrisville, NH 03540 
New Mexico Solar Energy Association,  P.O.  Box 2004, Santa Fe, NM 87501 
Solar Sustenance Team,  Rte,  1, Box  107AA, Santa Fe, NM 87501 
New Mexico Energy Extension  Service, P.O. Box 00, Santa Fe, NM 87501 
Sunspace,  Inc., P.O. Box  1792, Ada, OK 74820 
Long Branch Land Association,  Rte. 2, Box  132, Leicaster,  NC 28748 
Portland Sun,  1815 South East Main Street #4,  Portland, OR 97214 
Office  of Community Energy, P.O. Box  156, Harrisburg, PA  17120 
Governor's Energy Office,  80 Dean Street,  Providence, RI 
Tennessee Environmental Council, P.O. Box  1422, Nashville, TN 37202 
Solar Applications  Branch,  Tennessee Valley  Authority,  426 United  Bank Building, Chattanooga,  TN 

37401 

San Marcus Community Center, San Marcus, TX 
Office  of the City Manager, Crystal City, P.O.  Drawer 550, Crystal City, TX 78839 
Utah Solar Energy Association,  1159 East Stratford  Avenue, Salt Lake City, Utah 84106 
New England Solar Energy Association, P.O. Box 541, Bratdeboro, VT 05301 
Ecotope Group, 2322 East Madison, Seattle, WA 98112 
Washington Energy Extension  Services, Room 312, Smith Tower, Seattie, WA 98104 
West  Central  Wisconsin  Community  Action  Agency,  525  Second  Street,  Glenwood  City,  Wisconsin 

54103 

Community  Relations, Soc. Dev.  Com.,  161 W.  Wisconsin  Ave., Milwaukee,  WI 53202 
Gale Harms, Wyoming Energy Extension Services, 521 Park, Thermopolis, WY 82443 

All Local, State, and Regional Solar Energy Associations are very good sources of information.  Look for 
them  in die telephone book. 

- A-

A-frame,  35 
Access, 36 
AcryliteSDP,  122, 164 
Active Solar Energy Systems, 

16,  125,  145, 161 

Adobe, 54-55 
Adobe Bricks, 32 
Adobe Walls, 58 
Air Circulation. 27.43, 92, 

94 

Anchor Bolt, 56 
Angle of Incidence,  13 
Appropriate Technology 

Corporation,  159 

Appropriate  Technology, 

References.  197 

Appropriate Technology 

Research,  187-188 

Arizona, University of.  En(cid:173)

vironmental  Research 
Laboratory,  141-142 

Arkansas. Office  of Human 

Concern,  111 

Atrium, 25, 31 
Audio Visual  Materials, 

Solar, 201 

Auxins, 86 
Aztec Radiant  Heat 

PanelsR,  111 

- B-

B.T.U.,  13 
Bacillus thuringiensis, 95 
Baer. Steve,  161-162 
Balcomb, Doug, 8, 103, 

117,119-122 

Balcomb, Sarah,  103, 119-

122 

"Batch*' Heater,  115 
Bauerle, W.L.,  142-143 
Beadwall,48,  161 
Biological Control of Pests, 

97-98 

Biosphere,  9-10 
Biotrol, 95 
Blocks, concrete, estimat(cid:173)
ing amount needed, 58 

INDEX 

Block Wall, installation. 59 
Blood Meal, 80 
Brace Institute, 7, 34, 138, 

140, 149 

Brattleboro Design Group, 

116-117 

"Breadbox-* Heater,  115-

117,  162 

Brick Walls. 58 
British Thermal Units, see 

B.T.U.s. 

Brother Sun,  165-166,201 
Bugs, see Pests 
Building Codes. 25 
Building Site, 52-53 
Bunker. James.  114. 151 
Bunker. Paul.  115,  149. 150. 

151 

Burke. Jim,  102 
Butler, Lee Porter,  132 

-c-

CFM. 43 
Carbon  Dioxide, 81 
Catalogs, Mail Order, Solar 

Equipment and Seeds, 
199-200 
Celotex, 75 
Centers, to determine, 60 
Chart,  Average percentage of 

possible sunshine for 
selected locations,  180. 
Daily temperature chart  for 
heat distribution  in the at(cid:173)
tached greenhouse on a 
clear winter day.  183. 
Home heating contribution, 
168. Monthly degree days 
in selected locations around 
U.S.,  181.  Planting,  191-
193. Solar transmission 
through a double southern 
facing glass on a clear day. 
14.  Sun  Movement.  172-
179. Vent size, 44. 

Chimney  Effect,  46-47 
Chlordane. 96 
Chlorinated Hydrocarbons, 96 

203 

Citizens for Citizens  Project. 

152 

Clay Pots, 94 
Clear Walls, 70-71 
Clemson  University—Rural 
Housing Research Unit, 
125 

Collector Tilt. 27-30 
Collector Angle of Incidence, 

13-14 

Colorado Rocky  Mountain 

School.  152 

Commercial Greenhouses, see 
Greenhouse,  Freestanding 

Community Solar Green(cid:173)

houses,  151-153 

Companion  Planting, 91-92 
Compost. 82-83 
Concrete, 56 
Condensation,  20 
Conduction,  16-17 
Conductivity. 37 
Convection,  17-18.27,43-

44,46-47 

Copper Napthenate, 65 
Corner Lath. 74 
Corrugated Galvanized Steel, 

72 

Corrugated Plastic, 65-66 
Cottonseed Meal, 80 
Creosote, Fresh. 57 
Crop Rotation, 91 
Cross Ventilation. 44 
Cubic Feet Per Minute, see 

CFM 

Currin, Betty & Ced,  104-105 
Currin, Bruce,  114 
Curtain  Wall,  159-160 
Cyro AcryliteSDP.  164 

- D-

D.D.T.,96 
Daar Residence, the.  107-109 
Davie, M.,  125 
Declination, 22 
Degree Days.  16. Monthly in 
Selected  Locations Around 
the U.S.. Chart, Appendix 
D.  181-182 

204 

Dependence Cycle, 11 
Design, Exterior, 21-35 
Design, Interior, 36-50 
Diffuse  Sky Radiation, 28 
Diazinon, 96 
Dipel, 95 
Direct Thermal Storage, 37 
Diurnal swings, 41 
Doors and Vents, 74-75 
Doors, Exterior. 36 
Drainage, 24-25 

-E-

Earth Worms, 80-81 
Earth Berm,  149 
Ecosystem, 9 
Ecotecture Group,  128-130 
Ecotope Group,  146-147 
Ekose'a,  132-133 
Electromagnetic Waves, 18 
Evaporation,  20 
Excavation Depth, 52-53 
Expansion Bolts, 63 
Exterior Design, 21-35 

-F-

Fall Planting Cycle, 88-89 
Fan, 44 
Fan, Solar, see Solar Fan 
Fertilizers, 81-83 
Fiberglass Batt, 74 

Flat, 65-66 
Outer Layers, to install, 
70-71 

Fiberglass/Acrylic  Sheeting, 

65 

Filon, 70 
Flowers, 86. 89-91 
Four Seasons Greenhouse, 

156 

Foundation,  53-58 
Frame. Painting, 65 
Frame Walls, 60-64 
Franta. Gregory,  124 

- G-

Galt.John.  115 
Geraniums, 90 
Glass, 66-68 
Glazing, Clear, Choosing, 65-

69 

Glazing,  Interior. 73 
Glazing, 65-70 
Acrylics, 67 
Comparison Chart. 68-69 
Fiberglass, 67 
Glass, 67 
Polycarbonates, 70 
Temperature Limitations, 
67-69 
Translucent, 65 
Transparent, 66 

Glazing Suppliers. 200-201 
Glazing Tilt, 28 
Green, Cedric,  128 
Green Horizon,  110-111 
Green, Wade,  154 
Greenhouse, about,  7-10 

Attached, advantages of, 
34,  101-117 
Care of,  78 
Community,  151-153 
Configurations,  25-27 
Construction,  51-77 
Daily Temperature Chart, 
194 
Freestanding, 34-35, 137-
153 
Geometries, 30-35 
Heat Distribution,  183 
Layout, 79 
Length and heat, 26 
Manufacturers,  154-166 
Materials used, 76-77 
Performance,  Calculator 
Programs, 201 
Predicting thermal per(cid:173)
formance. Appendix F, G, 
184-188 
Principles, Solar Design, 
12-20 
Portable,  115 

Prefabricated,  11,30 
Recycled,  102 
Research Facilities, large 
scale,  142-145 
Roof, tie-in to wall, 63 
Sealing. 75 
Seasons, 87-89 
Temporary, 30 
Thermal Characteristics, 
16-20 
Unheated, 40 

Greenhouse  Effect,  15-16 
Greenhouse Gardening, 78-

100 

Greenhouse-home  combina(cid:173)

tion,  117-136 

Grimmer, Derrick,  185-188 
Growhole, 53 

-H-

Habitat Center, the,  107 

"Hands On"  Workshop, 
107 Solar Greenhouse Re(cid:173)
trofit,  107 

Haggard  Keith, 7 
Harrison, David,  161 
Hayes, Jo Ann & John.  106 
Heat Distribution  in the At(cid:173)
tached Greenhouse on a 
Clear Winter Day. Appen(cid:173)
dix E,  183 

Heat Motor.  164-165 
Heat Storage, Capacity, 37 

Common Materials Chart. 
37 

Storage in Greenhouse, 19 
To estimate total. Appen(cid:173)
dix F,  184 
Losses, Appendix G.  185-
188 
Use,  15-20 

Helion.Inc,  135-136 
Herb Shop, the,  140-141 
Herb Shop and Solar Green(cid:173)

house, 92 

Hite, Henry,  124 

Holdridge,  Bob,  123 
Home Heating Contribution 
Chart, see Appendix A, 
167 

Hortenstein, McChesney,  114 
Hot Water, Solar System, see 

Solar Hot Water System 

Houseplants, 89-90 
Humidity, 20 
Humus, 81 
"Humus Toilet,'*  125 
Hurly, Mike,  152 
Hybrid Solar Energy Systems, 

16 

Hydroponics, 83; versus soil, 

83-84 

- I-

IS Company,  160 
Indirect Thermal Storage, see 

Isolated Thermal Storage 

Infrared,  12 
Infiltration,  18 
Insects, see Pests 
Insulating Panels,  Seasonally 

Applied,  3i 

Insulation, 44-49, 53-54, 57 

73-74 

Interior Design, 36-50 
Iron Oxide Mortar,  107 
Isolated Thermal  Storage, 37, 

42-43 

J-

Jaehne, Dennis,  153 
Jenkins, Rob,  109-110 

-K-

Kalwall Solar Components, 

163 

Kelbaugh, Doug, 45 
Kenin, Steve,  157-158 
Kimbell, Clark,  123 
Knight, Don, 84 
Kolstad and Grimmer,  185 

Kolstad, Charles,  185 
"KubePak."  144-145 

- L-

Lascolite, 70 
Lawand.T.A.,  138, 140 
Layouts,  Recommended, 
based on Orientation to 
True South. 26-27 

Light Collection,  12-15 
Light, Reflection  of,  15 
Loitz, Joan, 24, 92,  140, 141 
Londe,  114 
Long, Lorell,  108 
Long Waves,  15 
Long Wave Transmission, 66 
Loudon, J . C,  128, 150 
Lumber, Selecting, 60-61 
Lumpkins, Bill,  120 
Lunar Calendar, 79 

-M-

McDonald College of McGill 

University,  138 

McGruer, Andrew,  114 
MacKinnon, David J., 

Excerpts from  recent pa(cid:173)
pers,  147-149 

Maes, Reed E.,  138-140 
Maintenance, 91-92 
Malathion, 96 
Manure, 82-83 
Marlboro and Plymouth Solar 

Greenhouse Proceedings, 
148 

Massachusetts Institute of 

Technology, 57 

Massachusetts Opportunity 

Council,  153 

Massive Walls, 58-60 
Mastrobuono, Tony,  102 
Materials, Annotated List, 76-

77 
Recycling,  102 
Selecting, 51-52,  102 

Mazria, Ed,  122 

205 

Mesa College,  109-110 
Michels. Tim and Associates. 

114 

Microclimate, 78 
Mobile Home, 27 
Monsanto 602, 73 
Monthly Degree Days in 

Selected Locations Around 
U.S., Chart, Appendix D, 
181-182 

Moon Phases, Planting during 

78-79 

Mortar. 59-60 
Movable Insulation Systems. 

44-50 
Manufacturers,  159-166 

Mulching, 83 
Mullions. 60, 62-63 
Multiple Glazing,  14-15 

- N-

National Association of Solar 

Contractors,  117 

National Center for Appropri(cid:173)

ate Techology.  153 

Natural Solar Architecture, 

123 

Nelson, Lynn,  107-109 
New Alchemy  Institute, 145-

146 

New Mexico Organic Grow(cid:173)

ers Association,  115 

New Mexico Solar Energy 
Association, 76-77, 201-
202 

Nicotine, 95 
Nichols, Susan & Wayne, 8, 

119,  120,  122 

Nightwall,  161 
Nitrogen (N), 80 
Norskog, Judy & Noel,  11  I 

-o-

Obstructions, 23-24 
Ohio Agriculture Research 

and Development Center, 
142-144 

206 

Old Carpenters  Water Trick. 

54 

One Design.  162-163 
Organic Matter. 80 
Organo-Phosphates, 96 
Ozark  Institute.  111-112 

P-

Paneling, Exterior and Insu(cid:173)

lating, 75 

Paneling. Interor, 74 
Parallax Corporation,  122-

123 

Park, Jack, 8,  117,  135, 158 
Passive Conference  Proceed(cid:173)

ings.  198 

Passive Convection Cycle, 43 
Passive Solar Associates of 

Santa Fe. New Mexico. 42, 
122 

Passive Solar Energy,  Defini(cid:173)

tion,  16 

Passive Thermal Storage, see 

Direct Thermal  Storage 

Patterson,  Robert,  102 
Pattons. Joseph. Sir,  128 
Pentachlorophenol, 57 
Percentage of Sunshine. 12, 

Appendix C,  180 

Percolation, 25 
Pests, 93-98; To check, 94 

Identify,  94-95 

Pests, Biological Control, see 
Biological Control of Pests 
Pest Control Dusts, to apply. 

96 

Pest Control, Mechanical 

methods, 96-97 
Pest Control, see 
Common sense 
Pest Control for the Home 
Greenhouse, 92-98 

Pest Control, Topical Treat(cid:173)

ments. 95-96 
Inorganic, 95 
Botanicals, 95 
Microbial, 95 
Home Remedies, 96 
Synthetics, 96 

Pesticide Precautions. 96 
Phosphorous (P), 80 
Photoperiod.  12.21.23.24 
Photosynthesis,  12. 13 
Phototropic,  15,34-35.85 
Pit Greenhouses, 53 
Plants, Light Requirements. 

12 

Plants and People,  100 
Planting Areas, 36-37 
Planting Chart, see Appendix 

I.  191-193 

Planting Cycles. 78-79 
Planting Layout. 85-86 
Planting Vegetable Guide, see 

Vegetable Planting Guide 

Plenum, see Rock Bed 
Pollination, 92 
Potassium (K), 80 
Pragtree Farm.  146-147 
Pumice Blocks. Hollow. 58 

-R-

R-Value. 17 
R-Value Chart of Common 

Building Materials. 17 

Rabbits. 81 
Radiant Heat Loss, 19 
Radiant Heat Transfer,  18-19 
Radiation.  12.  18-20 
Radiation  Heating, 19 
Rafters,  63, 64-65, 72 
Rainwater, 91 
Rays, Direct,  12 

Diffuse,  12 
Reflected,  12,29 

Re-bar. 54 
Rebate, 25 
Re-rod. 54 
Reinforcing  Bar. See Re-bar 
Reverse Themiosiphoning, 45 
Rick's Cafe,  135 
Roaring Forks Research 

Center,  124 

Rock Bed, 42-43 
Roof Design, 31-32 
Roof  Installation, 72 
Roof  Insulated Section, Pri(cid:173)

mary  Function, 31 

Roof  Insulation. 31 
Roof Rafter,  see  Rafters 
Roof Sections, Insulation, 47 
Roof, Solid Area. 31 
Ross, Alan,  116 
Rutgers University, Cook 

College.  144-145 

-s-

Schwolsky,  Rick,  116-117 
Sea Group, the,  123 
Sea Water. Desalting, 141-

142 

Seedling, 87 
Sheffield.  University of,  128-

130 

Shore. Ron,  152 
Short, T.H.,  142-143 
Short Waves,  15 
Silicone Sealant, 71 
Sill Plates, 63 
Site, Choosing one, 21-25 
Site, not level, 52 
Skiles, Albert,  111 
Skylid.  162 
Smith. Debbie.  124 
Smith, Tom,  132 
Smith-Hite Studio,  124 
Smokers, 95 
Soap and Water, 96 
Soil. 80-81 

Elements, 80 
Enriching, 81 
Mixtures, 81 
Sterilized, 81 
Testing, 80 

SolarCollection. about.  12-15 
Solar Energy Handbook, 131-

132 

Solar Fan,  164-165 
Solar Greenhomes,  103, 117-

137 

SolarGreenhouse, See Green(cid:173)

house 

Solar Hot Water System,  115-

117 

Solar Organizations. Re(cid:173)

sources, 201-202 

Solar Power Supply,  135 

Solar Products,  Manufac(cid:173)

turers,  159-166 

Solar Radiation, See Radia(cid:173)

tion 

Solar Resources, Inc., 157-

158 

Solar Rights. 23 
Solar Room,  157-158 
Solar Sustenance Project, 7 
Solar Sustenance Team  Of(cid:173)

fice,  112-114 

Solar Technology  Corpora(cid:173)

tion,  155-156 

Solar Transmission through 
Vertical Double Glass at 
Three Orientations, Chart, 
13-14 

Solar Transmittance, 66 
Solsearch,  146 
SOLTEC, See Solar Technol(cid:173)

ogy Corporation 

South Face, Angle, 28-30 
South. True, 21-22 
Split Level Floor Plan, 52 
Sprays, to apply. 96 
Spring Planting Cycle, 87-88 
Starting. See Transplanting 
Stone. Charlotte,  123 
Storage, Direct Gain, 38-42 
Storage Media and Place(cid:173)

ment, 38-39 

Strandquist, Coleen & John. 

111-112 

Straw Bale Culture, 84 
Stud. 60-61 
Summer.  Planting Cycle, 88 
Styrene Panels, 75 
Styrofoam,  75 
Sun Movement and Building 

Orientation, 21 

Sun Movement Charts, see 

Appendix  B,  172-179 

Sundcsigns,  124  . 
Sundwellings Project,  130-

132 

Sunlight,  Right to, 23 
Sun-lite Storage and Tube 

Containers,  163 

""Sun-Louvres,'*  125 
Sunrise Solar Services,  117 

Sunshine, List of Possible Per(cid:173)
cent for 5 Major Cities in 
U.S.,  12. AppxC,  180 

Suppliers, Greenhouse 

Materials. Products, 200-
-201 

- T-

Taff,  Doug, 8,  122-123 
Tax Credits, 25 
Tedlar Coating, 65 
Temporary Solar Greenhouse, 

30,115 

Temperature.  15-16 
Terracing, 52 
Terry, Karen,  124 
Thermal Conductivity,  16 
Thermal  Dynamics, Some 

General Principals,  16-20 

Thermal Mass,  19, 38-43 
Thermal Mass Sizing, 39-43 
Thermal Momentum, 8,37-38 
Thermal  Relationship, Op(cid:173)

timum, between  Home and 
Greenhouse, 26 

Thermosiphoning, 45 
Thermal Storage, 37-43 

Direct, 38 
Isolated, 42-43 
Proper Placement, 38 

Thermal Storage, Capacity 

and Greenhouse  Perfor(cid:173)
mance, Appendix F,  184 

Thuricide. 95 
Tin Foil, Heavy Duty. 74 
Toenail, 64 
Trahan. Dorothy. J.D., 111-

112 

Transpiration, 20 
Transplanting, 90-91 
Tyson,  Frances & Wesley, 

149-150 

-u-

U-Value,  16-17 
Uniform  Building Code, 25 

207 

University of Arizona Envi(cid:173)

ronmental Research Labor(cid:173)
atory, 79,  141-142 

University of Northern Ari(cid:173)

zona,  147 

Unobstructed  light, 23 
Utilities, 25 

- V-

Valdez, Amie & Marie,  152 
van Dresser, Peter, 7,  130 
Vance, Judy & Paul,  105-106 
Vegetable Factory, the, 154-

155 

Vegetable Planting Guide, 86-

89 

Ventilation, Cross, see Cross 

Ventilation 

Vents in Roof, 72 
Vent Sizing,  Recommenda(cid:173)

tions Chart, 44. Appendix 
H.  189-190 

Vents, Spacing, 43-44 
Vermiculite, 81 
Vertical Collecting  Surfaces, 

28-30 

Vertical Framing Members, 

see Mullions 

Vertical Front Face, Advan(cid:173)

tages, 28-30 

Vertical Space, Optimum 

Use, 37 

Voute,  Barbara  & Peter,  150-

151 

-w-

Walls, end, 32 

Insulation, 32 
North, 32 
Optimum Thickness 
For Heat Transfer Chart, 
33 
East and West, 32 
Frame, Clear and Opaque, 
60-64 
Framing Options, 61 

208 

Walls, Massive, see Massive 

Walls 

Walsh, Valerie,  110-111 
Warner, Francis E.,  104 
Ward, Mark,  102 
Water Drums, 38-39 
Water,  Preheating  in Green(cid:173)

house.  116-117 

Water Storage Containers, 

37-39 

DATE  DE RETOUR 

j l Li  ^ , . .. 

^j 

J  ;  N 

DECUcJflttUJBI! 

I 

PETUPM 
luH^lT)  > 
I\UlUU.i  0(111 J  X  * 
*  i 

Watering, 91, 94 
Weather-tight, 75 
Weeds, 93 
Wessling, Dr. Francis, 7, 106-

107 

William Lamb Co..  165 
Wind,  18,24 
Window Quilt  Insulating 

Shade,  159 

Winter Planting Cycle, 89 
Workshops,  Regional 

Groups, 201 

Wright, David, 8,  123-124 

- X - Y - Z-

Yanda, Bill,  112-114, 115 
Zomeworks,  116,  161-162 

F256 

0 

You  may  order copies of  The Food  and  Heat  Producing  Solar  Greenhouse  by sending your  name 
and address and a check for $9.00 ($8.00 plus $1.00 postage and handling), or $9.34 if you  live in 
sunny  New  Mexico, to: 

John Muir  Publications 
P.O.  Box  613 
Santa Fe, NM  87501 

Send  for our  free catalog of books, 

• 

posters & T-Shirts. 

