Illustrations by Glen Strode 
Cover.Title and Chapter Drawings by Peter Aschwanden 
Herb Illustrations by Michaellallen McGuire 

Copyright ©  1982 by Shane Smith 
Illustrations and Cover Copyright ©  1982 by John Muir Publications, Inc. 
All rights reserved 

Published by  John Muir Publications, Inc. 

P.O.  Box 613 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501 

Library of Congress Catalogue Card No. 81-85952 

ISBN  0-912528-08-7 

10  9 8 7 6 5 4 32 
The  last  number  to  the  right  in the 
above  sequence  indicates  the print(cid:173)
ing history of this edition. 

1 

f""™"**"**^^^^^ 
I 
I 

UNIVERSITY  OF AiBEm 

LIBRARY 

MSItSUf 
I 
J 

CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION  Bill Yanda 
PREFACE 
CHAPTER  1 
CHAPTER 2 
CHAPTER 3 
CHAPTER 4 

CHAPTERS 
CHAPTER 6 
CHAPTER 7 

CHAPTER 8 
CHAPTER 9 
CHAPTER  10 

EPILOGUE 
APPENDICES 
INDEX 

The Greenhouse Environment 
Interior Layout Design 
Crop Layout 
Selecting Solar Greenhouse 
Crops And Varieties 
Plant Propagation 
Flowers And Pollination 
Greenhouse Food Crop 
Scheduling 
Crops 
Getting To The Roots 
Pests And Diseases, 
When Things Go Wrong 

7 
11 
16 
42 
54 

66 
74 
86 

92 
100 
148 

164 
201 
207 
215 

INTRODUCTION 

I've known Shane Smith for a good while, and a good while is a lot different than a simple 
while. A good while means that the quality of the while is worth more than the quantity of the 
while. 

The first time I met Shane was in  1978 at Ghost Ranch, a Presbyterian retreat and learning 
center in Northern New Mexico. For some time before our meeting I'd heard of his work at the 
Cheyenne Solar Greenhouse. Shane was part of a three person group from Wyoming attending 
a  Solar  Sustenance  Team  training  session  on  the  basics  of  organizing  and  managing  a 
community solar greenhouse workshop. The Solar Sustenance Team had specified that each of 
the 25 state groups contain one person with solar design or building skills, one with community 
organizing  or  P.R.  talents,  and  one with,  at  least,  some gardening experience.  Shane rep(cid:173)
resented the latter for Wyoming and, with him, we got a great deal more than we bargained for. 

The three day session was structured to spend roughly an equal amount of time on each 
discipline:  solar design, community relations and greenhouse growing.  As is typical at solar 
events the first two subject  areas tended to get  "all"  the attention at the expense of the last. 
(After  all, what's to know about a tomato. . . right?) Wrong. Shane demanded equal time for 
vegetables, and got it. If the solar designers went off on a tangent discussing the transmissivity 
of various types of glazing materials, he'd make sure they were informed  about how the light 
coming  through  each  affected  plants.  If  the community  organizers  were examining  energy 
imports to keep their towns warm, Shane would rigorously detail the BTUs expended to bring a 
head of lettuce from  a seed in Southern California to a table in Maine. 

' 'This man can make a bunch of radishes sing like the Temptations,'' I said to myself. The 
days  at  Ghost  Ranch  were  packed  with  the excitement  and  intensity  that  only  those  naive 
enough to be totally committed to an idea or cause can endure. At night, fortified  with  frijoles 
and  Cuervo  Gold,  smaller  groups  would  continue,  moving  more  into  the  philosophical 
promises of alternate energy and easily leaping over impossible chasms. Pure starlight will do 
that to even sane people. 

At Ghost Ranch I learned what a storehouse of information and what a great teacher Shane 

Smith is. 

Have  you  ever  seen  a  truly  fine  teacher  at  work?  These  rare  individuals  have  many 
attributes but, to me, they always have one thing in common: a sense of humor. The sense of 
humor only occurs when the teacher has a great deal of confidence  in his physical presence and 
extensive  knowledge  of  the  subject  matter.  When  these  three elements combine,  academic 
barriers  fall,  pretension  drops  and teacher  and  students alike  are open to real learning.  The 
learning occurs partially  because the ability to enjoy  a good laugh reveals the human  foibles 
present in the academic situation: i.e., "I've got the knowledge and you don't." I don't know 
whether the ability to convey loads of technical information in a warm and humorous wrapping 
can  be  acquired  or  if  it's  a  gift,  but  Shane  Smith  has  it.  I've  probably  heard  most  of  the 
anecdotes in here two or three times but they still give me a good chuckle while they underscore 
pertinent  facts. 

8 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

I do know that Shane is one of the few lecturers I enjoy hearing over and over for there's 
always  new  and  important  information  in what he says. There is an excitement  and sense of 
wonder  in  the  work  he's  done  and  it  carries  through  in this writing.  It  inspires  you  to do 
something. 

For instance, Shane once had my entire family  running through the meadows and woods 
of Tennessee  catching  lightning bugs for the Cheyenne greenhouse.  I heard him say that the 
little  critters  might help control  slugs and that he needed some for experiments.  I knew that 
Tennessee,  where  we  were  living  at  the  time,  had  a  much  higher  firefly  population  than 
Wyoming.  Unfortunately  for Shane, the fireflies  we found moved into a new home beside my 
six year old son's bed and never made the trip to Cheyenne on UPS. They did light up our place 
for  a while  before  we  let  them  go. Evidently,  Shane  found  a more reliable  source  than  the 
Yandas for his supply. Yet I note that he still places them in the experimental category in this 
book. Perhaps, he needs more. Send all  your... 

This book  is an  important  volume because it synthesizes three disparate types of green(cid:173)
house growing, leading the way to the most important type of greenhouse growing in the future. 
Until  the  advent  of  the  food  and  heat  producing  solar  greenhouse  in  the  mid-70s, 
greenhouse  examples  and technical  information  could be divided into three main categories. 
First, the elaborate and ornate structures such as the National Botanical Gardens. The climates 
in these houses is closely controlled and there you will find tropical plants, and exotic and rare 
vegetation  from  all  over  the  world.  The primary  goals of  these  facilities  are education  and 
research about the plants they contain. 

The  second  category  is the commercial  greenhouse  which bears about as much resem(cid:173)
blance to the first type as an apple to an orchid. The first rule in commercial greenhouses, as in 
any private business, is to produce the largest volume at the lowest possible cost. Commercial 
greenhouses are subject to the vagaries of the market place (What's in? Yellow lilies or white 
lilies?), as well as many other unpredictable forces. Lately, their greatest problems have been 
the high cost of  labor and energy. Nowadays most commercial houses grow flowers or serve 
simply  as staging areas  for flowers shipped up from Central and South America.  Prior to the 
drastic fuel  price increases in the 70s, many greenhouses in the East were growing vegetables 
for  the nearby  cities. Today,  as Shane explains, the majority  of the nation's fresh  food  gets 
shipped  from  California  and the South.  A vast amount of technical  information  on growing 
lettuce, tomatoes and cucumbers in commercial greenhouses is available from the Agricultural 
Research Service. Unfortunately,  very little of it has relevance to the home greenhouse grower 
as it is geared to mono-crop, climate controlled, chemically sustained growing. Hence, when 
new greenhouse gardeners seek out commercial greenhouse literature they'll find that tomatoes 
don't set fruit below 60°F, that they need an electric vibrator to aid in pollination or that white 
flies  will  destroy  their  whole  operation  overnight.  These  are  all  critical  concerns  to  the 
commercial  grower  with  5 acres  under glass. However,  they  are noteworthy  but  secondary 
concerns  to  the  home  greenhouse  grower.  I was once discussing the difference  in priorities 
between commercial and home greenhouse food growing with one of the most highly respected 
and  accredited  commercial  authorities  in the country.  "A  commercial  grower's  idea of  the 
perfect  greenhouse tomato," he grinned,  "  is one that he can throw out the door,  stand upon 
and roll all the way to a Manhattan restaurant." 

The  last category  of existing greenhouse  literature  is for the hobby greenhouse.  These 
books,  and  there  are  hundreds  of  them,  often  contain  useful  information  on  growing  and 

Introduction 

9 

propagating; but their primary emphasis  is on decorative plants, not food.  Also, like the two 
previous categories, most of the literature assumes that large amounts of conventional heating 
are necessary for a good environment, and that dealing with greenhouse pests is simply a matter 
of properly applying the right insecticide. (There are some notable exceptions, such as Organic 
Gardening Under Glass by George and Katy Abraham and Winter Flowers in Greenhouse and 
Sun Heated Pit by Kathryn Taylor and Edith Gregg.) Fortunately, the solar greenhouse books 
which have emerged since  1976 have consistently advised organic methods and low reliance on 
fossil fuels. However, the main emphasis of these solar books is on greenhouse design. 

This  superbly  useful  book  is  an  important  synthesis  because  it  combines  the  most 
applicable  information  from  these three greenhouse categories and the specific  requirements 
and  characteristics  of  a  solar  greenhouse.  Shane  Smith  has  the  training  of  a  professional 
horticulturist,  a  commercial  grower's  concern  for  space  efficiency  and  low  cost,  and  the 
knowledge of solar design and its constraints in the greenhouse environment. And Shane puts it 
together  in  a  form  that's  warm,  friendly  and  understandable.  If  you  believe  that  food  and 
energy  will  become even more critical problems in the later years of this century and into the 
21st century, if you believe that people should have more control over their own destinies, and 
if you're basically an optimist and think that you can do something about it.  . . then read on, 
you've just found an important document. 

Dr. Carl Sagan in the book and TV series Cosmos has stated, "'Books break the shackles 

of time, proof that humans can work magic. 

Shane, you've worked a lot of magic here. 

Bill Yanda 

' 'The best way to do something is to do it.'' 

—Jose Villarreal 

PREFACE 

Stop  for  moment,  and  pull  from  your  memory  your  earliest  thoughts  of  being  in  a 
greenhouse. Imagine being there again. Breathe in . . . the air is rich, humid, fragrant  and full 
of  life.  It's  warm on your  face.  It's comfortable.  Compared to a grey, cold, winter day, the 
green plants almost glow. Walking into a greenhouse you've entered the tropics. 

Greenhouses feel good to almost everyone. It's more than just stimulation of the senses, it 
goes deeper,  further  back. The tropics were the womb of human life  and the greenhouse is a 
reminder of our origins. The tropics cradled our earliest developments; there we learned the 
basics of  living on our planet, till tribe by tribe, humans ventured further and further  from the 
tropics. Finally our ancestors were able to survive and flourish  in adverse climates. 

Here we now live in those adverse climes, protected by heated homes, sustained by frozen 
dinners and food processors, worried about an energy "shortage." The so-called  "shortage" 
has caused one of the greatest lifestyle changes since World War II; and it hasn't been all bad. 
It's brought  the beginnings of  a consciousness change. Families have started riding bicycles 
together. The all-American backyard inventors have been resurrected; they're turning out solar 
collectors, food dryers and wind generators. Farmers are producing their own alcohol fuels. In 
response to the "shortage'' and as a positive step to individually do something about meeting it, 
people  learned  about  solar greenhouses.  Word spread  fast  that solar greenhouses  would not 
only grow food,  but also heat your home. So in the barn-raising style of yesteryear, neighbors 
met at thousands of solar greenhouse construction workshops and built greenhouses together. 
But the energy  shortage also brought hardships to the economically  disadvantaged. The 
average low income household spends more than 45% of its monthly income on energy in some 
form,  leaving  little  money  for housing, food,  clothing  and  medical expenses. These people 
include senior citizens on fixed incomes who are often too proud to ask for assistance. And this 
group also  includes  many who are locked  into the cycle of poverty—impacted  by  inflation, 
unemployment,  and a sense of hopelessness. I see nothing that offers people more potential for 
economic independence and a feeling of well-being than the solar greenhouse. 

Historically,  for the most part, greenhouses have been reserved for the upper classes; but 
now  poor  and  middle class  people  can  afford  to attach  a greenhouse-type  structure  to their 
homes.  I've  seen them built of scrap for as little as $30, or fancy as can be for $30,000. The 
cheap and the expensive ones both produce food and heat. With the price of food and energy 
skyrocketing. Organic Gardening and Farming magazine in  1979 described it not as a case of 
whether you can afford  a solar greenhouse, but whether people can afford  not to have a solar 
greenhouse. 

One common problem that greenhouse owners encounter is that growing food in the solar 
greenhouse  is  different  than  growing  in  the outside  garden,  and  in  fact,  different  than  the 
traditionally heated greenhouse. Outside gardening techniques just don't apply inside the solar 
greenhouse, causing much frustration  for their owners. 

12 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

This book will answer the need for specific food production methods for a solar green(cid:173)

house.  Because  space  within  the  greenhouse  is limited,  the  major  approach  to  greenhouse 
gardening  may  be  described  in one  word.  . . intensive.  That  means getting the  most  food 
production from the given space. The history of intensive gardening is married to the history of 
the food-producing greenhouse. Whenever people have made efforts to control the agricultural 
environment,  intensive gardening  practices followed  to ensure that the control efforts  did in 
fact result in greater productivity. 

The  history  of  food  producing  greenhouses  actually  had  its  beginnings  in  a  medical 
prescription for an emperor, Tiberius Caesar, who ruled between  14 and 37 A.D. He was told 
by his doctor  to eat a fresh  cucumber each day, so his workers created  a pit in the earth and 
covered  it  with  a transparent  stone such as mica,  alabaster or talc. It is also speculated that 
manure was used in the pit for its heat producing qualities. The fresh cucumbers were supplied. 

Although  not  much  was  recorded  about  greenhouse-type  structures  until  the  1600s,  it 
became a common practice to use simple techniques to (try to) control the environment around 
plants. They included using cloth, straw and fiber mats around and over plants to insulate them 
from  cold nights, thus prolonging their productivity. Then, as glass technology became more 
accessible in Europe, lantern glass was used to cover plants on cold days and nights, much like 
our present use of hot caps and cloches. 

In England during the  1700s, Samuel Collins wrote a treatise on the culture of cucumbers 
and melons, suggesting that window pane frames should be used to cover the plants in order to 
"force production.'' This same period saw use of oiled paper as a glazing cover over growing 
beds with the paper supported by a small portable wooden-arched frame that covered long rows 
of  a garden.  The  paper  was used for one season,  then discarded.  (The use of oiled paper is 
similar to our present use of plastic films; it might be interesting to work again with oiled paper 
as  a  low-cost,  homemade  glazing.)  During  the  mid  1700s  a wider  utilization  of  glass  as a 
roofing  material occurred, especially throughout England and Holland. The designs of these 
greenhouses  look  amazingly  similar to  today's  solar  greenhouses. They  had  steeply  sloped 
south-facing glass roofs, while the northern wall was a massive brick structure that often had a 
horizontal  flue system within the brick for heat. 

During the  1800s, as heating and environmental controls were better worked out with the 
wide  use of  steam,  hot water and  venting, the southern orientation  for these two-sided  glass 
structures  was  ignored.  This  was  a  step  backward,  as  such  structures  were  built  with  no 
particular solar orientation. These  19th century greenhouses, usually owned by royalty and the 
upper class, often  were very elaborate. Inside they grew exotic plants and winter flowers. The 
lower classes, on the other hand, relied on simpler cold frame structures to extend the growing 
season. Into the  1900s greenhouse design changed little, with a few exceptions. The introduc(cid:173)
tion  of  plastic-based  glazings  had  a major  impact  on greenhouses,  and  the development  of 
pre-fab quonset-type structures greatly changed the commercial greenhouse industry. 

In the early  1970s the concept of a solar greenhouse began to take hold. It was originally 
developed  both  as an energy saving structure (as was done at the Brace Research Institute in 
Canada) and as a vehicle to create a contained, ecologically-balanced  food producing system 
(as the New Alchemy Institute in New England and Jim DeKome of New Mexico both had been 
developing).  It was Jim  DeKome's  book The Survival Greenhouse, published  in  1975, that 
spurred  the  imagination  of  those  who  wanted  a home-based  wintertime  producer  of  fresh 
vegetables.  DeKorne,  who  dedicated  his  book  to  "everyone  who  has  ever  been  on  food 

Preface 

13 

stamps",  wanted  to show that the pit solar greenhouse could help provide a "technologically 
sophisticated life" on the land. 

In late  1976 The Food and Heat Producing Solar Greenhouse book by Bill Yanda and 
Rick  Fisher  gave  the  first  convincing  testimony  that  an  attached  solar greenhouse  not only 
could grow food,  but also produce excess heat which could be used by the home. Bill, along 
with  his  wife,  Susan,  gave  a  new  impetus  to  the  old  barn-raising  concept  of  community 
construction by organizing hundreds of unique weekend workshops where participants would 
build an attached solar greenhouse. 

The  development  of  the  solar  greenhouse  has arrived  at  the perfect  time, because  our 
agriculture is in a fragile period indeed. Food production is centralized in the southern areas of 
our country where large-scale factory  farming is alive and well. But in the northeast, the meat 
and  vegetables  on  last  night's  dinner  table all  have traveled  an average of more than  1,000 
miles. 

The northeast  is representative of the rest of the states north of the sun belt where about 
80% of the food  is now  imported. California  alone produces approximately  25% of all table 
food  and  40%  of  all  vegetables  consumed  in  the  entire  United  States.  According  to  some 
projections,  by the year 2020 all that California  produces will be required  to feed  California 
alone. Agriculture in the U.S., now more than ever, is totally dependent on petroleum fuels for 
chemical  fertilizers,  pesticide production,  and the processing and transporting of  food to our 
tables. Food prices are tied to the price of petroleum . . . and we know where that's headed. It 
now takes the equivalent of  1  gallon of gasoline to produce just  1  pound of hamburger. With 
current  agricultural  practices there  is also much concern  about the safety,  quality and nutri(cid:173)
tional value of our food. The environmental impact of these large scale agricultural systems on 
the  quality  of  our  land  is  also  in question.  Historically,  agriculture  is the greatest  ecology 
destoyer that  we humans have ever devised—except  for maybe nuclear weapons. And now, 
each year,  we are  losing about 2.5  million acres of  prime  farm  land to another destroyer of 
ecologies . . . urban sprawl. With the increasing price of fuel and the loss of prime farm land we 
can't continue feeding ourselves without paying markedly higher food prices. 

Fortunately  we  live  in  an  exciting  time of  hope.  In agriculture  there  is a major  thrust 

underway  to develop  ecologically  stable  and sustainable  food-producing  systems.  As men(cid:173)
tioned  in Crops,  permaculture,  which utilizes perennial crops and trees, has great promise in 
providing our food, fiber and forage in an ecologically balanced way. Biological pest control, 
which  employs  beneficial  insects  to control  harmful  ones,  is already  more economical  and 
more effective than spraying synthetic poisons on an increasing number of pests. Soil conserva(cid:173)
tion  practices  are  being  rediscovered.  The  "system"  is  approaching  the  realization  that 
ecological and economic goals need not conflict, but there's still a long way to go. Correcting 
our fragile,  intricate food system can't wait. We must begin dealing with it ourselves . . . now, 
at home. What is the potential here? Well, in 1944 more than 40% of our fresh vegetables were 
produced by home "victory" gardens. Now, for the first time we are capable of producing food 
year  round  in  solar  greenhouses.  In  these  greenhouses  (with  proper  management)  we  can 
produce V* to V3 of a pound of food per square foot of growing space per month. That's not to 
mention the other major benefit of a solar greenhouse . . . free heat. 

Yes, it takes time and energy to have a year-round garden. But a few hours per week need 
not be considered  work; rather,  it may be experienced as a relaxing pleasure. Judging by the 
fact  that  the  average  American  watches  more  than  2  hours  of  TV  every  day,  it  may  be a 
welcome alternative. 

14 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

I wrote this book in response to the many people who have found greenhouse gardening 
frustrating  because it produced little food. Their main problem, as previously mentioned, was 
treating  the  solar  greenhouse  garden  like  an outside  garden.  It's  a mistake  that  continually 
compounds itself. As the horticulturist and director of a 5,000 sq. ft. greenhouse in Cheyenne, 
Wyoming, I've been able to test different horticultural practices and compare the results.* The 
opportunity for intensive experimentation and observation would not have been possible in the 
confines  of a smaller greenhouse.  I have also applied these same garden techniques in many 
home greenhouses across the country for many years. Throughout the book there are references 
to help readers take into account their particular outside climate and its effects on their inside 
greenhouse food production. This book is primarily the result of experience, not speculation. 
Gardening is a science and an art; people are always developing different  ways to get the same 
good  results.  The  advice presented  here  is what I have  found  to work best.  But because all 
greenhouses  are  different,  I  urge  you  to  develop  your own  techniques  and  record-keeping 
systems. This should include temperatures, dates of planting, different varieties you have tried, 
and the results and feelings you have about them. This is essential to fine tune your operation to 
make it efficient  for your unique situation. 

Solar greenhouse horticulture is new and there's still much to learn and apply.  You are a 
pioneer,  so  don't  be  afraid  to  try  new  things.  But  also  benefit  from  the  experience  I'm 
presenting here and from the experience of other avid gardeners. 

The  solar  greenhouse  will  change  your  life.  It has the  power to feed  you,  warm  you, 
shelter you, make you independent, and most importantly, make you feel good. It will bring out 
your love, attention, creativity and patience. For now let's keep it simple—just  have fun. 

—Shane Smith 

Somewhere in the Rocky Mountains,  1982 

(For more information  on the Cheyenne Community Solar Greenhouse see the Epilogue.) 

1 

THE SOLAR 
GREENHOUSE 
ENVIRONMENT 

The basic principle of the solar greenhouse is as old and 
uncomplicated  as the practice of placing a glass lantern 
over  a plant  to protect  it from  the elements. The glass 
creates a totally  new environment within  its walls, ex(cid:173)
tending the productive life of the plant. 

Now  the  solar greenhouse  is coming of age. The 
environment  inside—slightly  tropical,  humid,  cool  at 
night—reminds us of other environments, but it's really 
unique, like no other.  In fact,  historically  it is a totally 
new  agricultural  environment.  With  the  solar  green(cid:173)
house's inherent temperature savings, lower light levels 
and  higher  humidity  characteristics,  it  is  even  very 
different  from  traditional  greenhouses.  As  such,  this 
sun-heated  space  requires special considerations when 
it comes to producing  food. 

There is a wonderful autonomous simplicity found 
in  most  passive  solar  greenhouses.  In  fact,  the  most 
important  variables  (light  levels,  temperature,  and 
humidity)  are  determined  by  the  building's  structural 
design. So if that's been done well, all that's needed is a 

18 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

certain  amount  of  fine  tuning  on  your  part  to 
make  it an effective  year round  food-producing 
unit.  Compare  this  to  a  standard  greenhouse 
which  is a glass house supplemented  by a com(cid:173)
plicated  array of heaters, lights, carbon dioxide 
generators,  automatic  misters,  and  other  auto(cid:173)
mated  machines  to  create  the  desired  environ(cid:173)
ment.  Despite  the  outside  goings-on  of  cloud 
cover,  temperature  swings,  etc.,  the  environ(cid:173)
ment in a conventional greenhouse is maintained 
unchanged.  I  personally  find  a special  connec(cid:173)
tion to the earth  in a solar greenhouse, which is 
affected  by  the  outside  elements  on  an  hourly 
basis. Each cloud, storm, hot spell, cold spell is 
part of the solar greenhouse environment. 

Though  the  structure  of  a  passive  green(cid:173)

house  determines  much  of  what  happens  in it, 
there are still  many things you, as operator, can 
do to make the physical environment  most sup(cid:173)
portive of the biological elements that produce your food. Generally, however, you have less 
control over a passive solar greenhouse environment than over a conventional structure. 

If you're interested in abundant food production in your protected environment—and who 

isn't?—you  need to be aware of two kinds of plant management: 

Biological  management—helping to  guide  all  life  forms  in  the  greenhouse  (bacteria, 

fungi,  insects, plants, etc.) to interact harmoniously to produce food. 

Environmental management—creating a physical environment (temperature, soil, light, 
humidity,  bed design, etc.) that supports maximum food production within the capabilities of 
your greenhouse.  In this chapter we'll look at what's environmentally required by a plant for 
best production. 

The basis for plant growth is the conversion of light into sugars—photosynthesis—which 
creates plant growth energy. But it takes a lot more than simply the plant and some light to make 
photosynthesis possible. Here's a list of the major requirements for photosynthesis: 

1.  Light 
2.  Carbon dioxide (CO2) 
3.  Temperature (generally between 32°F (0°C) and  100°F (38°C). 
4.  Water 

Note: if the level of any one of these environmental elements is less than optimum, the 

whole growing process may be slowed. 

It is becoming quite common for architects to design solar greenhouses with only vertical 
or south facing glazing and no overhead or roof glazing. This makes a nice sunroom, but not a 
very  good  food  producing  sunroom.  Why? Although  this design  is a good winter heater,  it 
doesn't allow in enough light for year-round vegetable growth. This is especially true as the sun 

N. 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

19 

attains  a  higher  angle  in  late  spring,  summer,  and  early  fall.  During  this time  most  of  the 
greenhouse floor is shaded. Continual shade means rough times for vegetable plants. However, 
greenhouses without roof glazing do permit adequate light for a few months on either side of the 
winter solstice. What to do if you're stuck with a non-glazed roof? Well, you can add skylights 
or glazing. If not, you're stuck with poor overall food yields. Still, it'll make a great sunspace to 
grow  houseplants  which  don't  require  as much  light  as do  vegetables.  Even  if  you  are not 
planning  intensive vegetable production, it's nice to have the option. Food may soon be quite 
expensive, so I recommend installing the roof glazing. 

Light 

Simply put,  when light hits the surface of the leaf, the energy of the sunlight combines 
with carbon dioxide (CO2) in the air and water from the soil. By means of photosynthesis, these 
elements  are  converted  into  oxygen  and  sugar.  The  oxygen  is given  off  into the  air  as  a 
component of water vapor, while the sugar is oxidized (burned) in the plant to provide all the 
energy  it needs for growth. The burning of the sugar in the plant, known as respiration, is the 
major plant activity at night. 

Photosynthesis (making plant energy) and respiration (using energy) are almost opposites 

of each other.  . . and they fit together so well. 

• Photosynthesis—making energy • 

Carbon dioxide and water 

in the presence of light, 
a plant and the proper temperature, 
produce 

sugar (future potential energy) 
and oxygen. 

• Respiration—using energy for growth -

Sugars plus oxygen 

in the presence of proper 

temperatures within the plant produces 

CO2 and water  * 

^ 

energy (plant growth) 

Measuring  Light in the  Greenhouse 

Plants require certain minimal quantities of light for proper growth. These quantities are 
commonly  measured  in foot-candles  (fc).  A foot-candle  is a unit of illumination  equal to the 

20 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

direct  illumination  on  a surface  one foot  from  a standardized  source called  an  international 
candle. I know it's an odd definition, but it becomes easier to understand once you work with it. 
The main thing here is being sure your plants get enough light. Here's a rough method to figure 
foot candles in the greenhouse: 

1.  Find a 35 mm camera with a built-in light meter. 
2.  Set ASA at 200. 
3.  Set shutter speed at  1 /125 of a second. 
4.  Aim camera at light source. 
5.  Dial f-stop to proper photo exposure. 
6.  If f-stop reads: 

then the amount of light is: 

f"st0P 
2.8 
4 
5.6 
8 
15 
22 

Foot-candles (fc) 

One foot candle 

32 
64 
125 
250 
1000 
2000 

Vegetables need at least 1000 fc for proper growth. Usually house plants need much less. 

Foot Candle Values 

Light Source 
Starlight 
Moonlight 
Overcast daylight 
Direct sun 

Foot-candles (approximate) 

.00011 
.02 
1,000.00 
10,000.00 

Maximum photosynthesis occurs around 2300 fc for tall vegetables and  1300 fc for short 
bushy  ones.  Still,  you  can  get  acceptable  vegetable  growth  in  less  than  optimum  light, 
especially when you alter other aspects of the environment. For example, you can increase the 
CC"2 in the atmosphere, raise a low temperature to at least 70°F (21°C), or space the plants 
closer together (leafy crops only). 

Crops compete for light if planted too closely and nobody wants a fight in the greenhouse. 
When  plants  are crowding each other they will grow slowly; the leaves will yellow, become 
elongated  and  spindly; and the plants won't  produce  much food.  Even  when plants are not 
competing  for space they can be short on light. Often  this is due to the greenhouse design. A 
greenhouse with little or no glazing on the roof creates low light problems in the late spring and 
summer.  Dark interior surfaces (except for thermal mass/storage), rather than reflecting light, 
can steal it from the plants. Also, shading causes low light problems. Tall plants especially will 
benefit from higher light intensities. For example, when you grow a bed of vining tomatoes all 
6'  high,  you'll  have a dense canopy of leaves 6'deep.  It would require more than  1000 fc to 
penetrate  the  canopy  to  maintain  proper  growth  because  the  leaves  at  the center  would  be 

The Solar Greenhouse  Environment 

21 

receiving far less than the original  1000 fc. For these dense leaf canopy situations, the plants 
could use 2000 fc or more for optimum growth and general contentment. 

Symptoms of Low Light Conditions 

1. Elongation of stems 
2.  Slow growth 
3.  Spindly-like growth 
4.  Yellowing of lower leaves 
5.  Growth of softer,  often  larger leaves 
6.  Plants bend drastically toward light source (this is called  "phototropism") 

Types of  Glazing 

The history of greenhouse glazings began with thin sheets of mica, alabaster and talc laid 
over a hole in the earth. Before glass technology became well developed, early small coldframe 
season extenders utilized oil paper, much in the same way we use polyethylene today. 

Now we have a wide array of choices, including glass, vinyls, fiberglass, polycarbonates, 
acrylics and polyethylenes. They vary in cost, ease of application and solar performance. It can 
be very confusing  and researchers are developing additional "new, improved" glazings all the 
time. Just remember, before you buy any plastic type of glazing material, be sure it's made for 
use in sunlight. Many plastics break down rapidly when exposed to the sun's ultraviolet light, 
eventually  limiting the amount of light coming into the greenhouse. Also, always look at the 
life  expectancy  guarantees before  you buy.  For good explanations of the many glazings and 
their  physical  differences,  consult  a  good  solar  greenhouse  design  and  construction  book 
before you make your selection. 

Ultraviolet  Light 

Light  is composed  of  many  components,  illustrated  on  the  visual  level  by  a  rainbow. 
Invisible to our eyes is another spectrum, and ultraviolet is an important part of it. Just about every 
plastic  or glass glazing absorbs most of the ultraviolet  rays in sunlight.  This causes plastics to 
degrade or yellow. Researchers aren't sure to what extent ultraviolet light affects plants benefi(cid:173)
cially, but they do know that ultraviolet kills many microbial organisms. Leaf diseases caused by 
these organisms therefore have an easier time living in a greenhouse where the ultraviolet light is 
absorbed by the glazing. There is no available proof of this, but when selecting crop varieties, it 
might pay to look for those with resistance to leaf diseases such as powdery mildew. (See Pests 
and Diseases and Selecting Solar Greenhouse Crops and Varieties.) 

Because  greenhouse  glazings  absorb  most  of  the  ultraviolet  light  from  the sun,  don't 
expect  to get a glowing bronze  tan while  working  in a greenhouse.  It's ultraviolet  light that 
produces tans. Fiberglass, however, does let in a small amount of ultraviolet radiation and may 
allow mild tanning.  I've  noticed that people who work  in any greenhouse seem to have more 
color in their face (though not a dark tan) and a healthier, happier look: is it the glazing or the 
lifestyle? 

22 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Glazing  and Plant  Growth 

Let's  look at how glazings affect  plant growth.  According to Colorado State University 
research,  most  glazings  developed  for  greenhouses  allow  satisfactory  growth.  A  marked 
difference,  however,  has been noted between clear glazings such as glass and those that are 
translucent such as fiberglass.  Plants grow better under glazing materials that are not visibly 
clear.  Don't get confused;  it seems that translucent materials let in about as much total light as 
clear materials, but they diffuse  the light beam as it passes through. The beam scatters over a 
broader area,  resulting  in more even light without sharp shadows. Because the light is being 
scattered, plant leaves not in the direct path of the sun receive increased lighting. Under clear 
glazings,  any  leaf  not  in  the  direct  path  of  the  sun  is  in  a  darker  shadow  and  receives 
substantially  less  light,  which means  less plant growth. The diffused  light is also helpful  for 
thermal mass temperature gain as it tends to moderate steep rises and falls of air temperature. 
Some translucent  materials such as fiberglass  also tend to catch more light at steeper angles 
(early morning and late afternoon) than do other glazings. 

Fiberglass is about the best diffuser  of light; polyethylene, polycarbonates, acrylics and 
glass  follow  roughly  in that order.  This  is not to say  that  fiberglass  is the best compared  to 
glass—just  that  it diffuses  light more,  which  improves  plant growth. The diffusion  factor  is 
only  one  consideration  when  comparing  glazings. There  are many other  factors  to  consider 
such as cost, durability and aesthetics. 

Photoperiodism 

The length of time that light strikes the plant also affects  its growth. This response to the 
length of the day or night is called photoperiodism. The amount of light-time can change how 
plants  grow,  when  they  flower  and  fruit,  and  whether  or  not  seeds  germinate  or  cuttings 
develop roots. 

Usually  the  term  photoperiod  is  applied  to  the  flowering/fruiting  response.  In  many 
garden  books  plants are listed as either  long-day plants  (which flower  when days are long), 
short-day  plants  (which  flower  when  days  are  short)  and  day-neutral  plants  (which  aren't 
affected  by the length of light or dark periods). Day-neutral plants respond to other factors such 
as levels of maturity and cold or warm temperatures. 

Scientists  have  found  that  it  is not the length of  the day that triggers this photoperiod 
response,  but  the  length  of  uninterrupted darkness.  A  long-night  (or  short-day)  plant,  for 
example,  can  be  thrown  off  schedule  if  the  night  period  is interrupted  by  light: this  would 
simulate a short-night (long-day) situation. It sounds confusing, but fortunately,  photoperiodism 
need only be taken into account when growing ornamental crops and a limited number of food 
crops. Most onion varieties sold in the temperate regions will bulb only with short nights (long 
days), though varieties have been developed  for areas in the deep South with warmer winters 
which bulb with longer nights (shorter days). Also, strawberries are dependent on day length 
and generally  won't produce during the winter when they are naturally dormant.  A few day-
neutral strawberries have been developed, though, which aren't affected  by day length. These 
are: Aptos, Hecker and Brighton. 

But  fortunately,  most  food  production  is a matter  of  maturity  response.  For example, 
when  a tomato plant grows for a certain period of time, it flowers and fruits  regardless of the 
length of day or night. 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

23 

Supplemental  Lighting 

Most vegetables require at least 8 hours of light per day to produce satisfactorily.  If you 
live  in  a  northern  area  with  very  short  winter  days,  or  if  you  live  in  a very  cloudy  area, 
supplemental lighting will increase your yields and will be worth your money. 

But at what point is supplemental lighting for food production a worthwhile investment? 
It's a tough one to answer.  Why? Because it has everything to do with the price of food  and 
electricity—both  prices  varying  greatly  from  region  to  region  and  changing  almost  daily 
. . . usually upwards. So you'll have to do a little investigation on your own. 

There are a number of possible types of supplemental lighting. Most ordinary lamps can 
be used to grow plants, but there are differences  in set-up, cost and resulting quantity of food. 
Light  is composed  of many wavelengths that are used by plants with differing  levels of 
efficiency.  For example, scientists have found that wavelengths in red and blue spectrums are 
used most in the photosynthesis process, whereas plants use little green light because that's the 
color that leaves  reflect. 

Different  lamps emit different  colors or wavelengths. Most common incandescent bulbs 
emit more red wavelengths, though some incandescents are designed to give off a more blue 
wavelength  and  are  called  (and sold as) plant  lights.  Fluorescent  tube lights contain special 
phosphors that give off energy in certan wavelengths. Most common fluorescent tubes (those 
known as cool-white) emit more waves in me blue range. Many 
companies have developed specially "tuned'' lamps to emit more 
blue  and  red  wavelengths  to cater  to plants.  These  fluorescent 
grow lights usually cost much more than the standard cool-white 
lamps. Critical experiments have shown that maximum growth of 
most plants under cool-white fluorescent lights is equivalent to or 
better  than  that  obtained  under  most of  the higher  priced,  spe(cid:173)
cially designed  fluorescent  grow  lamps.  So save yourself  some 
money. Warm-white fluorescent mixed with cool-white is a good 
combination for seedling germination. 

An important reminder to those who plan to grow plants under fluorescent  lights: for best 
growth, be sure to hang the lamps very close (2") from the top leaves and raise the lamps as the 
plants grow, maintaining the same distance. This is the only way to get the required  1000 fc that 
vegetables need.  Also, always  use reflectors  for any supplemental  lighting.  You can do this 
simply by glueing aluminum foil onto cardboard and putting it behind and on either side of the 
light. For tall vegetables with a thick leaf canopy, the fluorescent lights may not be acceptable 
because  the  light  doesn't  penetrate  very deeply.  Here  you  may  have to turn  to high  or low 
pressure  sodium  lamps mentioned  in the following  chart.  For companies that supply sodium 
lamps, see the list at the end of this chapter. 

In general, supplemental  lighting is not worth the extra cost unless you live in a very low 
light  area  or desire  to grow  an  abundance of  warm  season crops  in the dead of winter.  See 
Greenhouse Food Crop Scheduling. 

24 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

GREENHOUSE LIGHTING 
Supplemental to Natural Light • 

Lamp Life  Appx. Cost/ 

(1000s of hours)  Sq. Foot 

Comments 

Type 
Fluorescent 

Cool White 

8-10 

$3.50 

Warm White 

8-10 

$5.00 

Improved Fluorescents 

Grow Lux 

4-5 

$5.00-$9.00 

Good overall growth—place 2'' 
above plant. Flowering may be 
slow especially if used as sole 
source of light. 
Good for photoperiodism 
flowering response. 

Expensive, but not much better, 
if any, response than the cheaper 
cool white lamps. Slightly better 
flowering response. 

Gives off heat. Good flowering 
response. Place 8" above plant 
Some stem elongation, pale 
growth noted. 

Poor flowering response. 
Spindly growth. Place 3" above 
plant for every 400 watts. 
Similar to improved fluorescents. 
Nice plant development. Expen(cid:173)
sive but lasts longer and illumi(cid:173)
nates much more area per light. 
Similar to high pressure sodium. 
Not as good for lettuce.  185 watts 
L.P. Sodium is equal to a 400 
watt mercury vapor lamp due to 
better light  efficiency. 

Agrolite 

Vitalite 

Incandescents 

Common 

5-6 

8-10 

$5.00-$6.00 

Same as above. 

$5.00-$7.00 

Same as above. 

1-3 

$2.00 

Discharge Lamps 
Mercury Vapor 

15-20 

$25.00-$40.00 

High Pressure Sodium  15-20 

$30.00-$45.00 

Low Pressure Sodium  12-18 

$30.00-$40.00 

Based on  ' 'A Guide to the Use of Lights for Growing Plants''  By H.M. Cathey and L.E. Campbell. 
Beltsville Agricultural Research Center. 

The Solar Greenhouse  Environment  

25 

• 

Illumination from standard cool-white fluorescent lamp 

1 

Distance  from 
Distance  from 
Lamps (inches) 
Lamps (inches) 

Two Lamps 
Two Lamps 

Four Lamps Mounted 

2"   Apart 

(used 200 hours) 
(used 200 hours) 

(used 200 hours) 

(new lamps) 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
18 
24 

fc 

1,100 
860 
680 
570 
500 
420 
360 
330 
300 
280 
260 
240 
130 
100 

fc 

1,600 
1,400 
1,300 
1,100 
940 
820 
720 
660 
600 
560 
510 
480 
320 
190 

fc 
1,800 
1,600 
1,400 
1,300 
1,150 
1,000 
900 
830 
780 
720 
660 
600 
420 
260 

Source: United States Department of Agriculture Handbook for the Home, Yearbook of Agriculture,  1973. 

Increasing  Reflective  Surfaces 

In the solar greenhouse sufficient  light may be lack(cid:173)
ing,  especially  toward  the west  and east  walls  (unless 
they've been glazed). To make matters worse, the north-
em  part  of  the  greenhouse  is low on  light  during the 
summer  when  the sun  angle  gets  high.  As most  solar 
greenhouse construction books explain, all opaque walls 
should  be painted  white or have a reflective  surface.  I 
prefer  semi-gloss white because  it's a little more reflec(cid:173)
tive.  White  reflects  more  total  foot  candles  than 
aluminized  metal  reflectors,  though  specular  reflectors 
such as aluminum foil are acceptable. Although it is rare, 
they have  been  known to cause hot spots. This happens 
when the aluminum concentrates the sunlight onto a leaf, 
causing occasional burning. So think white! 

To get maximum light to your plants, in addition to 
having white walls and roof, it's advisable to paint every(cid:173)
thing else in your greenhouse white—except, of course, 
thermal mass storage and plants or soil. This white paint trip would include sides of raised beds, 
trellising and any parts of thermal mass containers that don't receive direct sun but do receive 
any  amount of indirect  light.  (Don't get carried  away and paint your seedlings or gardening 
partner!) You might consider using light colored mulch in the darker areas of the greenhouse 
and light colored rock on your floors. The New Alchemy Institute placed white rock outside on 

26 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

the ground directly in front of the south glazing to increase light reflection into the greenhouse. 
This is a good idea for cloudy areas of the country. 

I've had a problem with slow summer growth in the area toward my north greenhouse wall 
when  the  sun  angle  shadow  is at  its high  point  in June.  I solved much of this summer light 
problem by hanging a white curtain over the black barrels that are placed against the north wall. 
Instead of the light being absorbed by the black barrels, it was reflected to plants. It increased 
plant growth adjacent to the north wall and kept the water barrels cooler—helpful  for summer 
cooling. In late September when the light started to strike my north wall and the nights began to 
get  cooler,  I removed the white curtain in order to allow heat to collect in the water barrels 
again. 

(See Crop Layout to get ideas on crop placement in low light areas.) 

Carbon Dioxide (C02) 

As I mentioned earlier, carbon dioxide in the air is essential to photosynthesis. The normal 
level of cabon dioxide in the air is about 300 parts per million (PPM), or three hundredths of one 
percent of the air we breathe. Because about 50 percent of a plant is carbon (and all of that must 
come from  the air), you can see that plants have quite an appetite for CO2. Much of the CO2 
normally occurring  in the air comes from the burning of fossil fuels and the decomposition of 
organic  matter,  as  well  as  from  animal  forms  ranging  from  bacteria  to human  beings.  It's 
partially what you're breathing out of your lungs as part of the respiration process. Besides the 
fact  that  plants  always  love  your  kind  words  and  attention,  they  also  like  you  for  your 
body—well, at least for your high CO2 breath. 

When CO2 is in short supply, plant growth slows. But when the supply of CO2 increases 
up to and beyond 300 PPM, up to a certain point plant growth (including food yield) increases 
as well. 

Plants use so much of the CO2 in the air that in sealed environments like a greenhouse, the 
level of CO2 may be depleted from  300 PPM to  100 PPM by noon. This can easily slow plant 
growth  by  60  percent—not  a  pleasant  thought.  This  phenomenon  occurs  only  in  winter 
greenhouses when there is no outside ventilation and the structure is sealed to the outside. CO2 
depletion  is  less  in  attached  greenhouses  where  there  are  people,  gas  stoves  and pets,  all 
producing extra CO2. Depletion is also less in greenhouses with soils high in organic matter, 
due  to the  billions of  microbes  breathing  in that rich, black,  pulsing-with-life,  humus-laden 
soil.  But depletion  may still  occur because  solar greenhouses are very tight structures.  It is 
almost impossible  to see a CO2 deficiency  because the only symptom is slower growth. You 
won't see any telltale signs in the crop. Equipment to measure CO2 is very expensive and hard 
to obtain. 

CO 2 Enhancement: Mulching and Other Methods 

Early greenhouse owners in Europe quickly discovered that placing a thick mulch com(cid:173)

posed of manure, peat moss, sawdust and straw around plants increased crop production. They 
didn't understand  why.  Around the early  1900s, scientific experiments proved that CO2 was 
created during the decomposition  of fertilizer and mulch. It was not until the later  1950s and 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

27 

early  1960s, however,  that researchers worked with levels higher than the normal ambient  (300 
PPM) amounts.  Enhancing CO2 levels from  a depleted greenhouse atmosphere of  100 PPM all 
the way to  1500 PPM resulted in significant  yield increases. Since the  1960s many  commercial 
greenhouse  growers  have  been  enhancing  the CO2  level  in winter greenhouses  to  1200-1500 
PPM, with a yield  increase of  10-30 percent.  It's  like fertilizing the plants through the air.  It is 
thought that anything above 2000 PPM is wasted effort  and continuous exposure to levels about 
5000 PPM  may be  a problem  to human  health. 

Commercial  growers  commonly  add  CO2  from  storage  tanks  of  liquid  CO2  held  under 
pressure,  which  becomes  a  gas  when  released  into  the  air.  Another  common  commercial 
method  of  increasing  CO2  is to  bum  fossil  fuels  such  as kerosene,  propane  or natural  gas  in 
CO2 generators  designed  specifically  for  this use.  In Europe,  many greenhouses  extract  CO2 
gasses  from  their boiler exhausts. This requires special equipment  because much of fossil  fuel 
exhaust,  such as carbon  monoxide, sulfer and fluorides,  is poisonous to plants and humans. 

Because  most  of  us can't  afford  a CO2 generator  or the  fuel  to ran one,  we must  look  at 
alternatives. With the price of fuel  so high, I'm sure commercial growers will soon be doing the 
same. 

The  alternatives  include: 

1.  Decomposing  organic matter  (compost). 
2.  Raising animals  in the greenhouse. 
3.  Burning homemade  ethanol. 
4.  Using  dry  ice (frozen  carbon  dioxide). 

Dry  ice  is  rather  troublesome  and  still  somewhat  expensive  (not  to  mention  a  bit  cold). 
Ethanol  can  be  dangerous,  being  flammable,  and  it's  especially  unsafe  because  greenhouse 
structures are quite flammable.  And raising animals in a greenhouse can cause offensive  odors 
and added trouble. If cages or pens aren't kept clean, manures emit ammonia gas which, in high 
concentration,  may cause  some damage to plants. 

So what about organic matter? Well, what was good 
for  our  grandparents  is good  for  us.  A compost  mixture 
used  as  a  thick  mulch  not  only  produces  CO2.  but  also 
heat. Compost piles can easily run at over  100  F (38  C), 
which can definitely  help the winter greenhouse. Just one 
4'  x  4'  compost  bin  at  The  New  Alchemy  Institute  in 
Woods  Hole,  Massachusetts,  raised  the  temperature  of 
their greenhouse 2.5° F (1.4° C) and increased the CO2 in 
the  air  by  as  much  as  650  PPM.  The  Ecotope  Group 
found  that an attached,  insulated compost bin with a vent 
system to carry  air from  the compost  into the  greenhouse 
raised the CO2  levels to as high as 2000 PPM in their 32' 
x  12' parabolic  greenhouse.  Jim  DeKome,  a noted  solar 
greenhouse  pioneer and author,  estimates  an  increase  up 
to 800 PPM.  In the DeKorne  greenhouse,  however,  this 
increase  was  due  not  just  to  compost,  but  also  from 

28 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

rabbits  he  raised  under  his hydroponic  beds.  (For details,  see The Survival Greenhouse by 
James  DeKorne.)  Danish  growers  have  achieved  levels  of  up to  5000  PPM just  with  the 
addition of a manure, peat and straw mulch, applied at a rate of 200 tons per acre. 

One problem with using compost or mulch to supplement CO2 levels in winter is that it's only 
a temporary  solution.  High levels of CO2 will probably  last 6 weeks at best. At that point, the 
compost must be remade or the mulch reapplied to maintain high CO2 enrichment levels. 

Because solar greenhouses are very tight structures, the possibility of CO2 deficiencies  are 
common.  It is almost  impossible to see a CO2 deficiency  because the only  symptom  is slower 
growth. You won't see any telltale signs in the crop. Equipment to measure CO2 is very expensive 
and hard to obtain. 

I recommend use of an organic mulch to bring CCb levels to at least 1000 PPM—if not more. 
This  enhanced  level  will  help  compensate  for  lower  light  and  lower temperatures.  It  has the 
potential of increasing yields by as much as 20 percent. You can increase the level of CO2 above 
300 PPM (the natural outside level) only when your greenhouse is tightly sealed to the outside. 
Please don't hesitate to ventilate to the outside if you are overheating inside. But remember, when 
you open up to the outside, your CO2 level will be the same as outside, 300 PPM. When you seal 
back up for a cold day, the mulch will help raise CO2 levels again. To put it simply, it would be hard 
to find any other single low-cost thing you could do to make such a difference in food yield. 

Here's a recipe for CO2 Mulch Mousse: 

Ingredients 

(Any combination from the two lists) 

Carbonaceous 

Green 

straw 
sawdust (avoid cedar 
and redwood) 
brown grass clippings 
brown or tan plant 
refuse 
brown or tan leaves 
any light tan organic 
matter 

kitchen wastes 
green garden wastes 

manures (add less the fresher it is) 
hair 

green grass clippings 
any green organic matter 

1.  Combine  by volume,  1  part carbonaceous materials with  1 part green materials (see 
above  ingredients).  Both  of  these  materials first should  be ground  or chopped  into 
small pieces. 

2.  Mix thoroughly. 
3.  Lay  down  mixture  as  a mulch  on  all  soil  surface  around  plants.  Mulch  should  be 

3 " - 4"  deep. 

4.  Stir up mulch every 3 weeks to get top layer (that dries out) worked back under. 
5.  Add  an extra  2"  of mulch every  2 months or whenever the previous mixture breaks 

down and darkens into totally decomposed compost. 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

29 

Note: One drawback  to the use of any mulch is that it can promote certain pests. Slugs, 
sowbugs and pillbugs just love to romp in mulches and unfortunately they love to eat leaves, 
stems  and  roots.  If  they  are a problem  in your  greenhouse,  rather  than  using  your  mulch 
materials as a mulch, thoroughly incorporate it into the soil so that it will degrade and produce 
C02-  For control of these pests see Pests and Diseases . 

CO 2  Ventilation 

The amount of carbon dioxide supplied to the plant from the atmosphere depends upon the 
level of CO2 at the leaf surface; or even more precisely, the CO2 level at the cell surface on the 
leaf.  In  still  air, a leaf  can draw  out most of the CO2 at the cell  surface,  thus creating an 
envelope  of CO2  deficiency  around  the leaf.  When  there is no 
turbulence, CO2 replenishment is slow around this microscopic 
area. But turbulent air around the leaf disperses this envelope of 
low CO2 concentration,  replenishing the air adjacent  to the leaf 
with an ample supply of CO2. Research in me Netherlands by P. 
Gaastra  in  1963 showed  the rate  of  photosynthesis  can be in(cid:173)
creased by 40 percent  with no change in atmospheric CO2 if the 
wind  velocity  increases  from  10 to  100 centimeters per second. 
So it's important  to keep the air in your greenhouse constantly  moving around during the day 
(whether or not you are trying to enrich the carbon dioxide). A good idea is to get a small fan to 
stir up the air, even if your greenhouse is sealed to the outside. This also helps keep pests and 
diseases down. If you have a fan that blows warm air into your house from the greenhouse, this 
may be enough. You'll know if the air feels stagnant. 

Humidity 

Did you know that all plants have small openings in their leaves?-Through these openings 
gases such as CO2 and oxygen pass. Also, because plants don't utilize all the water they take 
up, a large amount of water vapor comes out through these openings. This water vapor, along 
with the vapor already  in me air, causes high levels of humidity. "Relative humidity" (RH) is 
the term  most often  used to quantify  the invisible  water vapor in the air. It is expressed as a 
percentage of the maximum  moisture  the air can hold  at a given  temperature  and pressure. 
More  simply,  how wet is the air?  Relative  humidity can be measured by a hygrometer,  a 
relatively inexpensive instrument.  By the way, as me temperature rises, the air will hold more 
water per unit of air than it can at a lower temperature. If the air gets saturated with water (95% 
RH) and the temperature drops, the dew point will be reached. The dew point occurs when the 
air can hold no more water as vapor and the excess is precipitated out as rain, condensation or 
mist. 

Greenhouse  Water 

In a solar greenhouse that has very little air infiltration  from the outside, heat is retained 
and relative humidity is often very high. Plants grow best at relative humidities between 45 and 
60 percent.  Higher humidities often  may lead to more diseases. Studies show that humidity 

30 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

over  90 percent  fosters  rapid development  of  leaf  mold and various forms  of  fruit  and stem 
diseases. In general, disease problems are slight below 70 percent RH. Disease problems are 
most severe if the high humidity occurs at night, so don't  water during the late afternoon or 
evening. 

Another  problem  associated  with  high  humidity  is  condensation.  This  happens  when 
warm  humid  air moves along  a cooler surface  and the vapor is transformed  by the cold  into 
water droplets.  You will see it on glazing, walls and doors, dripping from  the roof like rain, 
giving the illusion of a little weather system cruising through the greenhouse. Condensation on 
glazings is a problem because the water droplets greatly reduce 
the amount of incoming solar energy  and light. The water also 
drips onto sills, and if these droplets continually land on wood 
surfaces, you may get wood rot problems. I recommend bevel(cid:173)
ing wood surfaces  where the condensation  lands so water just 
runs  off.  On  double  glazings,  always  try  to  get  a  tight  seal 
between  the glazings and the frame  to minimize  condensation 
between them. 

Beveledsill 

Some  materials  can  be  sprayed  on  glazing  surfaces  to 
prevent  water  droplets  from  beading  up,  but their  long-term 
effectiveness  is questionable.  Sun Clear,  one such product,  is 
manufactured  by Solar Sunstill Inc., Satauket, NY 11733. 

Basically, condensation  and high relative humidity are facts of life in solar greenhouses, 
especially  those  that  rarely  use  backup  heat.  Heated  greenhouses  will  burn  some  of  the 
humidity  out  of  the  air.  Be  sure  all  wall  and  wood  surfaces  are  treated  with  a  copper 
naphthenate type wood preservative to prevent mold from growing in high condensation areas. 
Avoid creosote or pentoxide type wood preservatives because they're toxic to plants. 

I  met  a  woman  who built  a beautiful  free-standing  greenhouse  that  was heated  by an 
artesian hot spring. Sounds heavenly, doesn't it? She understood that the humidity would cause 
her wood to rot so she applied the common wood preservative pentachlorophenal, also known 
as  penta.  After  she  was  well  into growing,  the humidity  began  to rise as  winter  came  on; 
condensation formed on the wooden members. Eventually the penta leached into the condensa(cid:173)
tion and vaporized in the air. Plant death resulted. It was a wipeout. 

This poor woman  was forced  to strip all the surfaces—not  an easy or quick  task—and 
recoat them with with plant-safe  copper naphthenate, Cuprolignium® or Cuprinol®. So when 
you buy lumber for the greenhouse, always ask if it has been treated and if so, with what. It's 
surprising to find how often it's been treated with penta. 

Help for  High  Humidity  Problems 

There are also some things you can do to minimize problems with high relative humidities: 

1.  Air circulation—Circulate  the air even  when the greenhouse is sealed to the outside 
(see CO2 ventilation earlier in this chapter). This produces more uniform temperatures 
which can help solve mild humidity problems. 

2.  Water early in the day—This will help prevent evening humidity problems which are 

the most severe as far as plant diseases are concerned. 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

31 

Water  only  when  needed—All  too often  people  overwater  in greenhouses.  Excess 
water increases humidity problems and is not good for roots (see Watering section later 
in this chapter). 
Ventilate to the outside—Whenever the outside temperature is warm enough, ventilate 
the moist air to the outside. This can also be done when the greenhouse is running hot, 
even if it is not warm outside. Not recommended if you are in, or heading into, along 
cold spell. 
Air to air heat exchangers—This  fancy  piece of equipment  is not easy to build, and 
even  harder  to  purchase.  It  trades  warm  moist  air  for  dry  cooler  air.  During  the 
exchange  process,  the cool  dry  air  is  heated  by  the existing  warm  moist  air,  thus 
minimizing heat loss while dumping out the wet air. Plans for air to air heat exchangers 
were  available  in  1981 for  $1.00 from:  U Learn, Extension  Division,  University of 
Saskatchewan,  Saskatoon,  Saskatchewan,  Canada. The title is "An  Air to Air Heat 
Exchanger for Residences," by R. W. Besant, R. J. Dumont and D. VanEe. 

Low  Humidity 

This is a rare occurence in greenhouses, but it can happen when much outside venting is 
going on. Low humidity causes plants to wilt. Humidity may be increased by simply watering 
the floor and by using swamp cooler type air conditioners. Another way is to purchase a misting 
nozzle attachment for your hose to spray mist into the air. This will help cool the greenhouse 
while  adding  moisture  to the air.  It's beneficial  to maintain  higher  relative  humidity  where 
you're germinating seeds and trying to root cuttings. 

Temperature 

Heat 

Plant  growth  requires heat. Temperature controls the rate of water and nutrient uptake, 
photosynthesis, and even cell division. Each plant has different optimum temperature require(cid:173)
ments,  and  different  growth  stages  have  different  optimums.  Seedlings  often  benefit  from 
warmer temperatures  where mature plants will not. For instance, many plants in the cabbage 
family require cool temperatures to mature properly. 

We  have  relatively  little  control  over  minimum  temperatures  in unheated  solar  green(cid:173)

houses. However, with back-up heaters, there is a higher degree of control and attached solar 
greenhouses can simply steal some heat from the house if temperatures are getting low. To best 
deal with seasonal temperature variations closely follow Crop Scheduling. For help in choosing 
the best crop and variety for the temperatures you have, see Selecting Solar Greenhouse Crops 
and Varieties. 

Your greenhouse's ability to hold the heat of the day is dependent mainly upon the design 
of the greenhouse. Although greenhouse design is beyond the scope of this book, know that if 
your greenhouse  is freezing  your plants in winter, you need to review your solar greenhouse 
design. Ifyourgreenhou.se  freezes up, run through this checklist. 

32 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

1.  Insulation—Is  the  north  wall  and  the wall  against  the prevailing  winter  wind  well 

insulated? Is part of your roof insulated? 

2.  Double glazing—A must. Both layers should be sealed tightly to the frame, free  from 
dirt, and should not be yellowing. Double glazing is no good if either layer is not well 
sealed. 

3.  Thermal  storage—Is  your  rock,  water  or  other  storage  enough?  Check  design/ 

construction books for proper amounts needed for your region. 

4.  Insulated foundation—Your foundation should not be a heat sink. Is your foundation' s 
perimeter insulated with 2"  of foam board type insulation? Insulation should extend 
down to at least the frost line, whether you have a foundation or not. 

5.  Site—A solar greenhouse should face within 20° of true south. There are really no two 

ways about it. 

6.  Night curtain—Most solar greenhouses don't use a night curtain. It's not essential, but 

warmer night temperatures will help increase vegetable yields. If you feel it's neces(cid:173)
sary  devise  night  insulation  for  your  glazing  to  help raise  low  night  temperatures. 
Many commericially available night insulating systems are available, but they're not 
cheap. There's only one bad thing I can say about a night curtain. It's a costly hassle. If 
that  is the only way you can maintain decent evening temperatures, however, a night 
curtain  is  a  must.  It  probably  becomes  more  essential  the  further  north  you  live. 
Snowfall  in the evening makes an excellent night curtain. 

7.  Seal  to outside—Vents and doors must be weather stripped and any cracks must be 

caulked and checked for wear every year. 

8.  Air lock—If you use your greenhouse door to the outside with any frequency in winter, 
it should have an air lock. That is a small room with another door. This double-door 
entry prevents a blast of freezing air from entering your greenhouse every time the door 
to the outside opens. If you don't have an air lock entry I advise using another house 
entrance and sealing up the greenhouse door for the worst of the winter. 

If you have properly  applied each one of these basics to your solar greenhouse and your 
crops  are  still  freezing,  either  you  live  in  a cold,  cold  place,  or you  need  to  think  about 
redesigning your greenhouse. 

Weather  Information 

A good tool for solar greenhouse owners is a special weather radio. The federal govern(cid:173)
ment  has  set  up  a series of  low-powered  radio stations (NOAA) which play taped  weather 
information  24 hours a day. About 80 percent of the U.S. population lives within range of one 
of these stations. See the NOAA weather station location list in Appendix C. The  frequencies 
are  162.400,  162.475 or 162.500 megahertz (Mhz) depending on where you live. The station is 
found on a special radio band—not on AM or FM radios. In  1981. a cheap but reliable weather 
radio cost about $ 12.00. Use the weather radio or your most dependable weather forecaster to 
help make decisions about heating your greenhouse. For example: it's a sunny winter day and 
the temperature  inside the greenhouse has risen to 95°F (35  C) and is still climbing. Tune in 
the weather radio for an up-to-date prediction for your area. If the weather is predicted to turn 

1 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

33 

cold and cloudy,  let your greenhouse run a little hot (but not much more than 90°F [32  C]) in 
winter to help charge up your storage to better handle the coming cold period. If the weather is 
predicted to stay clear and sunny, cool your greenhouse off to around 80°F (27°C). Vent your 
heat to the outside or an adjacent  building and  let  in some fresh,  dry cool air.  Why cool the 
greenhouse only to 80°F (27°C)? Because, if the weather service predicts sun and you get hit 
with a storm instead, a temperature of 80°F (27°C) will not affect  your heat storage or cause 
any problems with low night temperatures. 

Remember the old saying, "Only fools believe in weather predictions." Well, I learned 
the hard way. It was a wonderful  fall a few years back, with crystal clear warm days and cool 
nights. Fall's a time of year in Wyoming when we may get weather ranging from a tornado to a 
blizzard  to a heat wave.  My 88 year old friend  Howard kept saying we were  "gonna have a 
rough winter,"  while the clear blue skies seemed like they would never end.  All the while I 
checked the weather radio daily in case I needed to let the greenhouse heat up in anticipation of 
a cold cloudy spell. The NOAA radio station kept saying "cool nights and warm sunny days." 
I kept  venting  the  hot  air  and  told  myself  that  the yearly  chore  of  recaulking  and  weather 
stripping could  wait another day. Howard said it couldn't.  "It's gonna storm tomorrow!" he 
said.  I  smiled  to  myself  and  kept  working  outside  without  a  shirt,  enjoying  the  fall  sun.  I 
checked with my trusty NOAA weatherstation all day. "Cool nights and sunny warm days," it 
repeated.  In fact, they said it would be that way all week and the TV weather people agreed. 

That night it clouded up. 
Most of the 3' of snow we got the next day was still on the ground in early spring. It was 
cloudy  for  12 straight days. Howard  smiled but never said,  "I  told you  so." It was a rough 
winter. Caulk just doesn't go right when it's cold. Moral: don't put all your trust in scientifically 
calculated, satellite predicted weather forecasts. They're just tools to help  . . . sometimes. The 
weather does what it wants no matter what we predict. Is there a Howard living near you? 

Purchase a good high-low thermometer to see what the nighttime low and daytime high 
temperatures  are  in your greenhouse. Compare  it to the outside highs and lows to learn how 
your  greenhouse  behaves.  In  1981  a  thermometer  cost  about  $17.00.  It  sure  takes  the 
guesswork  out  of  figuring  your  temperatures  and  gives  you  a 
better  understanding  of  your  environment.  Mount  your  ther(cid:173)
mometer where direct sunlight will not strike it You may have to 
build a small box to mount it in. Paint the outside of the box white. 
At  the  Cheyenne  Community  Solar  Greenhouse,  it  was 
found  that the  lowest temperature  usually occurred right around 
sunrise. 

Soil  Temperatures 

Soil  temperatures  are  more  crucial  than  air  temperatures.  The  warmth  of  the  soil  is 
something we're not commonly aware of because we live our days surrounded by air. Most of 
us, anyway. 

When soil temperatures are below 45°F (7°C), roots work slowly and have a harder time 
taking up water and nutrients. When the air temperature begins to heat up, wilting can occur 
even though there is ample moisture in the cold soil because of slow water uptake. 

Research has shown that if soil temperatures are kept around 65°F (18°C) the winter air 

34 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

temperature can drop 10°F (6°C) without any loss in yield. This is especially true with fruiting 
crops. Many researchers believe the great results obtained by heating the soil are due not just to 
the  effects  of  temperature,  but  also  to  the  effects  of  faster  organic  matter  decomposition 
(resulting  from  warmer  temperatures)  which  creates  more CO2, thus increasing the rate of 
photosynthesis. 

There is a special thermometer with a 5" probe that sticks into the soil for measuring soil 
temperatures. It's a great help in locating environmental differences. By determining where the 
cool areas are  in your greenhouse, you can adjust  your planting layout to mesh best with the 
environment.  It's fun to observe soil temperature changes in relation to the outside weather and 
environment  inside  your  greenhouse.  Keep  records  of  these  soil  temperatures  and  the  air 
temperatures  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  the  solar  greenhouse,  and  to  monitor  the 
performance  of your structure. 

Heating the soil can be a complex proposition which, except for seedling flats, may not be 
worth the effort.  In earlier times, people utilized the heating qualities of decomposing manure 
to heat cold frames.  They placed an 8"  layer of raw manure about  1  xh'  below the top of the 
soil.  This  manure  would  heat  the  soil  that  covered  it  for  a  few  weeks,  which  might  help 
seedlings  started  in containers.  Planting seeds directly into soil that has heating manure in it 
might  eventually  cause overfertilization  problems, especially  when the roots reach the raw 
manure. But containers sitting on top of this heated soil do fine. 

Many  people have set up beds with warm water pipes hooked to active solar hot water 
collectors running through them. This is fine, except that it makes it difficult to work beds with 
a shovel. There's been some discussion about using wind-powered electrical resistance heaters 
running within the planting beds. I haven't heard of anyone trying it yet. Any takers? But don't 
get electrocuted. 

Watering  with  warm  water  is one good  way  to  keep  soil  temperatures  warm.  This  is 

explained in the section on watering later in this chapter. 

Cooling the  Greenhouse 

In my  experience,  most  solar  greenhouse 
owners  have  more  problems  with  overheating 
than  with  freezing.  Overheating  occurs  when 
cool  season  crops  are  above  w  F  (3Z C)  and 
warm  season  crops  are  above  100°F  (38° C). 
Short periods  above  these  temperatures  are not 
necessarily  harmful,  but  prolonged  periods 
cause problems for plants. Overheating is basi(cid:173)
cally  due  to  poor  greenhouse  design—usually 
poor  ventilation.  Bill  Yanda and Rick  Fisher's 
book.  The  Food  and  Heat  Producing  Solar 
Greenhouse, has some excellent rules of thumb 
for ventilation.  I like their recommendations be(cid:173)
cause they are easy to understand and their calcu(cid:173)
lations work well. Optimally,  you should estab-

Cross-flow ventilation 

lish a natural crossflow of air with a high vent on 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

35 

one side and a low vent on the other side. These should be either at the knee wall (south) and on the 
roof  (north); or on  the west  and  the east.  The high  vent  works best  when placed  opposite the 
direction of your prevailing summer wind and should be  15% larger than the low vent. A general 
rule of thumb' is to have the vent area to the outside equal to at least 30 percent of the area of glazing. 
Please don't cut down on venting area to the outside in hopes of preventing air leakage in winter. 
Install the right size vents, and be sure they're insulated and built tight. Vent doors to the outside 
should be well constructed and made to open on any day of the year (especially where they say, "If 
you don't like the weather, just wait five minutes and it'll change.") When closed, they should be 
insulated,  weatherstripped  and sealed  tight to the outside. Opening and closing of vents may be 
automated by using commercially  available heat motors which are temperature activated pistons. 
Be sure to attach a safety chain so the wind won't destroy your vent door and heat motor. Again, be 
sure they close tightly. In the design stage, plan it so vent doors don't open into areas where you'll 
bump your head and/or your plant's heads. 

If you  live  in a hot area or have a basic cooling problem, don't discount the value of an 
electric exhaust fan.  Electric fans cost' 'only pennies a day" to run. A fan for summer cooling 
should exhaust warm air to the outside for best cooling efficiency.  This will create a negative 
pressure  so  that  cool  air  will  enter  through  the  other  vent  to 
replace the exhausted warm air. Place the exhaust fan  in the high 
vent  for  best  results  and  be  sure  it's  blowing  air  out  of  the 
greenhouse. Try to get the air to travel across the full length of the 
floor before being exhausted to the outside. 

Any  fan  will  do  for exhausting  hot air in summer or other 
warm days. I have had great luck finding old fans for a few bucks 
at  garage  sales  and  second  hand  stores.  Or  go  exhaust  your 
pocketbook and buy spanking new ones. 

If electricity  is not available in your area, of if you want to 
attempt  a totally  passive cooling system, thermal chimneys may 
be  the  solution  for  you.  Thermal  chimneys  are  tall  (often  20' 
high), square (about 4' by 4'), and glazed on one side. The inside 
of the chimney  is painted black. Hot air temperatures are created 
within the chimney. The hot air rises fast,  and much like an exhaust fan,  it creates a vacuum 
within  the greenhouse.  The hot greenhouse air then  moves up and out through the chimney, 
while cooler outside air is sucked in, ideally through low the greenhouse vent. 

Another way to cool down your greenhouse  is to utilize the cooling effects  of evaporation. 
This is the same cooling we feel  when wind blows across wet skin. As the water evaporates, it 
cools. You may purchase a mister from a garden supply store or from a seed catalog and mount it in 
the  eaves of  your greenhouse.  On  hot days  you can  mist  the  air 
intermittently,  either  manually  or  automatically  with  an  electric 
solenoid  valve  and  timer.  As  the  water  droplets  fall,  they  will 
evaporate,  causing  a  substantial  temperature  drop.  This  usually 
works best when the outside relative humidity is below 80%. The 
lower the humidity, the better evaporative cooling works. 

Commercial  greenhouses  often  use  an  evaporative  cooling 
system (known as a pad and fan system) which works like a big swamp cooler. At one end of the 
greenhouse water is dripped through a thin fibrous pad in front of a vent to the outside. An exhaust 

36 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

fan at the opposite end pulls outside air through the wet pad, cooling the air, and the cooled air flows 
across the length of the greenhouse until it is exhausted to the outside. This would be a complex 
system for a small greenhouse, but a simpler system described below can work using burlap and a 
fan. Again, all of these evaporative cooling systems rapidly begin to lose their ability to cool as the 
outside relative humidity rises above 70%. At 90% RH they hardly work at all. 

A Homemade Burlap Swamp Cooler 

1.  Cover  lower  vent  with  two  or  three  layers  of  burlap, 
placing  the lower end of the burlap in a long wide con(cid:173)
tainer of water that's sitting on the floor below the vent. 
2.  Burlap should now pull the water up (by capillary action) 

in front of the vent opening. 

3.  Turn on the exhaust fan  at the opposite end of the of the 
greenhouse  to draw air through the wet burlap, cooling 
the air as it passes through. 

It's cheap and it works well. Just don't count on reusing the 

burlap bags to transport potatoes at a later date. 

Some  greenhouse  owners  have  turned  to  using  an  actual 

swamp cooler attached to the side of the solar greenhouse, pump(cid:173)
ing cooler air into the structure. A new swamp cooler in 1981 ran 
about S380. 

Shading to Cool 

Usually  shading is accomplished by directly treating the glazing surface,  or by outside 
planting  in  front  of  the greenhouse.  There  are commercial  greenhouse  shading  compounds 
available from commercial greenhouse suppliers. But many owners just spray on a thinned-out 
white latex paint diluted to the consistency of milk (70% water). There's also a new generation 
of  paint-on  shading  compounds  from  Europe  which  shade  the  greenhouse  when  dry,  but 
become  clear  when  wet  from  rain  or  mist.  This  enables  light  to  get  through  the  shading 
compound  when  plants  need  it  most.  You're  out of  luck  if  it's cloudy but  not raining.  The 
commercial name of one such compound is Nixol® and is distributed in the United States by V 
& V Noordland, P.O. Box 739, Midford, NY 11763. 

There  are  many  shading  compounds  available  on  the  market  so  check  with  a  local 
commercial  greenhouse  or  greenhouse  supplier  because  they  vary  in life  span  and  effects. 
Some are semi-permanent, some disintegrate and wash off after a freeze or a snow, some last 
only six months, while others are very hard to get off the glazing and may require scraping, a 
tough  job  and  not  good  for  the  glazing.  Check  with  a  local  commercial  greenhouse  or 
greenhouse supplier. 

In dry  areas,  many people just throw wet mud onto the glass and reapply it after heavy 

rains wash it off.  Though labor intensive, it works like a charm. 

Also available are commercial  shade cloths which are commonly hung inside under the 
glass.  You  can  make  your  own  by  using  cheese  cloth,  burlap  or  an  old  sheet.  Hang  it 
horizontally  over  the  areas  you  want  shaded.  Deciduous  trees,  sunflowers,  pole  beans and 
grapevines planted outside in front of your greenhouse glazing create summer shade too. 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

37 

Important  Note:  Most foodcrops  grown  in solar greenhouses are already  short on light 
because  of  the  obvious  limits  of  the  structure.  When  you  use any means to shade,  you  are 
cutting down on light used by vegetable plants for photosynthesis. This can cut down on food 
yields unless  you live  in a very bright area that provides, after  shading, enough foot  candles 
(around 2000 fc—see Measuring Light in the Greenhouse earlier in this chapter) to grow your 
vegetables. 

Shading in the summer won't affect growing houseplants at all if you plan, as many people 
do, to move your food production outside and use your greenhouse for living. But shading in 
winter or summer will greatly decrease the ability of your greenhouse to produce food and heat. 

Earth  Tunnels 

Another  development  in  cooling  greenhouses  is  the  use  of  earth  tunnels.  These  are 
underground  ducts that take in outside air.  As the air travels underground,  it is cooled to the 
temperature  of the earth,  which  is much cooler than the hot outside air. The cool air is then 
ducted  into the greenhouse to aid in passive cooling. For more details, consult a good passive 
home design book; many of the so-called  "envelope homes" use this cooling method. 

Water 

Watering  is  the  one thing  everyone  thinks  he or  she can do  well.  In reality  few  solar 
greenhouse owners do it with the correct frequency or amount. The most common problem I've 
encountered  is overwatering  (see  "Overwatering  Symptoms" in Pests and Diseases).  Roots 
need air and overwatering fills up all the air spaces in the soil. If this goes on for very long, it 
hinders the plants's normal functions by causing the roots to suffocate. It seems that greenhouse 
owners  living  in dry  western  climates  have  the  most problems  with  overwatering.  Because 
greenhouses are water efficient  compared to the outside garden, people who water their outside 
gardens with regular frequency  may have to change their habits. There are many variables in 
deciding how often  and how much to water. They include: 

1.  The  amount  of  sunshine  that plants receive.  More sunshine  means a need for  more 

water. 

2.  The amount of outside venting. More venting also calls for more water. 
3.  Seedlings need a steady water supply. They should not be dripping wet, but constantly 

moist. 

4.  Clay  soils  need  less  water  than  do  sandy  soils.  Get  your  soil  tested  by  a county 
agricultural extension agent. Then try to create a good balance between sand and clay 
so soil is well drained but holds water reasonably well. (See Getting to the Roots.) 

Knowing When to  Water 

Always check the soil before you water. Don't water out of habit! Of course, there is one 
obvious  way  to  tell—look  for  wilting.  This  method,  however,  is the  "too  late"  approach. 
There are better ways. For example: 

38 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Pots and Containers—Stick your finger  into the top inch of soil; if it feels powdery dry. 

water it. 

Beds—Dig one inch under the surface and grab a handful of soil. Form a ball out of this 

soil. Toss the ball from  hand to hand. 

If the ball 
is powdery dry and will not form at all 

Then 
water 

falls apart easily when tossed 
falls apart but not easily 

water 
don't water just yet-
tomorrow 

check again 

doesn't fall apart 
doesn't fall apart, and water is squeezed 
out in droplets 

don't water yet—check in a few days 

you got carried way and over-
watered—take it easy! 

When using the ball method, be aware that soils high in sand tend to fall apart more easily 
than other  soils, so also take into account how  "wet"  it feels. Experience will help you fine 
tune this method. 

Water very little or not at all on cloudy cool days. There is usally no need for it, except for 
seedlings.  When  you do water,  always try to do it in the morning hours to prevent evening 
condensation on the leaves, which leads to disease problems. And generally, the greenhouse 
needs less water in winter months. 

Symptoms of over-watering: 

1.  Bluish-green mold growth on soil surfaces. 
2.  Increased seedling or plant diseases and poor germination. 
3.  Increased number of slugs feeding on leaves (see Pests and Diseases). 
4.  Slow growth. 

How  to  Water 

The first step is to purchase a good rubber 
hose. Keeping it off the ground will help prevent 
the  spread  of  disease.  An old  recycled tire rim 
makes an excellent storage rack. Mount the rim 
on a wall and wind the hose around it when not in 
use. 

Next you'll need a nozzle. A misting nozzle 
is  available  from  garden  shops,  seed  catalogs 
and  greenhouse  supply  houses  and  is good  for 
starting seeds.  A water breaker may be found at 
these same outlets and is great for general water(cid:173)
ing  needs.  It  converts  one  strong  stream  into 
more gentle rain-like droplets. 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

39 

You'll  have  to do  bucket  watering  if  you  don't  have  plumbing.  In that case,  obtain a 

watering can that has a water breaker attachment. 

Plumbing  or not, try to keep water off  the leaves. Water the soil, not me plants. Try to 
avoid mud splashing and be especially gentle with seedlings; a hard spray can bury seedlings 
forever  and  even  knock  down  mature  plants.  Water  thoroughly.  Water  as  infrequently  as 
possible, but when you do water, soak the beds well. Stop when puddles begin to form. 

When watering pots and containers, stop when the water comes out the bottom. If the soil 
in your container has dried out, you may have to use the "water twice" technique. The  first 
watering, you'll notice, will immediately run out. This is because the soil has shrunk and pulled 
away from the pot. The water goes right down the sides and out the bottom. This first watering 
causes the soil to expand and contact the sides of the pot, but the 
soil will have absorbed little water. Now when you do the second 
watering, it will soak into the center of me soil mass. 

If you don't have the time or energy, there are systems you 
can set up to automatically water your greenhouse. These involve 
timers,  extensive  plumbing,  and  are  usually  drip  irrigation 
systems. They're great if you're going to be away for awhile but 
friends  may also be happy to help you out.  In my opinion these 
automatic systems take much of the fun out of gardening and may 
be quite expensive (around $400 in  1981). But if you are good at 
tinkering  and  scrounging,  you  can  devise  something  yourself.  Automatic  systems  are 
available through greenhouse suppliers—see the yellow pages in the phone book and garden 
magazine ads. 

Try  never to let soil  in beds or pots completely  dry out. Besides the obvious stress that 
wilting  causes  plants,  dry  soil  increases the concentration  of  fertilizer  salts.  Fertilizer  salts 
cause slower growth, brown leaf margins and high soil pH. See Getting to the Roots for more 
information. 

Water  Quality 

In rare instances, people run into water quality problems caused by pollutants or salts in 
the water. Generally chlorine is no problem, but fluoridation  in high amounts can be harmful. 
(See Pests and Diseases.) High pH water, also known as salty or alkaline water, can be trouble, 
especially if your water tests out above a pH of 7.4. Your county agricultural extension agent 
will help you test your water; litmus paper is also available from a pharmacy. This paper turns 
different  colors to indicate the pH of your water—the ideal pH is 6.7 - 7.2. 

The quality of water varies greatly from region to region and is affected by both nature and 
people. It is the human factor that causes most problems because people often don't respect or 
maintain their water at a high quality level. Water is classified  as hard and soft.  Hard water is 
high in minerals, usually calcium or magnesium carbonates. Dishwashing and laundry soaps 
work  best  in  soft  (low  mineral)  water.  People  often  "soften"  hard  water  chemically  for 
washing;  but  beware,  plants don't  grow  well  in artificially  softened  water.  Water  softeners 
usually raise the sodium content in the soil, which causes poor soil structure and poor drainage. 
They may also raise the pH of your soil out of the neutral range. 

In most cities, chlorine is added to tap water to kill harmful  organisms which may cause 

40 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

human disease. The amount of chlorine it would take to harm your plants would probably harm 
you as well and would not be suitable to drink. If you suspect your water is outrageously high in 
chlorine let it sit in a bucket overnight and most of the chlorine will disappear. (This is a trick 
used by goldfish  lovers.) 

Fluoride is also added to many towns' water supplies to help prevent tooth decay. In many 
parts of the country it occurs naturally in the water. Some horticultural research has shown that 
fluoride may cause some leaf tip burning, especially if your soil pH is below 6.5. But tip burn is 
also caused by high salts, high pH and overfertilization.  To avoid fluoride injury, be sure your 
water and soil is between 6.7 and 7.3 pH. See Getting to the Roots and Pests and Diseases for 
more information on pH, soil and growth. 

Unless  you  live  in  an  area  where  acid  rain  is  a  problem,  rain  water  may  be  a  good 
alternative to tap water. But winter collection may pose a bit of a problem. You'll have to be 
creative. 

With water resources in short supply, many people are turning to grey water. Grey water is 
"waste"  water  from  sinks,  laundry,  tub and showers.  As much as 80 gallons a day can be 
reused from a household of four. I recommend the following when using your grey water in the 
solar greenhouse: 

1.  Avoid laundry water that contains bleaches, boron (Borax), and high sodium deter(cid:173)

gents.  Because  most  detergents  contain  sodium,  it's  usually  best to  forget  laundry 
water.  Be on the safe side and use only the rinse water. 

2.  Dilute grey water by 50% with tap water. 
3.  Devise a sand and gravel filter to remove lint, grease or other impurities. Even a double 

layer cloth bag around the end of a hose makes an adequate filter. 

4.  Use mild, simple soaps. Castile soaps work well. 
5.  Wash all food well before you eat it. 
To transfer grey water to storage or to deliver it directly to your greenhouse, water may be 
caught  in  buckets  from  disconnected  sink  traps,  or  a  more  sophisticated  system  may  be 
installed.  You may have to set up your grey water system secretly as many  areas have local 
ordinances against reusing water. If the quality of your water turns out to be a real problem, the 
only solution is locating another water source. Capturing rain water is a good place to begin. 

Water  Temperature 

I  don't  like  to  be  splashed  with  cold 
water.  . . and  neither  do  plants.  It  slows  their 
growth  and  lowers  the  soil  temperatures  tre(cid:173)
mendously . Water is considered cold when it is 
below  43°F  (6°C).  Ideal  water temperature  for 
plants  is  between  65°  and  80°F  (18°-27°C); 
above 80°F (27°C) is usually too hot. 

Ways  to  raise  water,  temperature  in  your 
greenhouse: 

The Solar Greenhouse Environment 

41 

1.  Plumb in domestic hot water and a mixing  valve; or 
2.  Plumb  a  faucet  into the  side of  a  black  55  gallon  drum  that  sits  in the  sun  and  water 

plants from  that barrel. For best results, place the barrel up high; or 

3.  Make  a  coil  of  black  plastic  tubing  up against  your  north 
wall. Connect one end of the tubing to your house plumbing 
and put a valve on the other end for watering. The coil must 
be placed so as to receive direct winter sun. Now you have a 
source of solar heated water; or 

4.  Buy a solar hot water heater that is made especially for solar 
greenhouses.  Zomeworks  carries  the  only  one  I've  heard 
of.  It's called Big Fin. Write to Zomeworks, P.O. Box 712, 
Albuquerque, NM 87103. This water will need to be mixed 
with cold water to provide proper temperature; or 

5.  European growers have done some fancy water heating by running water pipes through 
a  compost  pile. Another  idea is to set a water drum in the center of your hot compost. 

Besides  light,  atmosphere  (CO2),  heat,  and  water,  the  one  remaining  element  of  the 
greenhouse environment  is the plant itself. But before  you can have a plant, you need a place to 
put it—and  I'll discuss that in the next chapter on Interior Layout  Design. 

Here are some sources of high and low pressure sodium lamps: 

North American  Phillips Lighting Company 
Bank Street 
Hightstown, NJ 08520 

Advance  Transformer 
2950 N. Western Avenue 
Chicago, IL 60618 

Quality Outdoor Lighting 
Northbrook,  IL 60062 

Dura-test  Corporation 
2321 Kennedy  Boulevard 
North Bergen, NJ 07047 

Jefferson  Electric 
840 25th Avenue 
Bellwood,  IL60104 

Leviton Mfg.  Company 
236 Greenpoint Avenue 
Brooklyn NY 11 

INTERIOR 
LAYOUT DESIGN 

During  initial design of the greenhouse, interior layout 
must be given serious thought. In terms of overall  food 
production,  this  is  as  crucial  as  the  structure  itself. 
Greenhouse space is always limited, so the final layout 
must enable you  to use  space efficiently.  Most green(cid:173)
house owners like to devote some greenhouse space to 
relax  and  live  in.  But  it  is still  important  that the area 
devoted  to  food  production  be  used  efficiently  to 
achieve the greatest food production per square foot of 
greenhouse space. It is also important to design interior 
space to be flexible  for changes in cropping,  increases 
or decreases in living space, and seasonal differences. 
Some  greenhouse  owners  are  as  concerned  with 
the  living space of the greenhouse as with the growing 
space, so food  production sometimes takes a back seat 
to  aesthetics.  In  trying  to  satisfy  two  sets of  require(cid:173)
ments,  these  folks  often  find  themselves  left  with  a 
structure  that  is  neither  functional  nor  aesthetically 
pleasing.  Granted,  there  are some  trade-offs  between 
aesthetically  pleasing  living  space  and  food  produc(cid:173)
tion—but  wonderful  compromises  can  be  made;  and 
remember, growing food is a great way to live. Here are 
the factors to consider. 

I 

44 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Sun Angles 

It's always fun for me to think of sun angles 
and how  I would design a solar greenhouse  for 
the high mountains of Ecuador (on the equator). 
But in the temperate  zones, the sun angle is low 
during the winter months because the sun never 
gets very high in the southern sky (northern sky if 
you live south of the equator). When the winter 
sun gets low, shading caused by interior objects 
may be a problem. Any tall object placed toward 
the  southern  half  of  a  greenhouse  will  cause 
shading, so be sure barrels or raised beds are not 
robbing other growing space of light. In winter, 
light  is  already  in  short  supply  and  vegetables 
need  all  they  can  get.  (See light  section  in The 
Solar Greenhouse  Environment.) 

Interior  Surfaces 

Shading at winter sun angles 

Because of the constant problem of low light levels, it's important that all light entering 
the greenhouse be used either for plant growth or heating (including thermal storage). The best 
way to achieve this is to paint all non-thermal mass surfaces white. (See The Solar Greenhouse 
Environment).  If  you live  in a cloudy  area,  bringing  vegetable yields  up to par  may  mean 
painting over your beautiful  redwood or cedar. 

Traditionally,  most solar greenhouses have water thermal mass storage along the north 
wall.  But if your greenhouse is much wider than  18' it may be wise to use some thermal mass 
along the south wall too. This will help create more even temperatures across the width of your 
greenhouse.  If you do this, to minimize winter shading, thermal mass along the south face of 
the greenhouse should be in smaller containers that don't rise more than 1 V2' higher than the top 
of the nearest growing bed. The sun side of any south wall thermal mass should be black but the 
north side of mese mass containers should be painted white to benefit nearby plants with diffuse 
light reflection.  Remember, thermal mass along the south side is only for solar greenhouses wider 
than  18'. You  might also consider hanging a white curtain over north wall thermal mass in the 
summer to increase light along north wall beds. (See The Solar Greenhouse Environment). 

Pit Greenhouses and  Light 

We  get 

into  a  similar  shading  problem  with  pit 
greenhouses: Low winter sun angles produce a shadow  across 
the growing  beds.  The deeper your greenhouse  is set into the 
earth the more this becomes a problem. It's a trade-off  between 
using  earth-sheltering  and  obtaining  adequate  light.  Again, 
paint  everything  white  (except  soil,  thermal  mass  containers 
and plants) to minimize this problem. 

Shading at winter sun angles 

in a pit greenhouse 

Interior Layout Design 

45 

Thermal Mass 

Until  recently  55-gallon  drums  filled  with 
water  have  been  a  common  choice  for  green(cid:173)
house  thermal  mass,  but  now  more people  are 
looking into other storage containers. Because of 
the  unattractive  bulk of  55-gallon  drums,  most 
people are switching to more visually appealing 
containers  such  as  fiberglass  tanks  or  stacked 
recycled  5-gallon  oil  tins.  Smaller  containers 
have the advantage of more sun exposed surface 
area per cubic area of water. The result is more 
heat gain when the sun is shining, but also more, 
and  quicker  heat  loss  on  cloudy  days  and  at 
night.  Small water containers are usually good for short-term  heat storage (1-3 days), while 
larger containers are best for long-term storage (more than 3 days of cold weather). A mixture 
of  both  is generally  recommended.  Small containers  take up less floor  space  and are easily 
moved, whereas large water containers such as 55-gallon drums are very heavy when full, so be 
sure they're  in their final resting place before you fill them. See a greenhouse design book like 
Yanda and Fisher's The Food and Heat Producing Solar Greenhouse for sizing the amount of 
thermal mass needed for your climate and size greenhouse. 

More  and  more  we  are  seeing  eutectic  salt,  and  other  phase-change  thermal  storage 
systems. They are often sold in small solar shops springing up all around. This storage takes up 
less space but there are questions about its life span. It's also quite expensive. Solar equipment 
suppliers should be able to give you more details on the eutectic salt storage products. 

Raised Beds 

In a greenhouse you can grow food directly in the ground, in containers, or in raised beds. 
A raised bed is generally a wooden sided box that is 3' - 6' long, 2W  - 4' wide and 4" - 4' high. 
It is filled  with a soil mix or other growing medium. A raised bed may also be built of brick, 
concrete or recycled material. 

There are a number of ways to lay out a raised bed. The peninsular system uses space most 
efficiently,  with the main aisle running north-south  or east-west. The width of the raised bed 
should  be  comfortable  for  you  to reach  across 
(about  3V4'  -  4')  providing  access  from  both 
sides.  For  one-sided  access  (such  as  a  bed  up 
against  a wall), don't  make the beds any wider 
than  Vk'.  Again,  bed  and  aisle  width  really 
depend  on  what  is comfortable  for  you.  Think 
about the size of your wheelbarrow and the route 
it  must  take  to carry  soil  to  the  beds.  The  old 
fashioned  three  point,  one-wheel  wheelbarrow 
has  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  roll  down 
narrower aisles. 

46 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

rvpOOOOOQ 
nnrLTLn j\ 
ooooooo 

Peninsular 

(avoids 

Will  there  be  lots  of  people  coming  through  your 
greenhouse? Ground beds have the disadvantage of getting 
trampled  as people walk through. A raised bed—even  2" 
high—tends to keep most people from  stepping into your 
garden; but it won't stop cats, dogs or curious kids. One 
great advantage of raised beds is that the higher they are, the 
less you have to bend over—and when it's comfortable to 
work in your greenhouse garden you' 11 take better care of it. 
Also,  like any  other thermal  mass, a raised soil bed will 
store heat.  Note: garden beds designed for senior citizens 
should be raised at least 24'' for easier access. 

One way to make a raised bed is to dig aisles down into 
the earth on the sides of the bed, rather than actually raising 
the bed by bringing in more dirt. This leaves the top of your 
raised bed at grade level. Of course this can't be done if 
you already  have  your  greenhouse  sitting on a concrete 
slab . ..  unless you're good with a jack hammer. 

Some  growers  prefer  a  raised-raised bed.  This  l'-or-so-
deep  bed  sits on  stilts.  It has  the  advantage of  providing  some 
storage space under the bed for pots, hose, garage sale accumula(cid:173)
tions and other junk. Because a 1' growing depth is quite limited, 
make sure the soil mix in this bed is not only rich but well drained. 
Also be sure the bed has many drainage holes in the bottom. 

Storage Space 

Raised-raised bed 

It's very helpful  to construct  a small cardboard  mockup of 
your greenhouse to try out different  design ideas. At least be sure 
to put your ideas on graph paper to see how things look and fit. 
This  preplanning  will  make  the  design  process  easier  and  you'll  more  likely  end  up  with 
something that fits your needs. 

Constructing Raised  Beds 

Materials: A wide variety may be used to construct beds. Unless you're wealthy, try to 
obtain inexpensive materials. For example, scrap lumber, brick, cinder block, stone, old tires, 
etc., can be made into raised beds. If you use scrap wood, avoid thin plywood because it warps 
and separates.  Also, be sure to avoid wood materials that have been treated with pentachlor-
ophenol ("penta")  or creosote wood preservatives because they 
are  toxic  to  plants.  The  best  wood  preservative  I've  found  is 
copper napthenate, Cuprinol® or Cuprolignium®. Unless you're 
using  redwood  or  cedar,  all  wood  used  for  bed  construction 
should be treated with this material. These products can be found 
at local greenhouse suppliers or lumberyards. It is also helpful to 
line  the  inside  of  your  raised  bed  with  plastic  to  make  it  last 
longer.  But don't  line the bottom with plastic because you want 
drainage all the way through. 

\\\V 

Excavated aisle 

Ys% 

1  1 

Interior Layout Design 

47 

Unless  you  have  a  concrete  floor,  you  should  sink  support 
stakes on the side of the bed deep into the ground. This will anchor 
the bed and keep it from  moving as you fill it with soil. If you're 
building on a concrete slab, either cross-brace or nail the bed into the 
concrete with special concrete nails. 

Paint the outside of all raised beds semi-gloss white to increase 

reflection of photosynthetic light throughout the greenhouse. 

A  l " x 6"  board  laid  on  top of  the  perimeter  of  the  bed 
makes a nice seat for people and a good place to set pots. If you 
don't  do  this,  people  will  tend  to sit on  the edge  of  your beds 
anyway . . . unless you place cactus there. 

, 

, 

. 

Use support stakes 

Filling the  Bed 

If you plan to do your growing in a soil medium (See Getting to the Roots) here's how to 
fill  your raised bed. First determine whether your soil is sandy or clayey by having a soil test done 
by a county agricultural extension agent, or try the following  "feel"  method of testing. Wet a 
tablespoon of soil and rub it between your thumb and fingers. If it feels gritty, it's probably a 
sandy soil. If it feels only slightly gritty, it is probably a mix of 
sand and clay. And if it feels plastic-like and smooth, it probably 
leans more toward clay.  (If it feels really slimy, you probably 
grabbed a slug.) A large number of hard dirt clods may indicate 
a clay soil. 

Always strive for a well-drained soil. Soils that are on die 
sandy side drain best, while clay soils hold water. In greenhouse 
soils it is better to rely on decomposed organic matter, not clay, 
to  provide  water-holding  ability.  Soils  high  in  clay  develop 
drainage problems, which can lead to a salt buildup and water 
logging—both hard on vegetable production. So keep your soil 
on the sandy side. If your soil is clay, add enough sand to make it 
drain well (up to l/i for soils very high in clay, but generally V3 
sand). If your soil is known for its poor drainage consider using 
drainage tiles under the greenhouse, or at least under the beds. 
See a comprehensive construction manual for details. 

Before  filling  the beds with soil on hand, have a soil test done to see if your dirt is the 
proper  pH  and  not  too  high  in  salts.  And  for  good  plant  growth,  check  on  the  amount  of 
nutrients it contains.  Either test  it yourself with a soil test kit or ask your county  agricultural 
extension agent for help. If your soil pH is high or low, you should add material to correct this. 
And if you're sure that the dirt you have on hand is absolutely awful  (either sub-soil, salty or 
poisoned) locate another soil source and haul it in. If your soil is marginal, have patience, you'll 
build it up in time by taking good care of it. See Getting to the Roots. 

Wanting to minimize heat loss to the ground, many people ask about placing foam board 
insulation  horizontally  below  the  entire  floor.  I  strongly  urge you  to avoid  it.  If  you  have 
properly  insulated  around the perimeter of the greenhouse foundation down to frost  line depth 

48 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

or deeper (as explained in most design books), your ground will not be a heat sink. So you gain 
nothing except a muddy mess and root growth problems due to poor water drainage. The earth 
is a good source of constant 45°F (7°C) temperatures (plus or minus 5°), which can be a great 
help in preventing a freeze-up in certain situations. What can happen is this: during a prolonged 
record cold spell (the type that freezes moustaches instantly) your thermal mass may become 
exhausted, leaving the earth as your only heat source. Even if the earth is only 40°F (4°C) it's 
still wanner than a 32°F (0°C) greenhouse, and its relative warmth would cause a positive flow 
of heat from ground to air and thus protect your plants from  freezing. 

If  you  feel  you  must  pour  a  concrete  slab  (which  I  don't  advise),  rather  than  just  a 
perimeter foundation,  it's a good idea to insulate only around the perimeter to the frost depth 
and  not  under  the  whole  slab.  For that  matter,  if you  have  no foundation  and just build on 
timbers or beams, still insulate the perimeter below the frost  line by trenching-in a rigid foam 
board  insulation. 

Depth of Fill 

For good vegetable production you should have a soi 1 depth of about 2'. Less depth works, 
but tends to produce more growing problems. This doesn't mean your raised bed has to be 2' 
high.  If your greenhouse  floor  is dirt, you can work the planting soil below the ground level. 
But if your greenhouse sits on a concrete slab, you can only go up. 

Begin filling your bed with a couple of inches of sand, then add your soil. (If it is a sandy 
soil to begin with,  you won't  need to start with sand at the bottom.) Add about 2 lbs of bone 
meal  to  every  10 square  feet  of  soil:  it provides phosphorus  and calcium to your soil.  (See 
Getting to the Roots for alternatives.) If your soil tests low in potassium add  1  gallon of wood 
ash to every  10 square feet. Wood ash does have an alkalizing effect (high pH) and if that is not 
desired, you may want to consider granite dust for potassium. Don't use coal ash. Leave a 7" 
space on  top  for decomposed organic  matter  and allow for an additional  inch of clear space 
between  the top of  the soil and the top of the bed.  Organic  matter should be added  in these 
quantities: 7" deep if using decomposed compost, 4'' if using well -decomposed manures, less 
if chicken manure. The compost or manure should be blended throughout the entire soil depth. 
Avoid raw manures.' They will burn leaf tips and throw nutrient balances out of whack. If your 
soil still tests out to be quite low in nitrogen, blood meal, cotton seed meal or fish emulsion are 
excellent fertilizers to correct the shortage. 

Materials such as leaf mold (composted leaves) and peat moss are helpful too and may be 
added to a depth of 3 " - 4"  in addition to the depth of compost or manures. They are very low in 
nutrient  content  but do  provide excellent  humus,  which  improves the soil's tilth  (water and 
nutrient holding ability), and they also help to keep diseases to a minimum. If your soil is very 
rich and contains a lot of decomposed organic matter to begin with, cut by 25% all recommen(cid:173)
dations of compost, manures, etc. Again, thoroughly mix in whatever you add to the soil. 

For  more  in-depth  information  and  recommendations  for  subsequent  applications  of 

fertilizers or organic matter after the first crop is harvested, see Getting to the Roots. 

Interior Layout Design 

49 

Seedling Space 

In  spring  people  often  like  to  utilize  much  of  the  green(cid:173)
house space for starting seedlings that will be set out later in the 
outside garden.  Containers of seedlings may be set directly on 
beds  when  food  crops  aren't  growing  there.  Or  they  may  be 
placed on top of thermal  mass containers. One way to increase 
useable  space for seedlings is to build shelves. Shelves may be 
placed  on  the  north,  east  and  west  walls.  They  may  also  be 
hinged  onto  the  side  of  raised  beds  to  swing  out  into  an  area 
previously  used  for  living,  or  an  area  where  aisles  are  wide 
enough—as  long as there is still enough room to walk or waltz 
through. All shelves should be painted white. See spring seed(cid:173)
ling section  in Crops and  Propagation. 

Container Food  Production 

Many commercial growers, as well as some small green(cid:173)

house owners, produce food  in containers rather than in beds. 
Containers that may be used for this type of production include: 
1-gallon cans,  old  5-gallon  paint  buckets,  large plastic  bags 
filled  with potting  soil mix, and other recycled  and  commer(cid:173)
cially available planting containers. Although I have a personal 
preference  for  growing  food  in  raised  beds,  containers  still 
have a place in every food producing greenhouse because they 
easily  utilize  space  that  planting  beds do  not.  This  includes 
hanging containers to utilize air space and containers set on top 
of thermal  mass or on the ground  in aisles.  Let's  look  at the 
pros and cons of using containers for all your food production. 

Pros 

—Cheap, easy to find recycled containers. 
—Utilize unused space (barrel tops, floor space, shelves, airspace). 
—Eliminate problem of disease spreading from plant to plant through the soil. 
—Can be moved easily around the greenhouse. 

Cons 

-Hard to grow big plants in containers unless the containers are very large. 
-Plants in containers need more attention (water, fertilizer, mere pest control). 
-Fertilizing mistakes are not as easily forgiven  in container soil. 

50 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

Whenever you grow plants in containers be 
sure the soil mix is rich and well-drained and that 
there are holes in the bottom of the container for 
drainage.  A common soil mix for containers is: 
M sand, !4  richtopsoil,  !6 well-rotted manure or 
compost and  1 cup of bone meal per 5 gallons of 
mix. Perlite may be substituted for sand. 

The  main  problem  with  growing  plants in 
containers is that the plants may be too large for 
the container, thus creating a stress situation. So 
try  to  balance  container  size  (root  area)  to  the 
size of the plant above soil level; watch for frequent  wilting and an increased susceptibility to 
insect problems; and  stick to bush varieties of  vegetables  rather than  large plants. Also pay 
more  attention  to  the  nutrient  needs  of  the  plants.  Excess  nitrogen  as  well  as  nitrogen 
deficiencies  are common in container soil. 

Taking to the Air 

A fancy  use of space in your greenhouse is rafter beds (for tall greenhouses with rafters) 
and high hanging pots.  1' deep beds may be rolled along on the rafters in a north-south direction 
so that  a shadow  is always cast directly on the walk path,  not on a lower growing bed. This 
rafter  bed is filled  with a lightweight growing medium that will be hydroponically  fed. Perlite 
would  work nicely here. This arrangement is only for tall greenhouses with sturdy  rafters—it 
admittedly poses quite an engineering problem. You need a way to easily get up into the rafters 
for regular plant maintenance. 

A hanging container with a pulley is somewhat more  realistic. 
The  idea  here  is  to  pull  your  plant  up  to  the  peak  areas  of  the 
greenhouse  where  the temperatures  in winter are generally  much 
warmer.  You  attach  a  long cord  to the pot,  then  thread  the cord 
through a pulley and anchor it down low. When you have to fertilize 
or water the plant, lower it to ground level, then pull the plant back to 
the peak area. On warm days or throughout the summer the tempera(cid:173)
tures near the roof are generally too hot for any plant to survive (often 
12(f  F [4<f C]), but in winter it works great for warm season bushy 
plants such as bush  tomatoes or beans.  Be sure your ground level 
layout is finished and producing food efficiendy before you consider 
taking to the air in these wilder ways. 

Aisles and Floors 

There are a number of ways to deal with aisle and floor space. Each material has its special 

attributes; my favorite is brick, but let's look at how each one stacks up. 

Interior Layout Design 

51 

Options for Aisles 

Material 
Dirt 
Wood boards 

Brick 

Gravel and rock 

Concrete 

Comments 
Gets muddy and may harbor disease and insects. 
May harbor slugs and insects. Rots and is hard to clean. Bare feet may pick 
up splinters. 
Easy to clean and pleasing to look at.  Somewhat porous and drains some 
excess water. Expensive but easy on bare feet. Brick floor patterns are fun to 
play with. Some solar heat storage possibilities. 
Use  only  pea  size  gravel.  Drains  well.  Great  on  hot  days;  it  can  be 
watered  down  and  cools  the greenhouse  as the water evaporates.  Not  so 
good  for barefooted  humans,  but  it's cheap. Harder  to roll  wheelbarrows 
and wheelchairs, though not impossible. 
If the whole floor is a concrete slab, plan for water drainage, preferably built 
in if possible. See a concrete specialist about porous concrete which is ideal 
for water drainage.  Concrete  floors  are easy to clean and their white color 
reflects  photosynthetic  light to the plants. Don't  paint your concrete  floor 
black for solar heat gain because it will cause summer overheating. Concrete 
walkways are preferred over concrete slabs that cover the whole floor. 

Wheelchair Access 

Wheelchairs vary between 2' and 3' in width. They need a 
diameter  of  about  5l/z'  for  a turnaround.  For complete  access 
you should remove stairs into the greenhouse and replace them 
with ramps. Ramps for wheelchairs should  not rise faster than 
1' per  10' in length. For wheelchair access to growing beds it is 
much nicer to be able to position the chair so that it's facing a 
bed or growing  table that has an underneath clearance (for  the 
knees) of 2'.  This provides an easy front reach from the wheel(cid:173)
chair  where the person's  legs are under the bed or table  rather 
than  having  to  pull  alongside  and  twist  uncomfortably  to the 
side to reach  plants.  Gravel  flooring  makes it difficult  to roll 
wheelchairs. 

Work and Leisure Space 

Provide 2' clearance 
for  wheelchair access 

Many folks  like to set aside a small space for a work area. Here you can pot plants, start 
seedlings, groom house plants and do transplanting. It's a sacrifice to use precious greenhouse 
food  production  space  for  this  activity,  so you  may  want  to use  an area  in your garage  or 
workshop for this. However, if you must locate the work area inside your greenhouse, place it 
in one of the darker corners (the northeast or northwest). Some people have made a nice work 

52 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

area by setting plywood on top of a couple of their 
55-gallon  water  drums  in a comer of the green(cid:173)
house. 

Many items usually found in the work space 
should be out of the reach of children. Things like 
seeds, fertilizer  and pesticides are dangerous  if 
swallowed and should not be left out in homes or 
greenhouses where children live or visit. 

You'll  enjoy  setting  aside  space  in  your 
greenhouse  for  sitting  and  relaxing—unless 
you're in a food survival situation or use it only for 
commercial production. Used efficiently,  the leisure space may allow enough room for two or 
three  chairs.  In  this  area  you  can  still  produce  food  in  1-gallon  pots hanging  overhead  or 
5-gallon buckets placed next to the chairs. Of course, you can always remove the furniture  for 
more growing space if your needs dictate. 

If you do plan to have a sitting area, locate it in the shadier areas of the greenhouse, the 
northeast  or northwest  corners.  If a side wall is opaque,  locate work areas and leisure space 
against  this  wall  and  to  the  north.  If  you  are going  to  use your greenhouse  socially  in the 
evening, include overhead lights, not for growing, but for seeing 
at night. It's usually nice to hook up your light to a dimmer switch 
for varying moods. Keep candles and kerosene lamps away from 
fiberglass  or plastic glazings. Greenhouses are extremely  flam(cid:173)
mable! 

Solar Sauna 

If you live in a sunny winter area and can afford the greenhouse space, you may want to try 
constructing  a solar  sauna.  It's  a great way  to get  over colds or to just  relax.  Construction 
involves walling off a southeast or southwest corner adjacent to the glazing and sealing it to the 
rest  of  the  greenhouse  with  either  wood  or  flat 
fiberglass.  It needs to be large enough to hold you 
and a few friends; 6' - 8' wide seems to be adequate 
(depending on the size and shape of your friends). 
This  room  should  have  no  ventilation.  During 
sunny winter days, it will frequently  get well over 
100°F (38°C). In cloudy areas, you must wait for 
those sunny days to get it hot.  Place a few sitting 
benches inside and, if you want to get fancy, add a 
shower  if you can work out the plumbing.  Don't 
put in plants as they won't survive the heat. For a 
night sauna, you will have to add a heater, but be 
careful, fiberglass and other plastic-based glazings 
are very flammable.  Candles and kerosene lamps 
also require extreme caution. 

Interior Layout Design 

53 

By keeping the door closed to prevent excess humidity, a solar sauna room can also double 
as a solar food dryer. However, humidity will not allow crops to dry properly and may promote 
mold growth, making the food dangerous to eat. So, see a good food drying book for details on 
how to do it. 

Interior Layout Design 

53 

By keeping the door closed to prevent excess humidity, a solar sauna room can also double 
as a solar food dryer. However, humidity will not allow crops to dry properly and may promote 
mold growth, making the food dangerous to eat. So, see a good food drying book for details on 
how to do it. 

CROP LAYOUT 

The  solar greenhouse  is a world of  its own.  The more 
you experience the interactions between the plants, soil, 
insects, sun and yourself, the more complex and fasci(cid:173)
nating the relationships  appear.  Look closely and with 
patience  to  see  what's  happening.  There  are  many 
micro-environments within the greenhouse that must be 
identified  before you can fit plants into the best location 
at the right time. 

The changes  in the environment  through  the sea(cid:173)

sons and in different  locations within the greenhouse are 
due  mainly  to  changes  in  temperature  and  light  in(cid:173)
tensities.  There  are  three  very  distinct  seasons  in  the 
greenhouse  environment,  summer,  winter and spring-
fall.  (Spring and fall usually are very similar—the tem(cid:173)
peratures  and  light  characteristics  are  very  much  the 
same, so I've grouped them as one.) 

Plants also create changes in the greenhouse envi(cid:173)
ronment.  Tall  plants  cause  shading;  overcrowding  of 
plants  causes  competition  for  limited  light,  water and 
nutrients.  Also, research  is now showing that  different 

56 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

plants  growing  adjacent  to one  another 
can have both positive and negative  ef(cid:173)
fects on each other. 

In  laying  out  crops  within  the 
greenhouse, I believe in always trying to 
use the differences  in the environments 
to  my advantage.  Hopefully,  the result 
will  be  higher  yields  and  the  efficient 
use of available space. 

Here's  a  common  example  illus(cid:173)
the  different  micro-environ(cid:173)

trating 
ments. Think of a cool, relatively  dark 
place  in the greenhouse  where  there  is 
only enough  heat and light to produce plants halfway  to maturity. Let's compare Swiss chard 
and  tomatoes.  Now,  what  do we have  to eat with  an  immature  tomato plant? Nothing. We 
cannot eat tomato leaves or blossoms. How about an immature Swiss chard plant half the size of 
a  mature  plant? There's  still  plenty  of  leaves  to eat,  although  they  are smaller.  This  is the 
difference  between utilizing environments for either productivity or non-productivity, at least 
as far as our stomachs are concerned. So, it's a matter of plugging the right plant into one of the 
available environments at the right time. 

The Seasonal  Micro-environments 

To isolate and understand the micro-environments we will be looking mainly at tempera(cid:173)

ture and light differences.  It may seem kind of tricky at first but you can eliminate the mystery 
by using some common sense. Remember these rules: 

1.  Hot air rises; cool air drops. 
2.  Shade has less light intensity than a sunny area. 
3.  On sunny days it is very hot near the glazing, and the closer to the glazing the plant is, 

the more light intensity there is on it. 

4.  On cool nights, it is colder closer to the glazing. 
5.  Plants  near  thermal  mass  feel  more  even  temperatures,  with  less  night-time 

fluctuations. 

6.  The  area  near  a north  wall thermal  mass is brighter  and  warmer  in the winter,  and 

shadier and cooler in the summer. 

Different  types  of vegetables  have different  environmental  requirements,  so now  it's a 
matter of plugging the plants' needs into the appropriate micro-environments. But remember, 
these  micro-environments  change  seasonally.  Let's  look at these changes graphically.  Your 
greenhouse  may  vary  depending  on  interior  and  exterior  design  and  local  climates,  but  in 
general this is what happens. 

Crop Layout 

57 

^^ 

^ - — ^ H ^ "^ 

\\ 
\ 
1 
1 

"^^^ 

* 

/ y^  

J n * a *
Warn, 
.. • • • 

. / ^ ^ C^ 
Very 
^ 
Sr/^A/ 
^ 
'•>,  Warm  1\ 
'"•  r " 
1 
bright 
,  '•  Ho/ft 
Warm  SryAl1  "• 
* 
• 
ft 
-..._  ft 

[Vawi 
To Cold 

Shady 
Warm 

•  ^^fe^ 

.'  Vtrv ^ 
/.  Bright 1 
^
11
 
• 
'•.  Hot\ 
** 

'•• 

I' 

Shady 
Hot 

7  ^ ^^  
:  ^ T ^ V -—  
:  Bnaht \ 
••: 
O- \ 
• 

*•.  Hot V 
\ 
\ 
\ 

\ 
'• 
• " " *» 

•  Bnahi 
Shady :  Warm 
Warm .* 

^^-^fr—" 

\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
1 

L 

1^1 
^  ^^•;;---. \\  ^y ••£h*»i&-.l 

\A 

\ 

SUMMER 

SPRINC-FALL 

. \ l\ 
\ 
^M fc^  &«^Vs\ 

K 

WINTER 

Note:  Cold=below  32°F  (0°C).  Cool = 32°-50°F  (0°-

10  Q,   Warm=50°-85°F (!0°-30°C). on up. 

Winter 
Note:  Areas  adjacent  to  glazing  become  very cold  at  night 
and  may  have spot  freezing. 

Now,  in order to plug  into these environments we need to know  what the different  plants 

require for best  growth. 

•Crop  Light  and  Temperature  Requirements -

Crop 

Light 

Temperature 

Comments 

Beans:  Lima 
Bush 
Pole 

Beans:  Fava 
Broad 

Beets 

bright - very bright 

warm-hot 

Will  tolerate  some  shade.  When  trellised, 
pole beans cause shading. Seeds need 65°F 
(18  C)soil temperature to germinate well. 

bright - very bright 

cool - warm  Needs  trellising  which  causes  adjacent 

shading. Will not tolerate hot! 

shady - bright 

cool - warm  May  go  to seed  if  temperature  falls  below 

freezing. 

Broccoli 

shady  bright 

cool- warm  Will  flower  fast  and  produce  small  heads 

if consistently warm to hot. 

Brussels 
Sprouts 

Cabbage 

shady  bright 

cool 

Poor  quality  if  consistently  warm  to  hot. 
Will cause shading toward maturity. 

bright  - very bright 

cool - warm  May  go  to  seed  if  temperature  is  below 

freezing for a long period of time. 

Cantaloupe 

bright  - very bright 

warm -hot 

Must have warm nights above 50°F (10°C). 
Needs  trellising  which  causes  adjacent 
shading. 

Carrots 

shady  bright 

cool- warm  May  go  to seed  if  temperature  is cold  for 
a  long  period  of  time  and  then  grown  at 
warm temperatures. 

I 

58 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Crop 

Light 

Temperature 

Comments 

Cauliflower 

shady  bright 

cold - warm  Will flower fast and produce small heads if 

consistently warm to hot. 

Celery 

shady  bright 

cold - warm 

Likes many months of consistent cooler 
temperatures.  Will  often  go  to  seed  by 
summer. 

Chicory 

Chinese 
Cabbage 

Collards 

shady  bright 

cold - warm  Not good in hot areas. 

shady  bright 

cold - warm 

Flowers rapidly in warm to hot conditions. 

shady  bright 

cold - hot 

Will  cause  shading  after  a  few  months  of 
growing. Well adapted to solar greenhouse 
environment. 

Corn Salad 

bright 

cold - warm  Well adapted, grows low. 

Cucumber 

bright  - very bright 

warm - hot 

Needs  nights  above 50°F  (10°C).  Creates 
much shading when trellised. 

Eggplant 

bright - very bright 

warm - hot 

Needs nights above 50°F (10°C). 

Endive 

Garlic 

bright 

cool 

Poor quality with hot conditions. 

shady - bright -
very bright 

cool - warm  Will tolerate hot and cold. 

Kale 

shady  bright 

cold - warm 

Kohlrabi 

bright 

cold - warm 

Leeks 

bright 

cool 

Poor quality with constant warm to hot tem(cid:173)
peratures. 

Enlarged stems (edible portion)  crack  with 
warm  to  hot  temperatures.  Rowers  rapidly 
with warm to hot temperatures. 

Will go to seed if temperature is below freezing 
for long periods and then grown at warm tem(cid:173)
peratures. 

Lettuce 

shady  bright 

cool - warm  Will go to seed with consistent warm to hot 

temperatures. 

Mustard 

shady  bright 

cool - warm  Will go to seed with consistent warm to hot 

temperatures. 

Okra 

bright - very bright 

warm to hot  Will not grow in cool temperatures. Tall va(cid:173)

rieties cause shading. 

Onions 

bright 

cool - warm  Will not bulb in winter but are good for greens 

year round. 

Crop Layout 

59 

Crop 

Parsley 

Light 

Temperature 

Comments 

bright 

cool - warm 

Plants that over-winter (grow through the win(cid:173)
ter) will go to seed in spring or summer. 

Parsnip 

bright 

cool 

Peas 

shady - bright 

cool - warm 

Pepper 

bright - very bright 

warm - hot 

Radish 

shady  bright 

cool - warm 

Plants  that  over-winter  may  go  to  seed  in 
spring. 

Consistent warm to hot temperatures will re(cid:173)
duce yield. 

Prefers  warm temperatures  in young stages 
but  will over-winter  if temperature  remains 
above 40°F (5°C).  Best  production  above 
50°F(10°C) 

Consistent  warm  temperatures  cause  top 
growth and seed production, poor quality in 
warm to hot temperatures. 

Rutabaga 

shady  bright 

cool 

Poor quality with warm to hot temperatures. 

Spinach 

shady  bright 

cool - warm 

Sweet Potato 

shady  bright 

warm -hot 

Consistent  warm  to  hot  temperatures  cause 
rapid 
flowering  and  short  production 
period. 

Can  tolerate  hot  temperatures  well,  likes 
long warm season. 

Swiss Chard 

shady  bright 

cool - warm  May  flower  in  spring  if  winter  was  cool, 

depends on variety. 

Squash 

bright  very bright 

warm -hot 

squash 

Requires  nights  about  50°F  (10°C).Win(cid:173)
ter 
shading. 
Summer  squash  is  generally  a  low  bushy 
plant. 

trellising  causes 

Tomato 

bright  - very bright 

warm -hot 

Turnip 

shady  bright 

cool 

Watermelon 

bright  very bright 

warm -hot 

Will  tolerate  short  periods  of  hot  tempera(cid:173)
tures. Vining tomatoes cause shading. Little 
or no production below 50°F (10°C). 

Warm  to  hot  temperatures  will  crack  and 
produce poor quality roots. 

Requires  nights above  50°F (10°C). Needs 
trellising which causes adjacent  shading. 

Note: Place any  tropical  and sub-tropical  plants such as figs, oranges, lemons, etc., near the thermal 
mass. Coffee  likes shady areas. In winter and fall place fruiting crops near thermal mass where it 
is consistently warm. See Greenhouse Food Crop Scheduling and Crops for further information.  . 

I 

60 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Height and Distance between Plants 

Layout 

Distance 

Between  Plants 

For Wide Bed  Planting 

Approximate 
Mature  Height 

Broadcast  =  B 
Trellising  =  T 
Triangle  =  A 

6' 

la(cid:173)

Tor  A  * 

4" 
6" 
4" 
4" 
1'-  1%' 

T 
A 
T 
B 
A 
A 
A 
T 
B 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
B o rA 
A 
B 

s'-  12' + 
r 
2'- 3%' 
3'-4' 
r 
8'-  15' + 
r 
2'-  Vti 
V 
V 
3-4' 
10-  15' 
3' 
8"-  10" 
r 

Crop 
Beans; Fava, Broad 
Beans. Bush 
Beans, Pole 
Beets 
Broccoli 
Bnissel Sprouts 
Cabbage 
Cantaloupe 
Carrots 
Cauliflower 
Celery 
Chives 
Collards 
Cucumber 
Eggplant 
Garlic 
Kale 
Kohlrabi 
Lettuce 
Onion Bulbs 
Onion Greens 
Parsley 
Peas 
Pepper 
Radish 
Spinach 
Summer Squash 
Winter Squash 
Swiss Chard 
Bush Tomato 
Vining Tomato 
Turnip 
Watermelon 
*  =  When grown  in a triangle layout the plant  will  need either a support stake or a hanging  string to 
grow  up on.  See Crops  for further  information. 
+  =  May  grow taller.  The roof  is the  limit. 
Heavy  fruits  such  as  watermelon,  cantaloupe  and  summer  squash  will need  something  to  support 
the fruit  on  the trellising.  This  will prevent  the fruit  from  pulling  the whole  vine off the trellising  as it 
gets  big  and  heavy.  Recycled  nylon  stockings  or  cheesecloth  around  the fruit  tied  directly  to  the 
trellising  works  great.  For pruning  detail,  see  Crops 

1'-  1*4' 
3'-4' 
1V4" 
r- iw 
10" 
r 
\w 
r 
\W-  2' 
5" 
V/i' 
8" 
5 " - 8" 
5" 
2"-  3" 
r-  vti 
4 ' - 8' 
IVfe' 
H4" 
6 " - 8" 
2W-  4* 
4 ' - 5' 
4"-  8" 
IVi' 
2 ' - 3' 
3 " - 5" 
4' 

8"-  10" 
r-  ivi' 
r 
r 
r - 7' 
3'-5' 
6 " - 8" 
8"-  10" 
2'-  2%' 
10'-  15' + 
IW-  2' 
2'-4' 
6'-  12' 
r 
10'-  15' + 

B o rA 
A 
T 

B o rA 
A 
* 
B o rA 

T 

BorA 

B 
B 
A 
T 
A 
B 

Crop Layout 

61 

Spacing and Trellising 

When laying out crops it is important to space all plants at the 
proper  distance.  A  general  rule  for  fruiting  and  root  crops  is to 
increase  spacing  slightly  when growing them  in shady  areas. For 
leafy crops, slightly decrease spacing in shady areas. 

Certain crops grow  much more efficiently  when laid out in a 
triangular pattern in the bed. With a triangular layout there is usually 
less wasted space than with square layouts. Other efficient  planting 
layouts  include  the  broadcast  method  and  trellising  method. The 
chart on p. 60 shows where each layout is appropriate. 

When seeds are broadcast, the bed is covered with plants in 
no particular arrangement, except that they are spaced or thinned 
to the proper distances. Seed either may be scattered into the bed 
or seedl ings may be transplanted. Because most direct light enters  Use Triangular and Broadcast 
the greenhouse at an angle to the south, always try to place shorter 
spacing for efficiency 
crops  to  the  south  and  taller  crops  to  the  north  or  adjacent  to  any  opaque  walls.  Use  the 
following chart to see how tall each vegetable gets when mature. 

When trellised, many crops can produce much more food per square foot. These crops include 
cucumbers, pole beans, peas, watermelon and cantaloupe. See chart for appropriate trellis heights. 
Always run trellises in a north-south direction to minimize shading of adjacent plants. Trellises may 
also be placed against any opaque wall or against thermal mass in summer months. 

Trellises  may  be  constructed  of  recycled  materials  such  as old  wood,  string,  fencing, 
chicken wire, etc. To be sturdy, support posts should be laid deep into the ground. Nail, staple 
or wire the materials together. Sometimes trellises can become somewhat elaborate. Trellises 
made into an arch or tunnel create a new micro-environ(cid:173)
ment under the arch to grow crops that like cooler tem(cid:173)
peratures and some shading. Crops that do best with arch 
type  trellising  include: cantaloupes,  watermelons,  pole 
beans,  European  cucumbers  and  winter  squash.  Good 
"under arch"  crops are lettuce, chard, turnips, mustard 
and spinach. 

Some unlikely candidates for trellising or stringing 
up  include  New  Zealand  spinach  and  summer  squash. 
New Zealand  spinach  may be gently tied up to a trellis 
made of chicken wire or fencing. I've been able to train it 
to grow as tall as 4'. Summer squash may be wound up in 
a string in much the same manner as tomatoes are often 
trellised. This technique is explained in Crops. 

Harvesting and Layout  Choices 

Some crops are harvested only once when they are mature. Examples include cabbage or 
carrots; once they're harvested, that's it. You need to start over again. But other crops such as 
Swiss chard,  spinach  or  leaf  lettuce  may be harvested  many times,  leaving the plant  in the 

62 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

ground to continue growing between pickings. When planting in the solar greenhouse, always 
consider which category each crop fits into. Then, in the easy to reach places, plant the crops 
that are harvested many times; and—that's right folks—in the harder to reach places, put those 
that are harvested only once. 

Integrated Planting 

In companion or integrated planting, rather than only one crop in a bed, the bed has two or 
more crops growing adjacent  to one another. Companion planting is more like nature and less 
like  modern  farming  where  large  acreages  are filled with  only  one crop.  Let's  look  at the 
benefits of integrated planting. 

1. Closer planting—When two totally dif(cid:173)
ferent  plants grow  next to each other they com(cid:173)
pete  less  than two alike plants growing side by 
side.  Example: Growing carrots  next to lettuce; 
the carrot has a deep root system and the lettuce 
has a shallow one, so there will be less competi(cid:173)
tion for water and nutrients. Because both plants 
can  tolerate  some  partial  shading,  there  is  no 
competition for light. 

Another reason for closer planting is to take 
advantage  of  a  slow  growing  plant,  squash  for 
example. While the squash plant is young, the space around it that will be taken up eventually, 
may be used by a quick crop of radishes. By the time the leaves of the squash have matured, the 
radishes will be gastronomic  history. This all adds up to a closer spacing, and closer spacing 
means higher total yields per square foot. 

2.  Helps prevent disease infestation—Diseases are usually specific  to plant families and 
often  won't  cross  over  to  affect  different  families.  A  cabbage  (or cole  crop)  disease,  for 
instance, usually  will  not affect  the tomato family.  When a bed is interplanted with  different 
crop families  it is harder for a disease to spread throughout the bed. The infestation  is limited 
and an epidemic is prevented. 

3.  Helps  prevent  insect  epidemics—Insects prefer  constant  and  similar  stimuli  from 
plants, such as taste, smell, etc. When a bed has many different plants growing in it, pests move 
much slower in their feeding  because the stimuli 
are  being  constantly  altered.  Also,  some  plants 
may repel certain insects and frustrate pest attacks. 

4. Symbiotic effects—Research  is beginning 

to confirm  earlier beliefs  that  plants may secrete 
something  that  benefits  adjacent  and  different 
plants.  But secretions may also have negative  ef(cid:173)
fects on adjacent  plants. The research generally is 
still sketchy and most of the information available 
is based on non-scientific observations or old tales. 
Please don't lose any sleep over any planting com-

Crop Layout 

63 

binations you  may have come up with  in your greenhouse.  It may be worth while to observe 
closely any repeated positive trends when you interplant. Your own record keeping is essential 
here. 

The  main  disadvantage  to  integrated  planting  is  having  to  harvest  each  planting  at  a 
different  time.  This  makes  it  harder  to  renew  the  soil  and  replant  after  a harvest  without 
disturbing  other  crops.  Also,  it's  sometimes  more  difficult  to see when  a crop  is ready  to 
harvest, so you may have vegetables sneaking past their prime harvest time. An integrated bed 
has a wilder look to  it which some enjoy,  but others have trouble getting used to; especially 
those who prefer very organized looking gardens. 

I have tried to simplify my mental attitude about gardening. A garden does not have to be a 
picture of perfect order. I often take a handful of assorted seeds including herbs, vegetables and 
flowers  that  are  similarly  adapted  to  the  greenhouse,  the  greenhouse  season  and  the  bed 
location. Then  I randomly sprinkle the seeds around, covering all areas of a single bed. The 
seeds  germinate  and  grow  in  a  random  combination.  Later  I  thin  them  out  to  the  proper 
distances.  This  very  random  pattern of different  plants often  becomes a very  productive but 
wild-looking bed. On the whole, however, an organized style of integrated planting, combin(cid:173)
ing triangles, trellis or broadcast plantings, is easier to manage, especially when you are new to 
this. 

In order to lay out a bed for companion planting, try to find 
plants of different  families that like similar micro-environments. 
When  possible,  avoid  mixing  together  physiologically  similar 
crops—such  as  two  different  leaf  crops.  Try  mixing  broadcast 
crops with  triangle Jayout  crops,  or trellis  crops with  broadcast 
crops. Interplant flowers and herbs with your vegetables. They'll 
not only add beauty to your garden but the flowers will provide a 
back-up food  source for beneficial  insects and will repel  harmful 
pests; and some  flowers  are even edible. Be creative with inter-
planting; experiment and have fun. 

f  ^ 

w* 
M 

Broadcast  with 

triangular 

Basic Crop Groups 

This  guide  will  help  you  plan  integrated  crop  plantings  and  crop  rotation  season-to-

season. Cross-mix the groups. 

Cole Crop—Crucifer—Cabbage  Group 

Alliums or Onion  Group 

Broccoli 
Brussel Sprouts 
Cabbage 
Cauliflower 
Chinese Cabbage 
Collards 
Cress 

Kale 
Kohlrabi 
Mustards 
Nasturtium 
Radish 
Rutabaga 
Turnip 

Onions 
Garlic 
Chives 
Scallions 
Leeks 
Shallots 

64 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Legume Group 

Beans - Soy, Bush, Garbanzo. Broad, Fava. Wax, Lima, Pole 
Peas 
Cowpeas 

Beet  Group 
Swiss chard 
Beets 
Spinach 

Carrot  Group 

Carrot 
Parsley 
Fennel 
Dill 

Anise 
Coriander - Cilantro 
Celery 
Caraway 

Tomato  Group 

Cucumber  Group 

Tomato 
Tobacco 
Potato 

Petunia 
Eggplant 
Pepper 

Cucumber 
Watermelon 
Cantaloupe 
Other melons 

Squash—winter and 

summer 

Louffa  squash 
Pumpkins 

Overall, companion planting is helpful, but 
it probably has a smaller effect  in the greenhouse 
than  planting  crops  in proper  locations,  laying 
out crops to eliminate shading effects,  planting 
crops  at  the proper time of  year,  and  selecting 
proper varieties. It's best to consider all of these 
factors together when laying out a bed. 

Crop Rotation 

Crop rotation, an old practice, is still very important in the solar greenhouse. It keeps the 
soil  healthy  and helps to break disease cycles. Keep records of where you have planted each 
crop from  season to season. Whenever possible try to wait about  1-2 years before planting the 
same crop in the same place.  It also helps to avoid vegetables of the same plant group  in the 
same place year after year. This is good preventative medicine against major disease problems. 
See the Basic Crop Groups chart. 

Crop  Maturity 

Crops will generally have different maturity times than specified on packets or in catalogs. 
To better time your planting and harvesting in winter, allow a 20 - 30 percent longer period than 
listed  for crops to reach maturity.  For fall  and spring greenhouse crops, add  10 -  15 percent 
more  "days  'til  harvest."  The  slightly  slower growth  in  fall,  spring  and winter  is not bad 
compared to zero growth outside. 

SELECTING SOLAR 
GREENHOUSE 
CROPS AND 
VARIETIES 

The main differences  between a solar greenhouse and a 
standard greenhouse are both higher and lower tempera(cid:173)
tures,  fewer  total  hours of  light in the winter,  a lower 
quantity of light, higher humidity, and an overall unpre(cid:173)
dictability of these factors arising from a long cold spell 
or heat wave. For help dealing with and understanding 
the solar greenhouse environment see The Solar Green(cid:173)
house  Environment. 

Selecting the best plant variety or crop for green(cid:173)

house  food  production  will  help  maximize  yields  in 
your  solar greenhouse. This choice  is the most impor(cid:173)
tant  factor  affecting  overall  total  food  yields.  I  found 
that if I grew Swiss chard in place of spinach, I quadru(cid:173)
pled my food  harvest. The reason? Spinach bolts (goes 
to seed) with warm sunny days.  And bolting ends the 
productive  life  of  the plant.  On the other hand,  Swiss 
chard  is  a  biennial,  usually  requiring  below-freezing 
temperatures  to  trigger  seed  production.  In  the  solar 
greenhouse  chard  rarely  goes  to  seed,  so  it  produces 
abundantly for the full length of its growth—which can 
be  years.  My  regular  spinach,  however,  has  been 
known to bolt in just five weeks! 

O^ 

68 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

I've also found that I can help keep 
diseases  to  a  minimum  by  selecting  a 
disease-resistant variety. My cantaloupe 
had  a common disease known  as pow(cid:173)
dery  mildew,  a  leaf  fungus,  that  was 
destroying  my crop  until  I  switched  to 
resistant  varieties.  These  varieties  will 
occasionally  show  slight  mildew  dam(cid:173)
age,  but  they  are  now  mostly  healthy 
and vigorous plants. My yield was saved 
by the selection of a better variety. 

If you are serious about getting the 
most  food  from  your  greenhouse,  you 

must know the difference  between an efficient  food producing plant and one that isn't. 

Plants that require much space for non-edible leaf production are often not efficient.  Here 
are some examples. Compare cauliflower to cabbage. The whole cabbage plant is edible, every 
last  leaf;  while  the  cauliflower  produces  many 
leaves but only a small edible head. (The leaves 
which  are  commonly  discarded  are edible,  but 
not desirable.)  Imagine two equal sized plots of 
land,  one growing  cabbage and the other cauli(cid:173)
flower.  The total pounds of food in the cabbage 
plot  will  be  much  greater  than  from  the cauli(cid:173)
flower  plot.  Another example: compare peas to 
beets.  Peas  require  space to grow  many  leaves 
before  you  can  harvest  the  small  round  sweet 
peas.  Beets,  on  the other hand,  are almost  100 
percent edible. The greens, or tops, are excellent 
when cooked  like spinach. And, of course, the roots are edible. There is little waste, With a 
crop of peas, the vines, leaves and roots are all thrown out or, hopefully,  composted. Hence, 
with peas, less food per growing space is produced than with beets. So think about each plant's 
food efficiency.  How much food does it provide in how much space? 

I'm  not trying to talk you out of growing peas or any other crop; peas are ambrosia in the 
winter  greenhouse.  But  with  the  high  cost  of  fresh  food—and  in  emergency  or  survival 
situations—these efficiency  considerations are of great importance as you plan what you want 
to grow. 

Probably one of the most important consid(cid:173)

erations is personal taste. What good is a bushel 
of  radishes  if  it doesn't  get eaten? Be sure you 
plant only  what  will  be consumed.  Also, avoid 
growing  food  that  can  be  stored  easily  or  pur(cid:173)
chased  cheaply.  Why grow potatoes when they 
keep  great  in  your  root  cellar  and  can  be  pur(cid:173)
chased very cheaply? Instead, get the most value 
out  of  your  greenhouse  by  growing  the  more 
expensive and perishable crops. 

Selecting Solar Greenhouse Crops And Varieties 

69 

In  selecting  a crop or plant  variety  well-adapted  to  the  solar  greenhouse  environment,  it 
would  be nice to just  review a list of  varieties and crops that have been  found  to perform  well. 
Such  a list  would  be great  to have,  but there are some difficult  problems  involved.  First,  crop 
varieties are constantly  changing, old ones being dropped as new varieties take their place.  So 
there is no guarantee you will find the recommended  variety over many years. Another problem 
is  that  every  greenhouse  has  it's  unique  inherent  characteristics.  One  greenhouse  may  be 
brighter,  while  another  may be colder,  smaller,  hotter or more humid.  Whereas one variety  or 
crop is good  for  one greenhouse,  it may perform  poorly  in another, even  if they are both  in the 
same  vicinity.  Eventually  you  will  leam  the  unique  qualities  of  your  greenhouse.  You  will 
discover  its personality.  Throughout  the book  I name  specific  varieties and  their characteris(cid:173)
tics,  but  it  is  far  from  a  universal  list.  The  best  thing  for  me  to  do  is  spell  out  the  major 
considerations  to look at so you  can  make the proper decision   Sox your  greenhouse. 

To begin  selecting efficient  plant varieties, start by subscribing to as many seed catalogues 
as possible.  (See  Appendix  A  for  listings.) There  is much  to  learn by  comparing  the  descrip(cid:173)
tions  of  the  different  varieties.  Not  only  are  the  catalogues  educational,  but  they  are  also 
entertaining.  Some  catalogues  I've  found  that  are  particularly  helpful  to  solar  greenhouse 
owners are: Stokes, Thompson  and  Morgan,  Herbst Bros., Harris, Twilleys, Cameron  Seeds, 
Porter  and  Son  Seedsmen,  and  Seed  Savers  Exchange.  While  you  look  through  the  many 
selections available,  keep the following  considerations  in  mind. 

Selection  for  Heat  Tolerance 

Whenever your greenhouse  is above  85°F (30°C)  in  the 
winter  or  above  90°F  (32°C)  in  the  summer,  it's  too  hot  for 
maximum plant growth. Above these temperatures plant growth 
will  slow,  blossoms  will  often  not  set  fruit,  and  many  leafy 
plants as well as some root crops will go to seed, bringing an end 
to plant growth and a great reduction  in quality. There are seed 
companies in the southern United States that list certain  fruiting 
plants,  such at tomatoes, that aren't  damaged  by the heat.  For 
instance.  Porter  and Son  Seedsmen  of Texas  list a few  tomato 
varieties that' 'continue  to set fruits  with daytime  temperatures 
up  to  90°F"  (32°C).  Check  out  these  southern  catalogues  if 
your greenhouse is commonly too hot in the spring, summer and 
fall  months.  Selection  for  heat  tolerances  is  not  so  crucial  in 
areas with less winter sun, or cool summers. Of course, the best 
way to deal with a hot greenhouse is proper venting as outlined 
in The Solar Greenhouse  Environment. 

But  if  you  live  in  an  area  that  receives  a  winter  monthly  average  of  45%  or  more  of 
possible  sunshine  (as  listed  by  your  local  National  Weather  Service  forecasters;  also  see 
Appendix  D)  you'll  often  experience  very  high  winter  temperatures.  Here  you  should  select 
varieties listed as being  "heat resistant,"  "slow to bolt," or the like. Crops that are spoiled by 
going  to  seed  include  spinach,  lettuce  and  radishes.  Another  solution  to  crops  bolting  is  to 
utilize  substitute  crops such  as New  Zealand  spinach  or  Swiss chard  which  are  perennial  and 
biennial greens  respectively,  and therefore  will not bolt  in one growing  season. 

70 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Other plants may not bolt, but respond to overheating in 
other ways. For example, yields of peas drop drastically with 
hot  daytime  temperatures.  However,  there  are  certain  pea 
varieties which are tolerant of heat as well as being cold hardy 
(see Crops), so choose wisely. 

Selection  for Cold  Tolerance 

Selection  of  cold  hardy  crops  is  important  for  solar 
greenhouses  located in areas with much winter cloudiness or 
below  45% of  possible  winter  sunshine.  See  Appendix  D. 
Resistance  to  cold  is  also  an  important  consideration  for 
winter food production  in cold frames or season extenders. In 
the catalogs  sometimes  you'll  find  varieties  listed as  "cold 
hardy"  or  "productive  in cold weather."  In general, many 
crops are quite hardy in cool temperatures (even below freezing),  particularly  varieties in the 
cabbage or cole crop groups. Other possible crops include those grown for their vegetable parts: 
root, petioles, leaves, stems and bulbs. A book entitled Wintertime Gardening in the Maritime 
Northwest  by  Binda  Coiebrook  is  an  excellent  guide  for  folks  who  grow  food  in  cold 
greenhouse conditions, coldframes and outside in cloudy maritime climates. It's available from 
Tilth, Rt 2 Box  190-A, Arlington, WA 98223. 

Selection for Quick  Maturity 

In  the  winter  months,  important  limiting  factors  in the  solar  greenhouse  include  low 
temperatures,  low  light  levels  and  short days.  Varieties  and crops  that  are  listed  as  "early 
maturing"  generally  require  less light and heat to reach the harvest stage. Early varieties are 
those listed in catalogs with the least number of' 'days 'til harvest.'' The early varieties are best 
planted  in the  fall  and winter.  Although you have selected  an early variety, expect  it to take 
longer to reach maturity than the catalog specifies. Catalog specifications are usually based on 
ideal  summertime  conditions,  which  are far from  what the wintertime solar greenhouse can 
supply. But using early varieties in the winter often can speed the growth period a few days to a 
few weeks over conventional varieties. 

Selection for Plant Shape and  Size 

When a plant grows vertically, it can provide more food per square foot of growing space. 
Because the growing space in a greenhouse is always limited, it is wise, whenever possible, to 
grow vine varieties (which can grow vertically) rather than bush varieties. With crops such as 
beans,  peas,  cucumbers,  squash and melons, you are often  provided with a choice of either 
bush growth or vining. Tomatoes offer a similar choice, but they are often listed with a different 
vocabulary; vine types are called "indeterminate" and bush varieties "determinate." This is 
because tomatoes, unlike peas, beans, melons and cucumbers don't have tendrils and so really 
don't  "vine"  per se. However, they can be trellised or supported to grow vertically, but only 
indeterminate tomatoes have this ability. Vines such as peas and beans will readily climb up a 
trellis or other support, but the vine cucumbers and tomatoes usually must be tied loosely to a 
support, and they must also be pruned for best production (see Crops). 

Selecting Solar Greenhouse Crops And Varieties 

71 

When  you set up trellising for any crop, run the trellis north-south.  An east-west trellis 
should be set up only in areas where shading is not a problem, such as against an opaque wall or 
the north wall in spring, summer or fall. As the heavier fruits form on melon plants, place them 
in an old nylon stocking or cheesecloth tied to the trellis. This will prevent the weight of the 
growing melon from ripping down the whole vine. And the stocking will expand with the fruit 
as it grows. Whenever tying up plants on a support, be sure to use a soft string or cloth strip tied 
loosely to prevent strangulation of the plant. Does this sound complicated? It isn't. You'll get 
used  to  it,  and  with  time  your  trellising  can  become  as  creative  as you  want  it to be,  with 
serpentine waves or extensive arches over walkways and beds—a veritable new art form. 

Many plants have been developed  for bush growth rather than vine growth. These bush 
varieties can be fit  into the solar greenhouse in special places like a front  knee wall bed where 

there  is not enough room  to let the 
plants  grow  tall.  When  growing 
food  in  containers  or  pots,  you'll 
find  that  bush  varieties  do  best. 
Plant stress need not be a problem in 
containers  as  long  as  the  limited 
room for root development provided 
by the container corresponds  to the 
bush-sized top growth. Some exam(cid:173)
ples  include: bush beans in a hang(cid:173)
ing  pot,  a  bush  cucumber  in  a  3-
gallon  can, a Tiny Tim tomato (de(cid:173)
terminate tomato) in a 3-gallon con(cid:173)
tainer,  and  some  dwarf  peas  in an 
old  bucket.  Play  around  and  see 

Bush by kneewall 

Determinate & Indeterminate 

what  works.  It  is  fun  to  experiment.  But  avoid  planting  large  vine  type  plants  in  small 
containers because the  imbalance of  limited root space to the tall  leafy  part of the plant will 
cause periodic wilting and plant nutrition problems. 

Unfortunately summer squash can be found only in bush types; but bush types can still be 
trained to grow vertically up a string or stake. This technique requires great gentleness and is 
outlined in Crops. 

Selection for Disease  Resistance 

With  the  inherent  high  humidity  of  solar  greenhouse  and  intensive  plant  and  food 
production,  diseases often  can be a problem.  Besides maintaining healthy plants, the easiest 
way to prevent plant diseases is to grow varieties that show some resistance to your particular 
disease problem.  Catalogs list varieties that are resistant to certain diseases. Tomatoes, peas, 
beans, lettuce, melons and squashes are among the many crops listed. If a variety isn't listed as 
being  disease  resistant,  nevertheless  you  may  find  that  it  out-produces  a  similar  disease 
resistant  variety.  And even though a variety is listed as being disease resistant, the degree of 
"resistance" may vary a good deal. Don't be surprised if you are growing a vegetable that is 
listed as ' 'resistant'' to a certain disease, and still see evidence of that disease. The variety may 
be only more tolerant  than most other varieties, or they may be totally resistant,  showing no 
signs of the disease. That's something tiiey don't tell you in the catalogs. 

72 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Plant  maladies  move  fast,  especially  if 
there is a large planting of only one crop variety. 
Diseases  can  spread  like  an epidemic.  For this 
reason,  never  plant  just  one  variety  of  a main 
crop such as tomatoes or lettuce. Always grow at 
least  two  different  varieties;  chances  are  if  a 
disease  takes  hold  and  starts  to  spread,  it will 
affect one variety more than another. In growing 
several  varieties,  nature's genetic diversity will 
work for you.  Planting a few types of tomatoes, 
for  instance, will also enable you to observe the 
differences  in production among them. It is a self-education  process that is on-going. It results 
in  your  discovering  the  best  possible  varieties  for  your  unique  solar  greenhouse,  while 
protecting  you  from  unforseen  disease epidemics.  Keep records of what varieties you plant, 
when and where they are planted, and what your feelings and observations are about the overall 
production of each. Don't be lazy about record keeping. It's not hard and will provide you with 
valuable information  not available anywhere else. 

Of course, identifying  the specific disease is the first step. Check out Pests and Diseases 

for help. 

Selection for Insect Pest  Resistance 

In a few  instances there  are vegetable crops that  have been bred  for  their resistance  to 
insect  attack.  Listings in garden catalogs for insect resistance are rare, but you may find that 
certain varieties grown in your greenhouse exhibit a greater tolerance to infestations by insects. 
Again,  keep  records.  There  may  be other  reasons for  a crop's  insect tolerance,  so test your 
favorite  varieties  for a few  seasons to see if there is some inherent  ability to ward off  insect 
infestations.  It may have just been a good year for crops and a bad year for pests. 

i 0 

Greenhouse  Varieties 

There  have  been  food  crop  varieties  developed  espe(cid:173)
cially  for  large  standard  commercial  food  producing green(cid:173)
houses.  Developments  have  been  limited mainly  to cucum(cid:173)
bers,  lettuce and tomatoes—the three traditional greenhouse 
crops. These greenhouse varieties have been selected for high 
productivity under ideal conditions of light and temperatures 
in  a totally  controlled  energy-intensive  environment.  Incor(cid:173)
porated  into these varieties were characteristics  such as dis(cid:173)
ease  resistance,  high  yields,  vine  growth,  bolt  resistance 
(lettuce),  resistance  to  physiological  disorders  (fruit  crack(cid:173)
ing, blossom-end rot, etc.) and, as in the case of the European 
cucumber,  not  requiring pollination  to set fruit.  Often  these 
same characteristics are also helpful  in the solar greenhouse. 
Such  greenhouse  varieties  usually  out-produce  tradi(cid:173)

tional  garden  varieties.  Greenhouse  varieties  can  be  easily 

Selecting Solar Greenhouse Crops And Varieties 

73 

located  in the catalogs that carry them. They are usually flagged  with a statement  like,  "for 
greenhouse production,"  or  "for  greenhouse forcing."  You will find  that each  greenhouse 
variety has different  specific characteristics. One variety may be listed to set well under cold 
conditions,  while  another  sets  in hotter conditions.  You'll  also find  much  variability  in the 
disease  resistance  among  the greenhouse  varieties.  Here's where you apply  what you know 
about your own greenhouse. 

Let's say you are thinking of growing the European cucumbers (see Crops) and know that 
you  run cool  night  temperatures and also have a problem with the powdery mildew disease. 
Among many choices, Stokes catalog, for instance, lists a variety that fits those criteria. 

As mentioned earlier,  most of the breeding work in developing greenhouse varieties has 
concentrated on only three crops—cucumbers, lettuce and tomatoes. This is just an indication 
of the potential.  Imagine the possibilities of a breeding effort  with all the possible greenhouse 
crops, selecting characteristics to suit the unique solar greenhouse environment. 

Many of the varieties mentioned in Crops include the bred-for-greenhouse  varieties. Take 

advantage of these and watch your yields increase. 

Crops That  Need Winter—Problems and  Possibilities 

Why  not  asparagus,  rhubarb,  apples,  cherries,  peaches,  pears,  apricots,  currants  and 
raspberries in your solar greenhouse? There are a couple of problems here. First, these crops 
are usually grown outside and the cold of winter is required for their normal growth and food 
production.  No  winter,  no  food  production.  Another  problem is that these crops  require  an 
appreciable amount of space and produce for only a relatively short time. Depending on where 
you live, these crops may do just fine outside, and unfortunately  won't do much better inside 
unless you live where summer frosts are common. 

But there are those of us who wish we could be eating rhubarb in the dead of winter. You 
can  sometimes fake  a winter,  or "force  a crop" as horticulturists put it. Different  crops and 
varieties have different' 'chill requirements," and these can be imitated artificially. One way to 
do this is to go outside in mid-winter and carefully  dig up plants (you may need a pick for the 
frozen top soil) and transplant them inside for late winter harvests. The "half winter'' treatment 
is usually enough to ensure proper production. 

The wintertime transplanting method is, of course, much harder with an 8' peach tree; but 

it can be done with dwarf varieties in large containers on rollers. 

These  "winterphyllic"  temperate  crops  warrant  further  experimentation  and  develop(cid:173)

ment. There is some good potential for growing crops such as asparagus and rhubarb in winter 
greenhouses. In the south, plant breeders have developed varieties of temperate fruit crops that 
require less chilling to produce food.  Look through some southern catalogs for these special 
"low chill requirement" plants. 

As  you  look  through  the catalogs  and  get  a few  years  of growing  and  record  keeping 
experience, you'll have an easier time selecting crops for your greenhouse. You will see your 
yields  increase and come to appreciate the special thought that must go into use of your solar 
greenhouse. Soon it will be hard to imagine the old days of planting the same crops and varieties 
as you did in your outside garden. The inside garden and the outside one each require their own 
brand of attention. 

5 PLANT 

PROPAGATION 

In our industrial  world we sometimes take for granted 
or never learn where things come from. Once I asked a 
little  girl  where  she  thought  her  french  fries  came 
from.  She  said  "France.'*  Eggs?  From  "the  egg 
factory";  pineapple,  from  "a  pine tree" and bananas 
came from  the  "store." It's a healthy thing to wonder 
where things come from.  When it comes to plants they 
either grow from  seeds or spores; or vegetatively  from 
cuttings,  grafting,  division,  or  above  and  below 
ground  runners. 

Your ability to start plants in the solar greenhouse 
is the  heart  of  the  food  producing cycle.  If  you have 
trouble here your whole operation is in trouble. 

There  are  tricks  you  can  use  in  the  solar 
greenhouse  for starting and establishing plants that can 
result  in  more  efficiency.  For  example,  rather  than 
wasting precious bed space waiting for seeds to germi(cid:173)
nate,  use another area for starting seedlings. Then  4-6 
weeks later, transplant seedlings into a bed the same day 
you rip out an old crop. It's just like hitting the ground 
running. 

76 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

We'll  also look  into saving time and money by propagating clones (exact reproductions of 
the  mother  plant),  also  known  as  cuttings.  Most  people  are  quite  familiar  with  this  type  of 
propagation  for  house  plants.  There  are  great  benefits  when  the  same  idea  is  applied  to 
vegetable  crops.  Cloning  can  shorten  the  time  it takes  to  produce  a  new  plant  and  will  save 
money over buying some of the more expensive  hybrid and fancy  vegetable  seeds. 

Seed Propagation 

Pollination  fertilizes  the egg  within  the plant,  and  the  results of  this  sexual  reproduction 
are  seeds.  Seeds  are  truly  amazing,  self-contained  units.  They  are  new  genetic  individuals. 
Within  each  seed  is an  embryonic  plant  and  a  food  reserve  to get  the  plant  going  until  it can 
provide  for  itself.  A nice  little complete  package. 

The  first  step  for  the  gardener  is  to  obtain 
new,  good  quality  seeds.  Older  seeds  produce 
lower quality  plants, are slower to germinate  and 
have  a  lower  percentage  germinating  and  are 
more  susceptible  to  disease.  Generally,  seeds 
older  than  two  or  three  years  begin  to  lose  their 
viability, but the length of storage time varies with 
different  crops.  It's always best to store all seeds 
in  an  air-tight  dry  container,  in  a  dark,  cool  and 
dry  place.  Temperatures  as  low  as  freezing  are 
usually  fine. 

Seeds are usually bought in packets (the type 
you  see  displayed  in  stores  in  spring)  or  from  a 
catalog  source.  I  feel  that  a  catalog  gives  much 
better  descriptions  of  the  varieties  and  a  much 
wider choice.  If you order from a seed catalog be 
sure to ask them to ship immediately, especially  if your order is made in the offseason  (the off 
season is any time but late winter and early spring). Just scribble  "Ship as soon as possible," on 
the order  form.  (See Appendix  A for  a list of seed  companies.) 

In choosing how much seed to buy, here's a guide to the approximate number of seeds per 
ounce.  Count  on  a 60% - 80% germination  rate  for  new  seeds. The germination  rate drops as 
seeds  age. 

Hybrids 

One  of  the  first  choices  when  buying  seeds  is  whether  to  grow  hybrids  or  non-hybrids 
(often  called open-pollinated  seeds). A hybrid  is defined  as the result of two genetically  diverse 
parents.  But  nowadays it means more. Agricultural  scientists have developed what is called the 
F i hybrid.  This hybrid  is created by inbreeding two different  parent lines for a specific  number 
of years.  During the inbreeding, each parent line is kept separate. After the period of  inbreeding 
the two  lines are  finally  cross-pollinated.  The resulting  seed  is the Fi  hybrid  seed. Where does 
the  designation  F)  come  from?  It  is the First  generation  after  the  inbreeding  is over.  Usually 
when  you  see the word  "hybrid"  in a catalog or packet, it's generally  an Fi  hybrid. 

Plant Propagation 

77 

Number of Seeds Per Ounce 

Ornamentals & Herbs 

Approx. No. ofseeds/oz.  Vegetables 

Approx. No. of seeds/oz. 

Ageratum 
Allyssum 
Basil 
Begonia fiberous roots & 

tuberous 
Calendula 
Carnation 
Chives 
Coleus 
Cosmos 
Dahlia 
Dill 
Feverfew 
Impatiens 
Marigold 
Marjoram,  Sweet 
Morning Glory 
Nicotiana 
Pansy 
Parsley 
Petunias 
Phlox 
Snapdragon 
Thyme 
Verbena 
Viola 
Zinnia 

130,000 
90,000 
20,000 
2,000,000 

3,000 
14,000 
22,000 
100,000 
5,000 
2,800 
6.300 
145.000 
44.000 
10.000 
100.000 
650 
400.000 
20,000 
19.000 
200.000 
14,000 
180,000 
76,000 
10,000 
24,000 
2.500 

Beans 
Broccoli 
Brussels Sprouts 
Cabbage 
Canteloupe 
Carrots 
Cauliflower 
Celery 
Chinese Cabbage 
Collards 
Cucumber 
Eggplant 
Kale 
Kohlrabi 
Lettuce 
Okra 
Onions 
Peas 
Pepper 
Radishes 
Spinach 
Squash 
Tomatoes 
Turnips 
Watermelon 

120 
10,000 
8.500 
7.500 
1.000 
15,000 
10,000 
70,000 
16,000 
9,500 
1,000 
6.000 
8,500 
8,000 
20,000 
550 
9,500 
150 
4.500 
2,500 
2,000 
250 
10,000 
11.000 
250 

For a home source of regular seeds, consider saving your own. Here are some good books 

on the subject: 

Seed Starters Handbook by Nancy Bubel from  Rodale Press,  1978 
Growing  Garden Seeds: A Manual for  Gardeners and Small Farmers, by Rob Johnson. 

Available from Johnny's Selected Seeds, Albion, ME 04910 

Vegetable and Herb Seed Growing for  the Gardener and Small Farmer by Doug Miller. 

Available from Abundant Life Seed Foundation, P.O. Box 772. PortTownsend. WA 98368 

F|   hybrids  have  distinct  advantages  and 

disadvantages. The advantages are: 

1) Up to 25% higher yield. 
2) Production  of  uniform  looking  plants 
with  little  deviation  (an  advantage  for  machine 
harvesting). 

3) Greater  disease  resistance—this  is  not 
always  true  but  usually  more  resistance  is built 
into hybrids. 

78 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

The disadvantages are: 
1) High cost. They are up to four times more expensive because they take longer and are 

more trouble to produce. 

2) They  often  require  a more exacting  horticulture.  When things aren't  optimum,  they 

suffer  more than traditional open-pollinated seeds. 

3) You can't save your own seeds from  F] hybrid plants. The resulting seeds from an F| 
hybrid are usually lower yielding and quite variable in their physical characteristics. You just 
don't know what you'll get, and you often may lose all the advantages the Fj  plant had. 

Because  you  can't  harvest  and  use Fi  seeds and expect  decent  results,  F|  growers are 
forced to purchase new seeds each season. Seed companies love this, especially because F i are 
more  expensive,  creating  a higher  profit.  Farmers generally  don't  mind  either,  because the 
extra yield (also higher total profit)  from Fi  seeds easily covers the higher seed expense. As a 
result, seed companies have become a good stable investment with high profits. Since the early 
1970s most of the large seed companies have been bought by large multi-national  drug and 
petroleum  corporations. These are the same people who bring us chemical fertilizers,  refined 
petroleum, pesticides and other agricultural products. 

To give you a few examples, Burpee and O.M.  Scott and Sons are owned by ITT. Harris 
Seeds is owned by Celanese, Ferry Morse by Purex, Northrup-King by Sandoz, and Keystone 
Seeds by Union Carbide.  You may want to pick out seed companies with discretion. Ask who 
owns them. 

If you want to do more reading about the effects of hybrid seeds on our agricultural system 
see the book Seeds of the Earth, by Patrick Mooney available from Tilth, Rt. 2, Box  190-A. 
Arlington, WA 98223. 

You  will  have  to decide  if  F|  hybrid seeds are worth  it. Although you can't  harvest  F| 
hybrid  seeds for new plants, you can reproduce hybrids from cuttings as outlined  later in this 
chapter.  The best way to evaluate their worth is to compare them with non-hybrid varieties in 
your greenhouse. You'll have to do your own tests. 

Germination 

To germinate seeds you must create a specific environment. It may be helpful to set aside a 
small area  within  the greenhouse that has moderate temperatures and  light. Good  ventilation 
also helps. Here's a more detailed list of what's needed for good germination: 
Disease-free  soil and pots  Many seedling diseases cause poor germination. Therefore, use 
clean  pots  or  trays.  Never  use  old  soil  which  has  had  greenhouse  plants  growing  in  it 
previously,  unless  it's been  sterilized.  An alternative  is to use store-bought  potting soil. See 
seedling diseases in Pests and Diseases. 
Moisture  Germinating  seedlings  need constant  moisture.  Keep the soil moist but not drip(cid:173)
ping wet. If the soil dries out even once, it may kill germinating seedlings. 
Aeration  Seeds also need air, so make sure the soil isn't constantly saturated. All containers 
should have holes in the bottom so excess water can drain out of the soil. 
Soil temperature  See chart (page 80). In the winter many people have trouble germinating 
seedlings. This is due usually to cold soil conditions. Though plants vary in their temperature 
requirements  usually seeds have trouble germinating when the soil temperature is below 50°F 

Plant Propagation 

79 

(10°C).  A 
temperature  around  65-70°F 
(18-21°C)  is  optimum  for  most  germinating 
seeds.  Extreme  high  and  low  temperatures  are 
harmful,  so in the cold season you  may have to 
use  some  source  of  bottom  heat  from  electric 
heating cables or pads. They vary  in price  from 
S 10.00 to  $55.00. The pad type bottom heaters 
with  adjustable  thermostats  are  best,  but  also 
cost  the  most.  Lower  priced  models  work fine 
but  don't  last  as  long.  If  you  use  an  electrical 
bottom heater, don't trust its thermostat or what 
the package says. Check the temperature of your 
soil with a thermometer. If it's high or low, make 
proper adjustments.  A  10°F (6°C) difference can make shambles of your seedling survival and 
germination.  An alternative to bottom heaters is to bring your seedling trays inside the house 
and place  them  in a warm sunny window. Then, as soon as they germinate, bring them back 
into your greenhouse, for later transplanting. 
Light  Few seeds need light to germinate. Those that do should be planted at a shallow depth 
in a well lit area. Lettuce is one common vegetable seed that requires some light through the soil 
surface.  Be  sure  seeds  receive  enough  light  after  they're  up or they  will  become  leggy.  In 
winter you can greatly speed the development of seedlings by growing them under supplement(cid:173)
ary lights such as cool white florescent  types. This may even be done in a place other than the 
greenhouse. Make a growth chamber by setting up an array of lights over your seedling trays. 
See illustration p. 23. 
Depth  A general rule is to plant all seeds to a depth of 2-3 times their width. Smaller seeds 
have less food-energy  reserves to push through to the surface so plant them at correspondingly 
more shallow depths.  For shallow-planted seeds (smaller seeds), be extra careful that the soil 
surface doesn't dry out. Also, water gently. 
Nutrients  Seed germination  requires little if any added nutrients. In fact,  nutrients such as 
nitrogen may cause problems.  However, seedlings may benefit  from  very dilute fertilizers. It 
depends on how fertile your germinating medium is. See Getting to the Roots. 

The  following  is a good  general soil mix  for  seedlings  if you'd  like to make it yourself 

rather than purchase commercial potting soil. 

Seedling Soil Mix 

1 part rich top soil 
1 part sand, perlite or vermiculite 
1 part well-rotted, screened compost, peat moss, or leaf mold 
Blend well. 
If your top soil is chunky, you may want to screen it to get a better blend. The soil adds 
some nutrient value to the mix; the sand, perlite or vermiculite adds drainage and aeration; and 
the compost, vermiculite and peat moss add water holding ability, have a small nutrient value 
and also provide some aeration. 

i 

I;, 

i. 

I' 

i 

i 

! 

80 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

—Planting  Requirements 

Crop 
Beans 
Beans, Lima 
Beans, Fava 
Beets 
Cabbage 
Carrots 
Collards 
Cantaloupe 
Celery 
Chinese Cabbage 
Cucumber 
Eggplant 
Garlic 
Kale 
Kohlrabi 
Lettuce 
Mustard 
Okra 
Onions 
Parsley 
Peas 
Pepper 
Radish 
Spinach 
Squash 
Swiss Chard 
Tomato 
Turnip 
Watermelon 

Planting 
Method 

Seedling to 
Transplanting 

(weeks) 

3 
3 
3 
3 

2 

— 
— 
— 
— 
4-6 
— 
4-6 
3-5 
7-10 
4-6 
3-5 
7-10 
7-15 
4-6 
4-6 
6-9 
4-7 
5-9 
7-15 
6-10 
— 
8-11 
— 
6-9 
3-5 
3-8 
6-8 
— 
4-6 

Soil  Temperature 
for  Germination 

°F(°C) 
60-85(15-30) 
65-85(18-30) 
55-80(13-27) 
50-80(10-27) 
45-90 (7-32) 
45-85 (7-30) 
45-90(7-32) 
60-95(15-35) 
60-70(15-21) 
45-80 (7-27) 
60-95(15-35) 
75-90 (24-32) 
60-90(15-32) 
45-85 (7-30) 
50-85 (10-30) 
50-80(10-27) 
50-80 (10-27) 
60-95(15-35) 
50-90(10-32) 
50-85 (10-30) 
40-75 (4-24) 
65-95(18-35) 
45-90 (7-32) 
45-75 (7-24) 
70-95(21-35) 
50-85(10-30) 
60-85(15-30) 
60-95(15-35) 
70-95(21-35) 

Comments 

Requires thinning 

Requires thinning 

Bulbs, save the old seeds 

Needs light to germinate 

Bulbs sets save time 

May need dilute feeding 

Key to Chart Planting Method: 

1 = transplant to save space and time 
2=can  be transplanted but requires special care (peat pots are recommended) 
3=directly  plant seed into bed 
4=started  from  bulb or seed 

Note: Vegetables that are recommended to be transplanted can also be seeded directly into 
the bed.  But remember,  transplanting  saves time and space. Vegetables that are recom(cid:173)
mended to be directly seeded into beds should not be transplanted. 

Plant Propagation 

81 

How to Plant Seeds 

Sow the seeds into either a flat or an individual pot. A flat 
is  a  small  planting  tray  about  2 " - 3"  deep.  It  should  have 
bottom  holes.  Flats  may  be  purchased  from  commercial 
greenhouse  suppliers  or  made  out  of  recycled  materials—an 
old cake  pan or milk  carton  cut  in half and set on its side will 
work well. 
Smooth  it  out  on  top.  In  flats,  sow  seeds  in  rows  to  prevent 
disease spread.  Be sure to mark each row if there are  different 
seeds in a flat.  Leave some room between each seed depending 
on  seed  size  (usually  W).  The  flat  may  be  watered  either 
before  seeding  or  after.  I  prefer  wetting  the  soil  in  the  flat 
before  seeding  because  it prevents  the seed from  washing out 
later. To maintain high humidity, many people slip the flat  into 
a clear  plastic  bag  after  seed  planting.  If you do this, it prob(cid:173)
ably won't  need watering again till the seeds germinate. But be 
sure  to  check  it  daily.  When  the  seeds  begin  coming  up. 
immediately take the flat out of the bag and place it in a well lit 
location.  If the plants'  leaves begin to touch each other,  either 
thin them  out or transplant  into other  containers or a growing 
bed.  This  prevents  overcrowding,  which  can  greatly  slow 
growth and  reduce overall  yield. The best time to transplant is 
when plants have their first set of true leaves (the first ones with 
veins); look  closely. 

Thinning Out  Seedlings 

Planting 

sequence 

Ify 
chart  in 

ou are seeding directly into beds, be sure to thin out the plants to the specified distance (see 
Crop Layout). Failure  to thin  out  seedlings  is an  amazingly common  problem.  Some 
people don't  have the heart to kill a seedling as 
part of the thinning process—but it's sort of like 
destroying part of something to save it. You just 
have to get ruthless or they'll look like seedlings 
for  weeks.  Pinch  seedlings  out  at the  soil  level 
rather than pulling them out because pulling may 
injure the roots of remaining adjacent plants. Use 
the  following  chart  to  determine  whether  you 
want to transplant the crop or not. When you get 
to thinning, refer to Crop Layout for a chart with 
spacing distances. 

82 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Transplanting 

Transplanting  seedlings  rather  than  plant(cid:173)

ing seeds  directly  into a bed  frees  precious bed 
space  for  production.  You  can  plant  a 4  -  10 
week  old  seedling  on  the  same  day  a  bed  is 
harvested  and  pulled  out.  This  means  that pre(cid:173)
cious  bed  space  isn't  wasted  waiting  for  seed 
germination  and  initial  growth.  Of course only 
crops  that  are  recommended  to be transplanted 
can  be  treated  this  way.  And  you  will  have  to 
plan  carefully—at 
least  a  month  or  two  in 
advance—in  order  for  this technique  to be suc(cid:173)
cessful.  An occasional mistake might cause you to waste some seeds or seedlings, but the vast 
amount of time you can save makes it worth it. Try to predict when a bed will be about out of 
production and have to be  pulled out. Always be thinking about what will go in that bed next. If 
the next crop you plan to grow is transplantable, get it started so it will be ready to transplant the 
day the bed is ready. Refer to Greenhouse Food Crop Scheduling for help in planning this. 

There's  no loss with some leafy  crop seedlings even  if they never get transplanted. You 
can  let them grow  in their flat  and harvest the small leaves for eating.  I call these  "gourmet 
greens." They're small but good. This early munching only works with leafy crops; you don't 
want to eat something like tomato leaves. 

But as I said before, the time to 

transplant  is  soon  after  plants  de(cid:173)
velop  their first true  leaves.  If you 
wait  too long, you'll  get  hardened, 
spindly or stunted plants that seldom 
grow properly. 

Seedling with  1st leaves 

Water  your  seedlings  before 
you  begin  transplanting.  Dig  deep 
and gently, removing one plant at a 
time.  A  sharp pencil  makes an ex(cid:173)

cellent transplanting  tool to help ease the roots out. Get as much 
root as possible.  Do not clean the soil off the roots. Where there 
are  many  plants'  roots  intertwined,  place  them  in  a  bucket  of 
water to gently  separate them. To prevent damage from  drying, 
place  the  plants  on moist  newspaper.  Never pull out  more than 
you can transplant  in a few minutes because sitting out in dry air 
will  permanently  damage  the  roots.  Discard  spindly  or  poorly 
developed plants. 

Gently hold the plant by the top and carefully  tuck the roots 
into  holes  made  in  the  final  growing  location.  Keep  the  roots 
pointed  downward.  Plant  the seedling slightly deeper than they 
were  in the germinating  containers.  Don't jam  roots into a hole 

Transplanting sequence 

Plant Propagation 

83 

that is too shallow.  Finally, place soil around each plant and use your fingers to gently firm it 
around the stem and roots. Is the plant sitting upright? Yes? Good. 

After transplanting, gently water the plants again, being careful not to wash out or flatten 
them. And protect the seedlings from drafts or high temperatures. If you have a slug problem, 
you may  want  to  put  a slug trap near the seedlings. Also check, for aphids; they  congregate 
around the plant tops and under the leaves. (See Pests and Diseases for solutions.) 

After a few weeks, application of a dilute fertilizer high in phosphorus and low in nitrogen 

may help seedling establishment. 

Cloning Around 

An alternative to starting vegetable plants from seed is to use cuttings from a mother plant 
and to root them the same way you do houseplants. This is actually a clone because each cutting 
is genetically  identical to the mother plant. 

There are some real advantages to cloning. First, it can save you money in seed costs. For 
example, look in your seed catalog at the price of European Greenhouse Forcing cucumbers. 
The price of one of these seeds is about 30 cents. The price of hybrid seeds is alsahigh. When 
added up this can become a major expense. Starting plants from cuttings is a nice alternative to 
paying  for  F|  hybrid  seeds.  With  cuttings  you  can  have  your  hybrid  without  the  seed 
company.The  money-saving  potential  of  cuttings  or cloning  is amazing.  You can  take one 
existing hybrid  tomato plant and create literally hundreds of plants, all with the same disease 
resistance and hybrid qualities of the original, as long as the mother plant is healthy. 

Another  reason  to clone  is speed.  The  sooner your plant 
reaches maturity, the more food your greenhouse can produce. 
By using a cutting, a new plant can be ready for transplanting in 
3-4  weeks.  Compare  this  with  growing  from  seed:  up  to  12 
days for germination  and another 6-10 weeks before  it's ready 
to  transplant.  Cloning  is  not  the  solution  to  all  greenhouse 
propagation,  but  it  is  especially  effective  with  cucumbers, 
tomatoes, peppers, herbs and houseplants. 

To  make  greenhouse  cuttings,  you  must  first  prepare  a 
cloning  flat.  Here's how.  Simply  fill  a 2"-3" deep flat  with a 
mixture of  1 part sand and  1  part peat moss. Place it in an area 
that's  a constant 70°F  (21°C)  (bottom  electric heat cables or 
heating  pads  work  well).  Cooler  temperatures  greatly  slow 
rooting of the cutting.  There must also be some  light,  but the 
flat  doesn't  have  to  be constantly  bright.  An  area  against  an 
east or west wall will do fine.  Keep the sand/peat moss mix in 
the flat constantly wet.  If it dries out often,  try a mix higher in 
peat moss. 

The  first  step  in  taking  a  cutting  is  to  select  a  healthy, 
disease-free  stock  plant.  If  the  plant  is showing  any  signs of 
disease or poor health, don't  use it! Find a growing tip and cut a 
3"   long piece, tip and all. Preferably  this tip should be from  a 

Cloning sequence 

side branch (on tomatoes and cucumbers this would be pruned 

84 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

anyway). Trim any large, lower leaves off the cut piece. Leave one 
or two leaves toward the top, but only those that are 2" long or less. 

Treat  the bottom of  the cut tissue  with a rooting  hormone. 

These  hormones  are  based  on  naturally  occurring  plant  sub(cid:173)
stances that help trigger cells to produce roots. Rooting hormones 
generally come in powder formulations  and are available at most 
gardening  stores.  Just  dip  the  bottom  of  the  cutting  into  the 
powder and shake off any excess. Vertically place the hormone-
treated  cutting  about  %  into  the  flat's  peat-sand  mix.  Cuttings 
may be spaced as closely as  1" apart. 

If  you  don't  like  the  idea  of  using  commercial  rooting 
hormones,  you  may  make  your  own  rooting  compound  out  of 
purely natural ingredients like willow. Willow tea has been shown to have great root-promoting 
properties. To make it, steep many small willow twigs in hot water for 48 hours, then set your 
vegetable  cuttings  in this solution  for  24 hours before  placing them  in the flat.  Periodically 
water the flat with willow tea. 

Rooted cutting ready 

for tramp ant 

After  a  few  weeks  check  your cuttings  by gently pulling up on them.  If they do move 
easily, test again in a week. If they don't budge, they may have roots. Extract them gently with 
a pencil, one by one. If they have many good roots, transplant as you would any seedling. 

This same process works in starting trees or bushes. Tree cuttings are best if taken in early 
summer. After tree cuttings produce roots, grow them in  1-gallon cans for a year and then plant 
outside. These home-made trees could be the start of a nursery. Cuttings from grafted fruit trees 
may lose their dwarfness because it is a combination of grafts that causes the dwarfness. 

If your cuttings are wilting and not rooting, try shorter cuttings with fewer leaves. Cuttings 
love high humidity, so building a clear plastic shroud around your propagation (cloning) flat to 
create a higher humidity may help. Or if you have a plumber friend, ask him or her to help you 
set  up a mister  that  automatically  mists seedlings  for  30 seconds every  15 minutes.  Misting 
systems are also commercially available. 

If  you  have  any  major  rot or dis(cid:173)
ease  problems 
in  your  propagation 
flat,  discard  all  the sand/peat  mix and 
wash  the  flat  with  very  hot water and 
soap.  Start over again with a new mix. 
It  will  take  some  practice  and 
mistakes  to  get  the  technique  down. 
Please  be  patient;  you'll  get  it.  Some 
good  non-technical 
texts  on  plant 
propagation  are Plant Propagation  by 
Philip  McMillan  Browse,  and  Plant 
Propagation  in Pictures  by  Montague 
Free. 

I 
!  ! 

a 
.I 

i 

^4 

6 

POLLINATION 

The pollination  process is comparable to conception— 
the  first  step  in  creating  a  new  individual.  In  nature, 
flowers are pollinated by insects, bats, birds and wind. 
The  greenhouse  usually  lacks  the  natural  pollinators 
that otherwise ensure adequate fruit or seed production. 
So in most greenhouse cases, humans must do the job of 
pollination. 

Why Plants Flower 

Pollination  is the primary step in a plant's repro(cid:173)

duction  cycle, the result being a seed that grows into a 
new  individual  plant.  But  before  pollination  can  take 
place the plant needs to flower—that  is, grow its sexual-
reproductive parts. Normally the flowering  response is 
triggered  either  by maturity (in most vegetables) or by 
the  length  of  the  night  (in  many  ornamentals).  How(cid:173)
ever,  stress  from  external  factors  such  as low nutrient 
levels,  too  low  or  too  high  temperatures,  wilting  and 
competition  for  light,  water,  etc., 
may sometimes  in-

88 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

duce premature flowering.  Also, luxuriant amounts of nitrogen and water can sometimes delay 
flowering; this is often  true with tomatoes. The reason we're concerned about when  flowering 
takes place is that too early or delayed flowering often results in lower food quantity. 

Flower Physiology 

In  order  to  become  a  master  pol(cid:173)
linator inside your greenhouse, first you 
need to learn some simple flower physi(cid:173)
ology. 

There  are two major  types of flow(cid:173)

ers. The first is called a complete  flower. 
This flower contains both male and female 
elements.  Examples  are  tomato,  pepper 
and eggplant. These  types of flowers are 
the  easiest  to  pollinate  because  the male 
and female parts often are adjacent to each 
other in the same flower. 

Female 

sialk 

Male 

fbollen> 

Complete & Incomplete 

The other flower type is, you guessed it, an incomplete flower. In the incomplete flower 
the male and female parts are each in a different flower. Pollinating these flowers involves the 
physical  transfer  of  the pollen  from  the male part  in one flower to the female flower part in 
another. 

Environmental  Conditions for  Pollination 

Pollination  is usually done most efficiently  on bright days between  10:00 a.m.  and 4:00 
p.m., and optimally, it should take place at least once every other day. It's impossible to overdo 
it. Temperatures below 55°F (I3°C) and above 90°F (32°C) often will damage the pollen and 
greatly decrease the number of fruits produced. At certain times of the year, solar greenhouses 
run above and below these temperatures, so adequate ventilation in summer is very helpful  for 
good fruit set (production). In the winter you may find it wise to grow fewer fruiting crops and 
more leafy  and root type crops that don't  need pollination to produce food.  (See Greenhouse 
Food Crop Scheduling.) 

What and How to Pollinate 

Complete  Flowers 
Beans 

Most common garden varieties will produce a very good crop without pollina(cid:173)
tion. If you find your variety is not setting fruit, try changing to a more common 
variety. Runner beans need pollination, and it is difficult  to do. so you may want 
to  replace  them  with  regular  pole  or  bush  bean  varieties  that  don't  need 
pollination. 

Okra 
Peas 
Tomatoes 

Peppers 

Eggplant 

Pollination 

89 

Okra sets pods without being pollinated and produces very beautiful flowers. 
No pollination required. 
An  easy  crop  to  pollinate.  Get  a  long  thin  stick 
(about  IV2' long). A W  dowel will do fine. Tap 
the yellow blossoms gently and fruit generally will 
set. Tap each cluster of blossoms; don't skip any. 
If  you  suspect  that  any  plants  have  a  disease, 
pollinate  these  last.  There  are  electric  vibrating 
gadgets  available  to  commercial  growers  that 
work  fine,  but  so does  a stick . . . and  at a much 
lower  cost.  A  large  greenhouse  full  of  tomatoes 
can be pollinated in a relatively short time. One or 
two light taps to each blossom cluster is sufficient. 
As done with tomatoes, tapping flowers will help 
fruit set. but pollination will often occur by itself. 
Eggplants  are  quite  variable;  some  varieties 
don't  seem to need pollination, while others do 
well with a good tap, much like tomatoes. If you 
are having a problem  with setting fruit,  try this 
method:  find  a  flower  that  is  shedding  large 
amounts of pollen  (a yellow  dust will  fall  from 
flowers  when  tapped).  Put  your  thumbnail  un(cid:173)
der this flower and knock pollen onto your nail. 
Then  take  your  pollen-laden  thumbnail  and 
touch the pollen to the tip of the female  element 
on  each  blossom.  (The  female  element  is  the 
green  stalk  in  the  center  of  the  flower  sur(cid:173)
rounded  by  the yellow  pollen  parts.)  Apply  more  pollen  to your  nail  after 
pollinating  about  five  or  six  flowers,  and  repeat  the  process  on  all  your 
blossoms. 

Eggplant  pollination  with  thumb 

Tapping  blossom  with  slick 

"^s^S 

'0ds^^ 

VVl 

Incomplete  Flowers 
Squash 

First  locate the male flower—it will have 
a thin stalk leading up to the flower base. 
Within the flowers, you will find a shorter 
stalk tipped with yellow powder (pollen). 
The female flower is easy to recognize; it 
has  a  little  immature  squash  behind  the 
flower  at  the  point  where  the  petals  are 
attached.  The  pollen  must  be  transferred 
to the tip of the structure within the female 
flower.  If pollen  is not transferred  to the 
female  element,  the  immature  fruit  lo(cid:173)
cated  behind  the  petals  will  never  grow, 
and  eventually  it  will  begin  to  rot  while 

Male  blossom  pollinating 

female 

with  immature  fruit 

90 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

still  attached  to  the  plant.  To get  the  best  pollen  and  fruit  set,  pollinate  the 
flowers  as  soon  as  they  open  the  first  time. There  are  a number  of  ways to 
transfer  the pollen.  Use a small paint brush, a used match, or the whole male 
flower. The last method is the easiest and the best. I call it the "male flower stalk 
method.' Here's how it's done: pluck the male flower where it's attached to the 
plant,  then  strip all the yellow petals off  the stalk.  You'll be left  with  a stalk 
tipped with the yellow pollen. Holding the bottom of the stalk, touch the pollen 
on the stalk's end to the female element in the center of the female flower. You 
can pollinate 2 or 3 female squash flowers with one male pollen stalk. Also, you 
can sometimes use pollen from one type of squash 
to pollinate another type, such as yellow squash to 
pollinate  zucchini.  Within  days  you'll  know  if 
your  pollination  has  worked.  If  it  didn"t  work, 
you'll notice that the fruit will begin to rot from the 
blossom end. Pluck it off and discard it. 

There is the occasional problem of not having 
enough  male  flowers  to  pollinate  your  females. 
There's  not a whole lot you can do, but you may 
attempt to use another squash variety that has some 
male  flowers,  or  you  may  try  to  refrigerate  the 
male when they are in abundance for use at a later 
time.  To  do  this,  place  the  male  flowers  in  a  plastic  bag  and  refrigerate 
them—don't freeze them. To a point, the longer the flowers are in the cold, the 
longer the pollen will be viable. The maximum storage time is approximately 3 
weeks, but this may vary greatly. 

Rotted Squash tip 

Many cultures eat the squash's  male pollen  stalk.  Here's how: break the 
stalk at the point where it turns from green to light yellow. Dip the whole yellow 
portion  (including pollen)  into a batter and deep fry  it.  It's considered  a great 
delicacy.  Here's  another  thing  to try.  At  the  point  in the stalk  where you've 
broken it, look for a bowl-like indentation containing a small amount of clear 
liquid. This liquid is the nectar. Taste it and see why bees are into pollinating. 

Cucumbers  Europeans have developed a cucumber specifically for greenhouse culture known as 
European  Forcing  Cucumbers. They don't  need  to be pollinated at all and yield 
many  long, sweet, thin-skinned  seedless cucumbers. Although the seed  is some(cid:173)
what expensive, the high yields and less work involved make it a good choice for the 
solar greenhouse, especially during the warmer months. For more information on 
growing this type of cucumber, see Crops. 

But if you are growing regular garden variety cucumbers in your greenhouse, 
they will need pollinating to set fruit. To tell what sex your flower is, look for a small 
immature cucumber behind the yellow petals of the female flowers. It's similar to a 
squash plant. The male flower lacks immature fruit  and is just a flower on a thin 
stem.  Tweezers  are  a  great  aid  when  working  with  these  small  flowers.  The 
procedure is essentially the same as with squash except that the cucumber flowers 
are much, much smaller. This makes it harder, though not impossible to do. The 
task may require some time and energy,so you might want to stick with the high 
yielding European cucumbers. 

Pollination 

91 

Melons 

Melons  and  cantaloupe  are  pollinated  like squash,  but  like the cucumber,  they 
have much smaller  flowers.  Look for the small, often  fuzzy,  immature melon or 
cantaloupe  behind  the female  flower.  The male flower won't have one. As with 
squash,  transfer  the  pollen  to the center  of  the  female  flower  either  by  using  a 
small  paint brush  or the male  flower  stalk  method. The fruits  will not set if they 
are  not  pollinated.  Unfortunately,  there  aren't  any  varieties  available  yet  that 
will produce  without  pollination.  Maybe  someday. 

Artificial  Fruit  Set 

Synthetic  chemical  hormones  are  also  available  in  spray  form  that,  when  applied  to 
blossoms, will cause the fruit  to grow without pollination.  However,  there have been  reports of 
lower quality  fruit  (soft,  misshapen  fruit  with  poor color and  poor  storage characteristics).  In 
view of  the quality  risks and  the always-present  questions  associated  with using any  synthetic 
chemical  on  food,  use  of  fruit  setting  chemicals  should  not  replace  regular  pollination  of 
blossoms.  However,  these  chemical  sprays  may  help  to  set  fruit  during  adverse  temperature 
conditions. 

Problem 
Poor  fruit  set 

Blossom  drop 

Misshapen  fruit 

Cracked  fruit 

—Trouble-Shooting Problems 

1 

Possible  Cause 
Temperatures  above 90°F(32°C)  or below 60 °F (15°C). 
Sudden  cold or cool  temperatures. 
Very dry  air. 

High  temperature. 
Low  humidity. 
Low  soil  moisture. 
Nearby  incomplete combustion fumes, generally from a heater. 

Incomplete pollination (not enough pollen to female element). 
Also due to cold  nights below  55 °F (13  °C). 

Alternating high and low temperatures. Some varieties are listed 
as "crack  resistant,"  so try them  next  time. 
Usually  not due to  pollination. 

Low  numbers  of  blossoms 

Too much  nitrogen. 

Fruit  rotting  (incomplete 

flowering  plants) 

Immature  fruit  shriveled 

(cucumbers  only) 

No pollination,  or pollen  that was used wasn't  viable. 

Either  they  weren't  pollinated  (regular  cucumbers only)  or  the 
plant  had  too  many  mature  cucumbers  present  on  the  vine 
(common  with  European  cucumbers).  Keep  the  vines  picked 
or production  will be  slowed. 

7 

SOLAR 
GREENHOUSE FOOD 
CROP SCHEDULING 

Almost  any  common  vegetable  can  be  grown  in  an 
unheated,  well-built  and  well-designed  solar  green(cid:173)
house at any time of the year in most areas of the United 
States. Among crops, however, there is a drastic differ(cid:173)
ence  in  productivity  and  health:  the  difference  being 
between a plant that just barely survives and one that is 
abundantly  productive.  Along  with  selection  of  plant 
variety  and  crop  layout,  scheduling  is a major  key  to 
high food yields in a passive solar greenhouse. 

Although planting of crops occurs throughout the 
year,  I've  split the year  into two primary growing sea(cid:173)
sons:  summer  and  winter.  The  summer  greenhouse 
season  is  from  March  to October  and  winter  is  from 
October to March. It is the transition months and weeks 
around October and March when much of your planting 
occurs. 

In  the winter  season  characterized  by short days, 
low  light  intensities  and  cool  temperatures,  leafy  and 
root  crops—also  known as  "cool  season  crops"—are 
most productive. Peas, cauliflower,  broccoli and broad 
or  fava  beans  and  a few  other  crops, though  not  leafy 
and root crops, also do well in the winter season. 

< 
C 
a 

94 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Fruiting crops usually fit best into the summer season, characterized by longer days, more 
light  and  warm-to-hot  temperatures.  Non-fruiting  crops that also do well  in the summer are 
collards. New Zealand spinach, Swiss chard and a few other minor crops. 

For the best value from  your growing space, it makes sense to stick to vegetables that are 
more  valuable  and  perishable.  Also,  plants  that can  be harvested  many times  (for example, 
Swiss chard and leaf lettuce) are a better choice for high yields than ones that are harvested only 
once (cauliflower or head lettuce, for example). But remember, plant only what you know will 
get eaten. 

Although  not efficient  winter producers, if you want to grow fruiting  crops in the winter, 
plant them in the warmer areas of the greenhouse (as indicated by the chart in Crop Layout). 
The  wanner  your  greenhouse  is,  up to  85°F  (30°C)  days  and  65°F  (18°C)  nights,  with a 
minimum of 50°F (10°C) the better your fruiting  crops will grow. If you plan to actively heat 
your greenhouse  to raise  its winter temperatures for fruiting  crops, please be sure that you're 
getting your money's worth. Remember, it takes energy and money to heat. It also takes away 
from the concept of a passive greenhouse, which is one of the solar greenhouse's best features. 
If you let it run at its natural temperature, it 
will provide surplus heat to your home at 
no extra cost. Is the trouble, time, money 
and  energy  worth  a few  more  red toma(cid:173)
toes?  Maybe,  maybe  not.  The  same 
space, unheated,  will provide impressive 
yields of greens, herbs and roots with no 
extra trouble. Although it's always nice to 
have  a  few  tomato  and  pepper  plants 
through the winter, to devote a lot of space 
to  out-of-season  fruits  greatly  reduces 
overall  greenhouse  yields.  Experiment 
and  see  for  yourself.  Remember,  think 
efficient  food production. 

If you plan to try cool season crops (usually grown in winter) in your summer greenhouse, 
plant  them—you  guessed  it—in  the cooler  areas  of  your  greenhouse  (as  indicated  in  Crop 
Layout),  It would be much more efficient,  however, to grow these leafy and root crops outside 
in summer. 

Spring and Fall Planting 

The spring season in the greenhouse can be used to start seedlings for your outside garden. 
This will greatly  increase outside productivity. (See Spring Transplants in Crops.) Spring and 
early  fall  months are also a good time to sneak in some quick maturing crops such as summer 
squash, bush beans, Chinese cabbage, radishes and kohlrabi. 

With  the  exception  of  many  herbs,  some  flowers  and  Swiss chard,  digging up outside 
garden  plants in the fall  for greenhouse production  is usually not worthwhile. Remember, the 
criteria  for  selecting  greenhouse  food  crops are  usually entirely different than  for selecting 
plants for outside production. (See Selecting Solar Greenhouse Crops and Varieties.) Also, the 

Solar Greenhouse Food Crop Scheduling 

95 

shock of transplanting can set plants back, and often they never return to productivitiy. Usually 
you will do better to anticipate the changing seasons and start most of your winter greenhouse 
plants from  seed. 

With the exceptions of chamomile, basil and dill, most common herbs transplant well into 
the greenhouse. Flowers that transplant into the greenhouse with good results include: petunias 
pansies, allyssum  and some daisies. Outside snapdragons survive but don't flower very well, 
so grow only ' 'greenhouse" snapdragons in your greenhouse. 

Starting Winter  Crops 

The biggest crop scheduling trick is getting your winter, cool season crops started on time. 
It's very important to get their root systems established before the cool nights and short days set 
in around November. If you wait until winter arrives to start your cool season crops, you won't 
see any  significant  production  until  late winter.  So plant  the winter crop  early—September 
through October. 

Getting your greenhouse  converted  to pri(cid:173)

marily  cool  season  crops  is  not  an  easy  task. 
Often  the  plantings  of  warm  season  fruiting 
crops  will  still  be  vibrant  and  healthy  well 
through  November and even  into early  Decem(cid:173)
ber. But soon the yield drops drastically and then 
it's too late to start seeding cool season crops and 
expect  decent  growth.  A bit  of  a dilemma.  To 
convert the fall greenhouse for winter, you may 
need to cultivate a ruthless attitude that will en(cid:173)
able you to rip out beautiful cantaloupe or tomato 
plants to make  room  for winter crops. But first 
do your pulling up of the fruiting beds that have the lowest production, or those that are having 
disease  or  insect  problems  in  their  old  age.  If  you  plan  to  leave  a  few  fruiting  plants  for 
winter—which  I recommend—try  to leave  the ones near the thermal  mass (north  wall area) 
where it is warmer  in the winter. At the same time, don't allow massive plantings to cover up 
large portions of the thermal mass. This would prevent direct solar gain for heat storage. 

Summer—What to do 
with your  Greenhouse 

Often  people aren't quite sure how 
to  use  their  summer  greenhouse.  For 
people who live in northern areas with a 
short  growing  season, 
the  summer 
greenhouse  provides  a  place  to  grow 
crops  that  are  hard  to  grow  outside. 
Plants such as cucumber, tomato, canta(cid:173)
loupe, melons and winter squash, which 
have  barely  come  into  production  out-

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

side  when  the  first  frost  attacks,  will  produce  abundantly  for  many  months  in  the  solar 
greenhouse. Even people in longer growing season areas can benefit from the longer productiv(cid:173)
ity of warm season food crops inside the solar greenhouse. The summer greenhouse also offers 
an  opportunity  to  maintain  perennial/perpetual  crops,  many  of  which  are exotic  in nature. 
Those include artichokes, fig trees, citrus, etc., or the more common New Zealand spinach and 
herbs. 

On  the  other  hand,  you  may  decide  to  let  the greenhouse  rest during  the summer and 
concentrate your energies on outside food production. This may open your greenhouse space to 
houseplants  and ornamental crops, or for use as a living and storage area. If you do, you may 
want to consider shading the glass during the summer for the benefit of those living inside. (See 
Shading  in The Solar Greenhouse Environment.) But don't  get too used  to this extra space. 
Remember, come winter, this is your food producing greenhouse. 

Year-round Crop Scheduling  Charts 

Following are two general crop schedules for use in  100% unheated solar greenhouses. If 
you add extra heat and/or lights, you can extend the summer warm season crops into both sides 
of winter. 

The crops are listed only during the months in which they will have the highest productiv(cid:173)

ity.  Most crops  will  live beyond  the time periods listed  here. As mentioned  earlier,  you can 
grow  cool  season  crops  in summer or summer crops  in winter,  but  it often  means a drop in 
quantity and quality of food. Keep your own records and fine-tune your planting schedule each 
year.  The  first  schedule  is  for  areas  with  sunny  winters,  the  second  for  areas  with cloudy 
winters. The letter P designates a possible month to plant the crop. The letter M indicates the 
crop may be growing toward maturity. The letter H indicates the crop may be harvested, if 
mature  at  this  time.  Remember,  this  is only  a general  guide. There  are so many  variables 
involved in gardening that it's hard to get real specific. An especially hard winter may result in 
lower  overall  productivity.  For best  results,  study  Crop Layout and  Crops .  Also see Plant 
Propagation for information on which plants to transplant and which to seed directly into beds. 

• 
h 
0 
u 
Q 

i. 

Solar Greenhouse Food Crop Scheduling 

97 

(Receives a winter monthly averag e of 45% or more of possi Me sunshine as listed by your closest 
National Weather Service, or see Possible Sunshine chart in Appendix D.)) 

C unny Winter Schedi •la. 
E  unny Winter Schedi l ie  — 

Month 

J 

A 

J 
H 

S 
P 

PM 
P 

F  M 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 

A  M 
H 

O 
PM 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
PM 
PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
PM 
P 
PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
H 
PMH  MH 
MH 
H 
PMH  MH  MH 
P 

PM 
P 
P 
PM 
PMH  MH  MH  MH 

-
H 
PM 

PM 
PM 
H 

PM 

H 

H 

P 

P 

N 
D 
PM  MH 
H 
H 
H 

PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  PMH 
PM 
PM  M 
PMH  PMH  PMH 

M 

H 

P 

H 

J 

CROP 
Beans—Broad, Fava 
Beans—Bush 
Beans—Pole 
Beans—Lima 
Beets 
Broccoli 
Brussels Sprouts 
Cabbage 
Cantaloupe 
Carrots 
Cauliflower 
Celery 
Chinese Cabbage 
Collards 
Corn Salad 
Cucumber 
Eggplant 
Endive 
Garlic 
Kale 
Kohlrabi 
Lettuce 
Mustards 
Okra 
Onions, for Bulbs 
Onions, Green 
Parsley 
Peas 
Pepper 
Radish 
Rutabaga 
Spinach 
New Zealand Spinach 
Summer Squash 
Winter Squash 
Swiss Chard 
Tomato 
Turnip 
Watermelon 
Spring Outside 
Transplants* 
PM 
*See specific schedule in Crops. 

PM 

P 

P 

H 

H 

H 
PM 
PM 

P 
P 
P 
PM 
P 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  MH 
PM 
M  MH 
M 
PMH  MH 
PM 
PMH  PMH  PMH 
PM  MH  MH 

MH  MH 
MH 
H 
MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH  MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  MH 
P 
P 
H 

PM  PMH  PMH 
MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  MH  MH 
P 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH 
PM 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
H 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
H 
PMH  MH  MH 
P 
PM 

PM 
PMH  MH  MH  MH 

PMH  MH  MH 
H 

PMH  PMH  MH  MH  MH 
PM  MH  MH  MH  MH 

PM 
PM 

P 
P 
P 

H 
H 

H 
H 

PM 

PM 

H 

H 

H 

P 

P 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
MH  MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  MH 
H 
P 

H 
PM 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PM  MH  MH 
MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 

PMH  PMH  MH  MH  MH  MH 

PM 

PM 

H 

H 

P 

P 

P 

PM 
P 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
H 
PM 

PMH  MH  MH  MH 

PM 

H 

H 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 

P 

PM 
PMH  PMH  MH 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH  MH  MH 

H 

H 
P 

H 
PM 

P 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 

PM  MH  MH  MH 

H 

H 

PM 

PM  M 

98 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

(Receives a winter monthly average of less than 45% possible sunshine as listed by your closest 
National Weather Se rvice, or see Possible Sunshine chart in Appendix D.) 

mm~m  K. loudy Winter Sched tllv""~ 

r  loudy Winter Sched 

Month 
J 
J 

P 

PM 

P 

H 

H 
H 

H 

H 

H 
H 

PM 
PM 
H 

H 
PM 

A 
P 

S 
PM 

N 
N 
PMH 
PMH 

D 
D 
MH 
MH 

P 
P 
P 
P 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

H 
PM  MH  MH  MH  MH 

F  M 

J 
MH  MH  MH  MH 

A  M 
H 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  MH  MH 
PM 
PM  M  MH 
PM 
PMH  PMH  MH 
PM 

P 
P 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
H 
MH  MH  MH 
MH  MH  MH 
H 
MH  MH  PMH  MH 
P 

0 
PMH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
H 
H 

PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  MH  MH 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  MH  MH 
PMH  MH  MH  MH 
PM 
PMH  PMH  MH 
PM 
H 
PMH  MH  MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
MH  PMH  PMH  MH 
H 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
MH  MH  MH  MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  MH 
MH  PMH  PMH  MH 
H 
PM 
PM 
PM 
P 

PMH  PMH  MH  MH  MH 
H 
PM 

CROP 
Beans—Broad,  Fava 
Beans—Bush 
Beans—Pole 
Beans—Lima 
Beets 
Broccoli 
Brussels Sprouts 
Cabbage 
Cantaloupe 
Carrots 
Cauliflower 
Celery 
Chinese Cabbage 
Collards 
Corn Salad 
Cucumber 
Eggplant 
Endive 
Garlic 
Kale 
Kohlrabi 
Lettuce 
Mustards 
Okra 
Onions, for Bulbs 
Onions, Green 
Parsley 
Peas 
Pepper 
Radish 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
Rutabaga 
PM  MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
Spinach 
New Zealand Spinach  MH  MH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
Summer Squash 
H 
Winter Squash 
Swiss Chard 
Tomato 
Turnip 
Watermelon 
Outside Spring 
Transplants* 
PM 
*See specific schedule in Crops. 

PMH  PMH  MH 
PMH  MH  MH 
MH  MH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
H 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
MH  MH  PMH  PMH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
MH  PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
P 
PM  M 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
MH  PMH  PMH  MH 
H 

H 
H 
H 
PM 
M  MH  MH  MH 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH 
MH  MH 
PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH  MH 
H 
PM 

PMH  PMH  MH  MH 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 
PM 

P 

H 
PM  MH  MH  MH 

P 

PMH  MH  MH 
P 

PM 

PMH  PMH  PMH  PMH  MH  MH 

H 

PMH  MH  MH 
H 

PMH  PMH  MH  MH 

H 

PMH  PMH  PMH  MH 

PM 

PM 

PM  M 

P 
P 

PM 
PM 

P 
P 
P 
P 

P 

P 

PM 
H 

H 

P 

PM 

H 
P 

P 

PM 

P 

PM 

P 

PM 

H 

8 CROPS 

Now that we've covered how to lay out your crops, start 
plants,  select  the  varieties  and  schedule  them  most 
efficiently,  we need to look at the specific  horticulture 
of each crop. What I say here is based primarily on my 
experience; but there are other ways to get similar good 
results.  Gardeners  are  an  individualistic  sort,  always 
finding  new  and  different  ways  to  work  with  plants. 
Sometimes  I  think  it  says  more  for  the  nature  of  the 
plants  than  of  the  people.  In Greenhouse Food Crop 
Scheduling  I  split  the  year  into two  seasons,  summer 
and  winter.  What  I call  summer  and  winter crops  are 
those  that  best  fit  into those  seasons,  producing  food 
more efficiently  during one half of the year or the other. 
The  recommendations  which  follow  are not hard 
and fast rules that must be followed to the letter. Instead 
they are starting points for your own experimentation. I 
never guarantee that anything I say is true—only that it 
works. . . most  of  the  time.  Recordkeeping  of  your 
experience  is particularly  helpful  here for your modifi(cid:173)
cations of my suggestions. 

102 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

Beets 

Winter Crops 

Each beet seed really has up to five seeds inside. A big problem people have with beets is 
overcrowding.  So be sure to thin them, or they'll never produce. Because both the greens and 
the roots are edible, you can eat your thinnings. If you eat both the roots and greens in salads or 
cooked  like  spinach,  beets  can  be  efficient  greenhouse  producers.  Just  the  roots?  Not  so 
efficient  but still good. Try golden beets, they're very sweet. If you plan to transplant beets, do 
it  while  they're  under  IVi"  tall.  Also,  beets  may  go  to  seed  after  a  cold  snap  or  in  the 
springtime,  especially  if it was a cold winter in your greenhouse.  Beets like slightly alkaline 
soils, so if you live in an acid soil area, try adding some lime or wood ash. 

Broccoli 

To prevent your crop from  maturing all at once, plant a few different  varieties at different 
times in cool bright  areas. Broccoli usually matures in 60-80 days in the greenhouse.  Before 
purchasing  seeds,  read  catalog  descriptions  closely.  Some  va(cid:173)
rieties  produce  more  side sprouts than others, and this can help 
prolong production. After you cut the main head, let it grow for an 
additional  harvest  of  side  sprouts.  On the other hand,  you may 
prefer one large head instead. So choose an appropriate variety. 
Broccoli  plants  transplant  fine  when  they're  seedlings— 
that's  the good  news. However, broccoli grown in sunny winter 
climates  may  turn  into  flowers  very  rapidly  and produce  small 
heads—that's the bad news. It prefers to mature in constant cool conditions. Because the bulk 
of the plant  is usually discarded,  it isn't  a very efficient  greenhouse food producer. But it's a 
tasty crop for fresh  winter eating. 

Brussels  Sprouts 

In the solar greenhouse, brussels sprouts are slow growers, often taking  130 days or more 
to reach maturity. So it's best to start them in early fall. If they mature in a warm environment, 
as in late spring, the taste may be bitter and the sprouts may form loose heads. This crop is best 
suited for those living in a cloudy cool winter environment. Space the plants 2' apart. They get 
tall  when  they  mature  (about  3')  so  be  careful  of  shading.  Brussels  sprouts  are  easily 
transplanted while in the seedling stage. 

When the sprouts (cabbage-like buds) are just beginning to form, pinch out the center or 
growing point at the top of the plant. This encourages the upper sprouts to form. Remove lower 
leaves and leaf stems as the plants mature. Hopefully,  you will have finished the harvest before 
warm spring weather arrives. If not, they will develop a hot, bitter taste. 

Growing Brussels sprouts is similar to growing cabbage, so see the next section for more 
details. The hybrid varieties are very productive and reach maturity a bit earlier. A good hybrid 
variety is "Jade Cross." 

Because the leaves are usually discarded, Brussels sprouts are not efficient  food producers 

for the amount of greenhouse space they require. 

Crops 

103 

Cabbage 

There  is a wide  selection  of  varieties  to choose  from.  Cabbage  falls  within  three main 
categories: early season, mid-season and late season. Usually the early and mid-season  types 
provide better total  yields  in the solar greenhouse, while the late season varieties keep better 
and weigh more, but are later to mature. You can also select the savoy leaf types which have 
wrinkled bubbly-type leaves. They taste very good and are hardy, but they tend to harbor more 
insects in the wrinkles, especially aphids. 

Cabbage transplants well in the seedling stage. Give each cabbage at least  10" -  12" of 
space. Don't cultivate too deeply, as they're shallow rooted. If your greenhouse gets very cold 
(32  F, 0°C  or below) and then  warms up again, your cabbage may begin to flower.  This is 
because  cabbage  is  a  biennial  and  the  cold  has  fooled  it  into 
thinking it is two years old. Happy (last) Birthday. Pull it up; it 
won't produce now. 

Cabbage  needs a rich soil  and  sun.  It can grow  in shadier 
areas,  but  growth  will  be  slower.  Besides  being  a good  winter 
crop,  it's  also  a  good  crop  to  grow  between  the  winter  and 
summer seasons. It's an efficient  crop for solar greenhouse pro(cid:173)
duction because almost all parts of the plant are edible. 

Rotate  areas  where  cabbage  is planted  to help  prevent  the disease  clubfoot  (a  fungus 
causing lumps on the roots), yellowing, and low yields. Clubfoot is more common in acidic soil 
areas. If you have problems with cabbage yellowing, switch to a disease-resistant variety. 

Carrots 

When  I think  of  carrots  in the solar greenhouse  I have a wonderful  memory of a cold 
cloudy winter day. My first solar greenhouse carrots were just about ready. I was giving a tour 
to a class of  beautiful  4 year-old  Head Start kids. They were smiley and awed by my plants 
growing in the dead of winter. They were full of questions and were very loving children. I had 
two on my shoulders, a few on each arm and one sitting on each foot. I managed to drag myself 
and  the children  over  to my carrot  bed  and  hollered:  "What's  this plant?"  "Onions!"  one 
shouted.  "Dandelion."  another said. A shy one, shaking  her head no, quietly mumbled,  "I 
don't  know."  "Well  look,"  I said  as I shook  a few  kids off,  moving  toward a carrot  top. 
"Iiiiitttssss  a a a a . . ."  They  were  all eyes as I pulled  it up.  "CARROT!!."  they yelled and 
screamed  in unison.  It was as if I were a magician . . . presto: a carrot. I wondered how long it 
would  have  been  before  they  learned  where  carrots  came  from  if  they  never had  seen  my 
greenhouse carrots. 

A year-round supply of home grown carrots will add a spark to food that nothing else can 

provide. There is just no comparison between home-grown and store-bought carrots. 

Carrots will fit into any empty place in your growing beds and can be planted any time of 
the year.  However,  unusually  hot weather can sometimes cause a strange  flavor  and fibrous 
texture. High amounts of manure in the soil will promote oddly shaped carrots for you modern 
sculpture  lovers.  Winter carrots  in the greenhouse  will take longer to produce than outside 
carrots, but the harvest is well worth the wait. Some winter carrots may go to seed if you grow 
them through  spring. 

104 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Carrots grow best if directly seeded into the bed, as they don't transplant well. Plant a few 
carrot seeds in any area that has some open space. Just barely cover the seeds with soil and keep 
the soil moist till  the seeds germinate.  If your soil gets crusty on top, lightly cultivate and try 
interplanting with radishes to break it up. Carrots prefer sandy soil; in heavy clay soils you may 
have better luck with the smaller varieties. I've had the best yields with standard long varieties. 
One,  known  as  Nantes  Frubund,  available  from  Thompson  and  Morgan,  was developed to 
grow under colder winter conditions.  Stokes offers  Coreless Amsterdam  which  is popular in 
Holland greenhouses. Many varieties have been developed with good disease resistance. 

The hardest part about growing carrots is thinning them out so they're at least 1'' apart. If 
they are not thinned,  they won't produce. Put on your "ruthless gardener" hat; get out there 
and thin! 

Cauliflower 

Cauliflower grows much the same as cabbage and broccoli and is subject to the same pests 
and diseases.  It takes about 50 - 70 days to mature. Tie up the leaves around the head as it is 
forming  to prevent browning of the white curd. 

It  is  not  a  very  efficient  food 
producer in the solar greenhouse, as 
much of the plant is usually discard(cid:173)
ed and the center white curd is rela(cid:173)
tively  lower  in vitamins  than cauli(cid:173)
flower's  cabbage-type 
relatives. 
Purple  headed  varieties,  however, 
contain more vitamins. 

Prolonged  hot  weather  can 
cause the head to flower rapidly and 

Buttoned-up head 

from prolonged hot weather 

Healthy cauliflower 

can also make the head button up (produce small heads). In the winter this is more common in 
high sun areas. So in sunny winter climates, cauliflower may not be the best choice for the solar 
greenhouse. Sorry for the pan review, mon cauliflower. 

Celery 

This crop is best grown where winters are long, cloudy and the greenhouse is cool. Where 
this is not the case, quality may be lacking. Warm temperatures make celery stringy and will 
trigger early flowering, ending its productive life. But a plant or two is always worth a try. Seed 
germination  is slow (3-4 weeks), and then it needs about  125 consistently cool days to reach 
maturity.  Celery  likes a relatively  wet, rich soil. Due to its exacting requirements  and slow 
growth,  it is not an easy or efficient  crop for the solar greenhouse. 

Chard  - Swiss  Chard 

Chard is a very close relative of beets. I can't say enough good things about this vegetable. 
But I'll try. It seems to have been put on the earth specifically for solar greenhouses. It tolerates 
both  high and  low  temperatures very  well. The whole plant is edible  and grows rapidly, and 
often  for a few years. It can be harvested many, many times. Incredible, eh? 

Crops 

105 

Swiss  chard  comes  in  three  main  types:  red-veined,  white-veined  and  green-veined. 
White-veined seems to be the most productive in the greenhouse. But the others do well too. 
As with beets, there are many seeds contained within each "seed," so be sure to thin when 

they come up. Space your plants 6"- 8"  apart. You can eat all your thinnings. 

Harvest by breaking off the outer leaves when they are  8"-
10" in size. Don't leave the leaf-stem  (petiole) attached as it will 
rot on the plant and harbor disease. Get it right down to the base. 
This leaf-stem  is edible (though sometimes stringy), and may be 
cooked  like  asparagus.  Chard  can  be  eaten  raw  in  salads  or 
cooked like spinach. It's good both ways. 

Chard  is  an  excellent  tasting,  nutritious  crop  in the winter 
greenhouse, but it may have a slightly bitter taste when grown as a 
summer crop. It can be fooled  into flowering  by a period of very 
cool days (temperatures  around freezing)  because it is a biennial 
like cabbage. If your chard flowers, pull it up and start again. The 
white-ribbed  varieties  seem  to  be  slower  to  flower  than  other 
varieties.  I've  had  some produce  non-stop  for three  years. (See 
photo of old chard plant.) 

Chard can produce 
for  several years 

Consider growing chard in place of spinach.  It can be harvested many more times and is 
much  less apt  to  go to  seed.  Spinach  is short-lived  and quick to flower.  By growing  chard 
instead, you'll find your space is many times more productive. 

Rhubarb chard is red-veined and very colorful  (good for Christmas). Grow it the same as 
you  would  white  or green-veined  chard  and  see  which  one you  prefer.  You  can  do  some 
interesting designs  in your growing beds by alternating red and white chard in a row.  Unlike 
true rhubarb whose leaves are poisonous, rhubarb chard or red chard's leaves are totally edible. 
Be sure your children understand the difference. 

Chinese  Cabbage 

Chinese cabbage is an efficient  food producer for areas with cool, cloudy winters. It will 
bolt (go to seed)  very rapidly when grown  in areas with a lot of winter sun. There are a few 
varieties  that  are  more  bolt-resistant  and better  suited  for  those  areas.  Stokes'  summertime 
variety is one. 

Chinese  cabbage  is  very  fast  growing,  transplants  well  in the seedling  stage,  and  will 
usually mature in 40 - 60 days. The variety "Michihli" is narrow and tall, but doesn't keep as 
well as the other "Wong Bok" types. The non-heading varieties are great for multiple harvests; 
keep picking the oldest leaves. 

I have  found  that my Chinese cabbage gets attacked by aphids and slugs where  adjacent 

crops are pest-free.  So keep your watchful  eyes out for 'em. 

Chives 

Chives are a very efficient  greenhouse  food  producer because they survive  year-round. 
Because you only harvest the green tops, the root system is never disturbed and the plant grows 
back rapidly  after each harvest. That is very different  from onions which must first be started 
from seeds or bulbs and don't even have good bulb development in the short days of winter. 

106 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

However,  I have found  that chives grow slowly in winter.  I have been able to stimulate 
winter growth  by cutting the chives to a height of  1" and then  fertilizing  them.  It brings up 
winter  production  by  a substantial  amount.  Chives  grow  well  in 5-gallon  buckets  or raised 
beds. Chives can be started from seed or from transplants obtained from outside gardens. Place 
them in a sunny spot that has rich soil. Be sure not to overwater—it will slow the growth and 
make them more susceptible to diseases. Harvest chives by cutting the slender tubular leaves at 
the base. I like to dice up the leaves, store them in a plastic bag in the freezer and then sprinkle 
them on all  kinds of  food  and salads for a great mild onion flavor.  Every greenhouse should 
have at least one clump of chives. 

Collards 

This is another crop, much like Swiss chard, that seems to be 
especially  suited  to  the  solar  greenhouse.It's  a  relative  of  the 
cabbage  and  looks like  a non-heading  cabbage.  It can  produce 
over a long period of time and tolerates warm temperatures, cold 
temperatures  and  partial  shading  quite  well.  Each  plant  needs 
about  IVi square  feet  of  growing space. Harvest only  the lower 
leaves.  After  3 - 4 months  it can  get  tall—as  much as 4'  high, 
which is good production for the amount of space it takes up. But 
then,  it may  begin  to shade  other nearby  crops,  so keep this in 
mind when laying out your beds. 

Collards are usually cooked  much like cabbage, but check out some southern soul  food 

recipes for great dishes with ham and beans. Mmmm. Give it a try, it's good. 

Corn  Salad 

This  small  plant,  used  as  a fresh  green,  is popular  in Europe.  Although  it  isn't  super 
productive, it will grow year-round in the coldest of solar greenhouses. The seeds are large and 
seedlings  transplant  well.  The  plant  fits  into  small  spaces  and  grows  close  to  the  ground 
compared to similar greens. It's great if you need a gourmet green for dinner guests. 

Cress - Curly  Cress 

Cress  is  a  small  pungent  green  that's  often  used  as  a garnish.  It's  similar  in  taste  to 
watercress, but is much easier to grow. It's quick to mature and can be harvested 20 days after 
you plant it. Eat it before it goes to seed. For a continuous supply, you'll have to do successive 
plantings. 

Edible  Chrysanthemums 

Some  people  know  this  plant  as  Chop-suey  greens.  It  has  a  wonderful  sweet,  mild, 
nut-like flavor  that is unique among salad greens. All the leaves are edible. It's a good winter 
producer and grows to a height of about 4'. Each plant needs about 2' of space when mature. 
Leaves may be constantly harvested. Always pick the older, lower leaves first. In spring it will 
provide  you  with  a beautiful  crop of  yellow, daisy-like  flowers  that are a nice addition  to a 

Crops 

107 

flower  arrangement.  It's  a beautiful,  dual-purpose  winter  plant.  Aphids,  however,  may be 
attracted to it, so be on guard. 

Fava Beans - Broad Beans 

Fava beans are cold hardy beans. They are the only beans that will produce well in your 
winter greenhouse.  They are very different  from common garden beans and grow upright on 
one thick stem. They make good use of vertical space, growing up to 5' tall, and may need a 
little support with stakes and string to remain upright. For survival situations they are valuable 
because  they  are one  of  the few  winter greenhouse crops that's 
high  in protein.  The  protein  content  is similar to soybeans, but 
they  contain  less  oil.  Hot  weather  may  spoil  their  flavor.  To 
induce  early  and  larger crops, you can pinch off  the tops when 
plants  bloom.  Seed  may  be  obtained  from  Johnny's  Selected 
Seeds, Stokes, Thompson  & Morgan,  William Dam Seeds, and 
Vermont  Bean  Seed  Company.  The  wonderful  scent  of  their 
bloom in the afternoon  is reason enough to grow it. 

However,  fava  beans  should  be eaten  with  some  caution. 
Some  people  are  genetically  unable  to  properly  digest  favas. 
Within 24 hours of eating, symptoms including  vomiting, diarrhea and dizziness may occur. 
Fortunately,  fatalities  are  rare  and  recovery  is usually  quick.  The  most  susceptible  genetic 
groups  include  people  (and  their  descendants) of  Mediterranean  countries,  also  natives  of 
Egypt, Iraq and Iran, along with some Chinese people and Blacks. Check with an allergist if in 
doubt. Those folks not listed above should enjoy fava beans with no problems. 

Kale 

Like  collards,  kale  is a member  of  the cabbage  family  and  is grown  for  its leaves and 
stems. It's not nearly as heat tolerant, however, as collards. The flavor of kale improves as the 
weather gets colder and is best after going through a few light frosts. Because frost in the solar 
greenhouse  is  usually  rare,  it  will be hard  to get  the  best  quality.  So the flavor  may be too 
pungent for some. It may be better grown outside or in a cold  frame. 

Kale is a very nutritious and hardy plant that can be harvested much like collards. Leaves 
should  be  harvested  before  they  become  old,  tough  and  woody.  Ornamental  kale,  grown 
mainly for looks, is a very colorful plant and rivals the beauty of many flowers. It is found in the 
flower section of seed catalogs. It's most beautiful  in the dead of winter. 

Kohlrabi 

This crop is like an above-ground turnip, but I think it tastes 
better  than  a tumip.  It  grows  relatively  fast  in the  winter  solar 
greenhouse  (70  days)  and  may  be  planted  close  together  (6" 
apart).There  are both purple and green varieties.  And there is a 
new hybrid variety called "Grand Duke" (available in a number 
of  catalogs)  which  can  tolerate  wide  temperature  fluctuations 
better than other varieties. Alternating hot and cold temperatures 

108 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

can cause the bulb of the kolhrabi to crack. While the purple variety is less apt to crack, it grows 
slightly slower. Cracking can be a real problem in warmer greenhouses. 

Lettuce 

Lettuce, one of the oldest greenhouse food crops, is also one of the most popular. It is the 
king (or queen—nobody  knows for sure) of the salad greens, and is very productive in the solar 
greenhouse. 

The  temperature  requirements fit well  into the winter  season of greenhouse gardening. 
The  crop  is  productive  even  at  low  temperatures  and  low  light  conditions  (as  low  as  400 
foot-candles). Warm temperatures and longer daylight hours may cause the leaf tips to brown. 

Lettuce prefers a rich, well-drained soil. When planting seeds, don't bury them too deep; 
to trigger germination they need to see a little light shining through. Lettuce prefers slightly acid 
soil; optimum  is 6.8  pH.  Keep the soil moist until the seedlings emerge.  Lettuce transplants 
well. The root system is shallow, so be careful if you are cultivating. Space the plants about4"- 5" 
apart. When you water, try not to splash soil up on the leaves. 

The  key  to  gcxxl  greenhouse  lettuce  production  is  understanding  not  only  its  growing 
requirements,  but  also the  variety  differences.  There are  four  basic types to choose  from:  leaf 
lettuce,  head  or  iceberg,  Boston or butterhead  (forming  a  loose head), and cos or romaine (an 
upright semi-heading lettuce). Leaf and loose-head lettuce are the earliest maturing varieties and the 
best choice for the greenhouse. In the winter solar greenhouse, you can expect a crop in 50 - 80 days 
depending on your temperature and light conditions. The iceberg head and cos types of lettuce 
usually take longer—up to  150 days till their harvest. 

Even within one single lettuce type there is a great difference  in growing characteristics. 
These  include the time it takes before bolting occurs, resistance to an assortment of diseases, 
the likelih(X)d of the tips burning, etc. For more information on bolting see Chapter4, Selection 
for  heat  tolerance.  Many  of  these  characteristics  are  listed  in  seed  catalogs.  It  is  these 
characteristics  that  greenhouse  growers  select  to  get  maximum  lettuce  production.  Some 
varieties,  usually  the leaf and  butterhead  types,  have been  specifically  developed  for green(cid:173)
house production. 

Most  leaf lettuce types for greenhouse production are selections from the original Grand 
Rapids  variety,  first  developed  in  1890.  Many  selections have  been  made  from  the Grand 
Rapids  variety  since  then.  Stokes  offers  three  different  Grand  Rapids  types for  greenhouse 
production.  Burpee Seeds offers  one called Greenheart.  Another variety that they sell. Green 
Ice, does well in the solar greenhouse. Waldmans Green, a darker green Grand Rapids cousin, 
is available from  many catalogs. Most seed companies sell Grand Rapids types. Grand Rapids 
is a good substitute for head lettuce lovers because it is crispy, much like head lettuce, but more 
nutritious and productive. 

Other  varieties of  tea/lettuce  include Black Seeded Simpson, Oakleaf  and Ruby. Their 
leaves are a little softer and may be prone to some bottom rot. Oakleaf is amazingly slow to bolt 
and produces for a long period. Give it a try and see how it does in your greenhouse.  Ruby is 
crisper than Oakleaf and is reddish in color, but it goes to seed quicker. Your taste buds will be 
the final judge. 

Butterhead  types  are more popular  in European greenhouses than  in the United  States. 
They  form  a loose head and have softer,  thicker leaves than the crispier Grand Rapids types. 

Crops 

109 

They're more perishable. Common garden butterhead varieties include Bibb. Buttercrunch and 
White  Boston.  Two  European  catalogs  Rijk  Zwann  and  Bruinsma  carry  many  varieties of 
butterhead types specifically  for greenhouses. Good greenhouse growing characteristics have 
been incorporated  into these varieties including slowness to bolt, shorter growing period (a few 
are even earlier than the Grand Rapids types), upright growing habit (leaves up off the ground 
for less rot) and resistance to some diseases. Stokes catalog carries two European butterhead 
types for greenhouse production. The European greenhouse lettuce varieties would be the best 
choice for the serious butterhead lettuce grower. 

There is one cos lettuce variety that is a good choice for the solar greenhouse. Crisp Mint 
sold  by  Thompson  and  Morgan  grows  upright  and  is  very  resistant  to  bolting.  It's  slower 
growing than Grand  Rapids, but its slow bolting characteristics enable you to harvest it for a 
longer period of time. It also resists bottom rotting. 

Iceberg or head lettuce can be grown in the winter greenhouse just fine, but it will be the 
slowest producer (almost twice as long as leaf types) and also the lowest in nutritional value of 
all lettuce types. How come this is our favorite, America? Leaf lettuce has up to five times the 
vitamins that Iceberg has. If you want to grow head lettuce, select the varieties that are listed as 
slow to bolt. The European catalogs Rijk Zwann and  Bruinsma,  carry a few  head or Iceberg 
lettuce varieties for greenhouse production. But I think you would be better off to learn to like 
leaf lettuce. 

Harvesting  lettuce can be done in one cut (harvesting the whole plant); or better yet, you 
can get two or three cuttings off the plant before it gets bitter or bolts. To do this, be sure to cut 
only the larger older leaves, leaving the young center leaves to continue growing. Clean off old, 
dead or broken  leaves from  the soil surface.  If you don't  they'll begin to rot and the rot may 
spread to the underside of the lettuce plants. This bottom rot can be very destructive. 

In  the  wintertime,  you  can  keep  lettuce  disease  to  a  minimum  by  providing  good 
ventilation. On a sunny day, if the greenhouse is warm enough, open a vent to the outside for a 
few minutes. Use a small fan to prevent air stagnation during the day. Lettuce is a heavy feeder, 
and it tolerates a high amount of nitrogen fertilization.  That causes very fast growth, but may 
also increase your crop's susceptibility to more diseases. 

To insure continuous production during the winter greenhouse season, it's a good idea to 
always have a few  lettuce seedlings started  for later transplanting  to fill  in empty areas  after 
harvesting other crops. 

Lettuce  is  very  productive  and  no  wintertime  greenhouse  should  be  without  it.  Start 

studying seed catalogs now. Those fresh  picked wintertime salads are such a luxury. 

Crops 

111 

Parsley  is a biennial and will often  go to seed in late spring and summer.  It is relatively 
productive  in the winter greenhouse,  and there is always  some room  for one or two parsley 
plants in any  bed.  Parsley can take up to 4 weeks to germinate.  Soaking  the seed overnight 
before planting will help it along. Warm soil temperatures (above 70° F, 21°C) will slow seed 
germination, so keep it at around 6(f F (16° C) while germinating. It does best in a sunny place, 
and can  be  brought  in  from  the outside  in fall  but  will go to seed  in spring, thus ending  its 
productive life.  It transplants easily, especially in the seedling stage. 

There are two primary varieties, curled leaf and the flat Italian parsley. Both do fine in the 
solar greenhouse,  but I've  found  it easier to get people  to try eating  the curled  leaf parsley. 
Stokes Seed  Company  now  offers  a curled  variety  known  as Unicurl.  Instead of  the  leaves 
curling out,  they curl  in. This variety will trap less dirt, making the foliage easier to wash. If 
older leaves turn yellow, the plant is in need of some nitrogen. Many people (including me) are 
allergic  to parsley  if  it's going to seed (often  in spring) even though first-year  parsley  won't 
bother them. In my greenhouse I graze on parlsey almost like a cow. 

Peas 

Whenever I've tried to get people to record greenhouse food yields by weight, I've noticed 
that it's rare to see any record of a pea harvest, even though peas are a common and productive 
crop in  the  winter  greenhouse.  The  problem  is that  peas don't  make  it to the scales  They 
usually  get eaten  first.  Maybe  I should weigh people before  and  after  they  work  around the 
peas. 

Peas are one of the best wintertime treats that a solar green(cid:173)
house can provide. They make good use of vertical space, provide 
protein,  and  are  sweet  as  candy.  But  in  sunny  winter  areas, 
they're  a  little  harder  to  grow.  Using  a  bacterial  innoculant 
powder to coat pea and bean seeds before  planting will help peas 
capture  nitrogen  from  the air.  It is available through  seed cata(cid:173)
logs.  This  innoculant  is  not  generally  needed  in soils that  peas 
have been grown in before. 

There  is a great choice  of  pea  varieties,  and  I urge you to 
experiment  with  a  few  different  ones  each  year.  Pea  varieties 
have  been  bred  for  many  different  characteristics  including: 
vining  growth,  bush  growth,  disease  resistance,  edible  pods, 
earliness, and hot weather tolerance. Most pea varieties produce 
fine in cool weather.  In the solar greenhouse, to make efficient  use of vertical space, you will 
usually  want varieties that grow tall (2'- 5')-  Disease resistance is also important, especially 
against  powdery  mildew.  Heat  tolerance  is another  important  characteristic,  particularly  in 
winter climates  with  lots of sun.  If your peas are maturing in hot temperatures (above 80  F, 
27° C), you'll probably get heavy vine growth, but few flowers, and hence few peas. Check out 
the heat tolerant varieties if this is your situation. 

Here  is a run-down  of peas that  have shown  some adaptability  to the solar greenhouse 
environment.  I have selected  them either  for their disease resistance, ability to grow tall, or 
ability to produce in warm weather. These include: 

110 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Mustard 

Mustard is a productive green for winter growing. It is related to the cabbage family and is 
very nutritious. There are many varieties to choose from, some with curled leaves, others with 
smooth leaves. Both do well in the solar greenhouse. The flavor can 
vary much among varieties, some being milder flavored than others. 
In the winter greenhouse,  you can get up to 2 - 3 plantings 
because mustard takes only 6-8  weeks to mature. Select varieties 
that are slow to bolt, especially if your area catches much winter 
sun.  Mustard  may  taste  strong  and  may sometimes bolt prema(cid:173)
turely if it is grown  in a warm environment.  However, in cloudy 
winter areas it is a prolific producer. Harvesting can be prolonged 
by cutting only older larger leaves, leaving the center to continue 
its growth. Eat it in salads or cook it like spinach. 

Onions 

Onions  are  almost  as  old  as  civilization,  originating  in  ancient  Egypt.  Onions  can  be 
grown  for  bunching  (onion greens), or for their bulbs. For bulb production,  they  need  fairly 
cool  temperatures  and  longer days. This pretty much limits growing onions for bulbs in the 
solar greenhouse to mid- and late-winter planting. The solar greenhouse is a good place to start 
onion  seedlings for later transplanting outside  in spring. As long as onion bulbs (sets) can be 
bought cheaply in the store, it might be best to utilize your limited greenhouse space for other 
crops.  You  can  use  outside  space  for  bulb production  and  store them  in a cellar  for  winter 
eating. 

Growing  onion greens  is practical all year long and easy to do in the solar greenhouse. 
They can be produced from onion sets or from seeds. Onions for greens may be planted much 
closer together than for bulbing—2" spacing will do fine. The greens can be pulled up entirely 
or cut  at the soil  for multiple harvests. When the plants begin to form  flower  buds, the plant 
should  be pulled  up and consumed.  Many varieties of onions have been developed  for use as 
onion greens, also known as bunching onions, including Evergreen, Beltsville, Hardy White, 
and White Sweet Spanish. 

Another type of onion called Multiplier or top set will work well for both onion greens and 
bulbs.  During  midsummer,  the Multiplier produces bulblets at the top of the flowering  stalk. 
These can be planted  like onion sets for growing winter greens. By fall,  the Multiplier onion 
produces 3 - 4 bulbs in the ground, which can be harvested and replanted like the top sets winter 
greens. 

Because any type of green onion takes up relatively little space and can add so much flavor 

to winter food, I highly recommend them for your greenhouse. (See Chives.) 

Parsley 

Parsley was originally put on plates to sweeten your breath at the end of a meal, but now it 
is usually used by Americans as a garnish to make food look pretty. All of us who have washed 
dishes for a living can vouch that most of it gets thrown away.  It's almost a sin. Try eating it 
instead. It tastes good, really! It's great in salads, and is full of vitamins, especially vitamins A, 
C and iron. 

Crops 

111 

Parsley  is a biennial and will often  go to seed in late spring and summer.  It is relatively 
productive  in the winter greenhouse,  and there  is always some room for one or two parsley 
plants  in any  bed.  Parsley  can take up to 4 weeks  to germinate.  Soaking the seed overnight 
before planting will help it along. Warm soil temperatures (above 70° F, 21° C) will slow seed 
germination, so keep it at around 60° F (16° C) while germinating. It does best in a sunny place, 
and can  be brought  in from  the outside  in fall  but will go to seed in spring, thus ending  its 
productive life.  It transplants easily, especially in the seedling stage. 

There are two primary varieties, curled leaf and the flat Italian parsley. Both do fine in the 
solar greenhouse,  but I've  found  it easier to get people  to try eating  the curled leaf  parsley. 
Stokes  Seed  Company  now offers  a curled  variety  known  as Unicurl.  Instead  of  the  leaves 
curling out,  they curl in. This variety will trap less dirt, making the foliage easier to wash. If 
older leaves turn yellow, the plant is in need of some nitrogen. Many people (including me) are 
allergic  to parsley  if it's going  to seed (often  in spring) even though first-year parsley  won't 
bother them.  In my greenhouse I graze on parlsey almost like a cow. 

Peas 

Whenever I've tried to get people to record greenhouse food yields by weight, I've noticed 
that it's rare to see any record of a pea harvest, even though peas are a common and productive 
crop  in  the  winter  greenhouse.  The  problem  is that  peas don't  make  it to the scales.  They 
usually  get eaten  first.  Maybe  I should weigh people  before  and after  they work  around the 
peas. 

Peas are one of the best wintertime treats that a solar green(cid:173)
house can provide. They make good use of vertical space, provide 
protein,  and  are  sweet  as  candy.  But  in  sunny  winter  areas, 
they're  a  little  harder  to  grow.  Using  a  bacterial  innoculant 
powder to coat pea and bean seeds before planting will help peas 
capture  nitrogen  from  the air.  It is available  through seed cata(cid:173)
logs.  This  innoculant  is not  generally  needed  in  soils that  peas 
have been grown in before. 

There  is a great choice  of  pea varieties,  and  I urge you to 
experiment  with  a  few  different  ones  each  year.  Pea  varieties 
have  been  bred  for  many  different  characteristics  including: 
vining  growth,  bush  growth,  disease  resistance,  edible  pods, 
earliness, and hot weather tolerance. Most pea varieties produce 
fine in cool weather.  In the solar greenhouse, to make efficient  use of vertical space, you will 
usually  want varieties that grow tall (2'- 5')-  Disease resistance is also important, especially 
against  powdery  mildew.  Heat  tolerance  is another  important  characteristic,  particularly  in 
winter climates  with  lots of sun.  If your peas are maturing  in hot temperatures (above 80° F, 
27° C) , you'll probably get heavy vine growth, but few flowers, and hence few peas. Check out 
the heat tolerant varieties if this is your situation. 

Here  is a run-down  of  peas that  have shown  some adaptability  to the solar  greenhouse 
environment.  I have selected  them either for their disease  resistance, ability to grow  tall, or 
ability to produce in warm weather. These include: 

112 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Wando:  This is not a new kitchen appliance. Available in most catalogs, it's noted for its 
ability to withstand warm temperatures. Wando peas grow up to 4' high in 60 - 80 days in the 
solar greenhouse. 

Green  Arrow:  Available  in  most  catalogs,  it  has  good  resistance  to  the  following 
diseases: fusarium  wilt, downy mildew and leaf curl virus. It grows 2'-3' tall and takes 60 - 80 
days to mature in the solar greenhouse. 

Gloriosa:  Available  through Thompson  and  Morgan.  It has good ability to withstand 
warm temperatures, grows 4'- 5' tall and matures in approximately 80 days. Yields well in the 
solar greenhouse and shows some tolerance to powdery mildew. 

Sugar Snap:  Available in most catalogs, both peas and pods are edible. Grows 5'-  6' 
high. Needs a well-lit place and approximately 80 days to mature in the solar greenhouse. It is 
susceptible to powdery mildew disease, but the great taste makes it worth a try. 

Oregon Sugarpod:  Grows 3' - 4' high. Somewhat tolerant of warm weather. Approxi(cid:173)

mately 70 days to harvest in the solar greenhouse. 

Grenadier:  Available from Burpee, it shows some resistance to powdery mildew, a rare 

and important characteristic. 

Dwarf Grey Sugar:  Available in many catalogs, I've found this edible pod variety to be 
heat  tolerant.  It  grows  to about  3'  tall  and  does best  when  trellised,  though  some  catalogs 
suggest it's not necessary. It takes about 70 days to reach maturity. 

All of the above varieties should be trellised. Chicken wire works very well, or use what 
you have on hand. When deciding where to plant peas, be mindful of the shadows the vines will 
cast on adjacent  plants. I have found  it best to run trellises on a north-south axis to prevent a 
full-day  shadow. Even a short length of trellis running 3 feet long can produce many peas. Peas 
also do well in a 5-gallon container with a teepee type trellis. Some dwarf varieties may come in 
handy  in areas where you want to grow peas but don't want shading on other crops. 

I plant two rows of peas for each trellis, one row on each side. A 2" spacing between seeds 
works fine.  You may initially have to help the peas get started up the trellis. Pea vines are very 
fragile  and frequently  get damaged during harvesting. To prevent this, pick the peas with two 
hands instead of ripping them off with one hand. Keep the vines well picked to prolong harvest. 
It seems you get slightly more total food from  the edible podded peas than from the basic pea 
varieties. Give peas a chance. 

Potato 

Potatoes are not a good choice for the solar greenhouse because they can be purchased 
very cheaply in the store at any season, and can be stored year-round in root cellars. It's better to 
utilize  limited  greenhouse  space  for  more  valuable  and  perishable  crops.  If  you  do  grow 
potatoes in your greenhouse, you can prevent many potential disease problems by planting only 
USDA certified seed (certified free of disease). Many people grow potatoes in large containers 
such as garbage cans. It is also common to grow potatoes in a light compost/soil mixture. This 
mixture allows you to lift up the compost and harvest the potatoes while the plant continues to 
grow, harvesting them as you need them. Too much light on potato tubers causes skins to turn 
green, and such potatoes can be slightly poisonous. So keep harvested tubers in the dark. 

Crops 

113 

Radish 

Radishes are fast producers when given the right environment.  Basically they are easy to 

grow, so many folks plant more than they can eat. 

Radishes like cool temperatures and moist, friable  (not compacted) soil. Most varieties do 
well  in the  winter  season.  Radishes  will  be  ready  for harvest  in about 4 weeks. The closer 
they're  grown  to  the  winter  solstice  the  longer  they'll  take  to 
mature due to the lack of light. Winter radish varieties are slower 
growing  ( 8 - 12  weeks),  much  larger  and  longer-keeping  than 
regular  varieties.  Try  different  varieties  to  find  the  degree  of 
pungency you like. 

A  common  problem  with  radishes  is  production  of  leaf 
growth with little or no root development. This can be caused by a 
number of factors,  such as prolonged warm temperatures (above 
70'  F,  21°C),  failure  to  thin  the  seedlings  (thin  to at  least  1"  apart),  too much  manure  or 
nitrogen in the soil, growing them too dry (radishes like moist soil), and growing in very shady 
areas. 

Radishes  are  a great crop  to  interplant.  Put  a few  seeds  in any empty  place  you have; 
they're a good filler. Because the seed germinates fast,  it's best just to seed them directly into 
the bed rather than transplant seedlings. 

Salsify 

This plant is also know  as the vegetable oyster. The root is cooked and used just like an 
oyster. Salsify  will grow fine in the solar greenhouse, but it needs  150 days to reach maturity. 
Don't transplant  it as that will destroy tap root development, which is what you're growing it 
for. Sandy soil is its favorite. Try just a few plants at first to see how they do, and whether they 
pass your  taste  tests. Salsify  grows fine into the warmer  months.  It is not an efficient  food 
producer due to the long growth period before harvesting, but it doesn't need much space. 

Spinach 

Spinach  has low heat tolerance and bolts very quickly.  In high winter sun areas, you are 
lucky to get much of a harvest before  it flowers.  But in cooler winter climates with less sun. 
spinach  is a good producer, though not quite as good as lettuce. 

Select  varieties that are slow to bolt; they'll produce more over a longer period of time, 
and you may get several harvests. To prolong the harvest period, pick only larger, older leaves, 
and let the smaller leaves continue to grow. 

Varieties that seem resistant to bolting include Bloomsdale Long Standing and America, 
both being generally available. Melody, a common spinach variety available in many catalogs, 
is  grown  for  its disease  resistance  to downy  mildew,  mosaic  virus  and  blue  mold.  Winter 
Bloomsdale is resistant to blight disease. Spinach transplants fine in the seedling stage and likes 
a light soil that  is somewhat  moist.  Space them 6"  apart. The best harvest and quality can be 
obtained when grown in temperatures below 60° F (16° C). 

Consider  the  much  higher  yielding  spinach  alternatives  such  as Swiss  chard  and  New 

Zealand spinach before planting a lot of standard spinach. 

114 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

New  Zealand  Spinach 

This thick-leaved spinach alternative has one great advantage over spinach: it's a peren(cid:173)
nial that doesn't die after it flowers. One plant can produce for many years. Also, the leaves still 
taste fine during flowering.  It spreads out over a bed, and it grows slightly slower than spinach 
with  cool  temperatures,  but  it's  productive  over a much  longer period,  even during  the hot 
weather of summer. 

You can make efficient  use of space by tying it to a north-south trellis. The vines are very 
delicate and break easily, so tie it up gently. By growing it vertically, it will yield much more 
per square foot.  New Zealand spinach can also be trained to hang off the edge of a raised bed, 
thereby making aisle space productive. It likes a rich soil. Seedlings transplant easily into beds. 
I have interplanted  it under taller plants with good success. 

Turnips 

Turnips grow fine in the solar greenhouse, but they also grow very well outside and keep 
nicely in a root cellar. Still, it's nice to eat a fresh turnip in the dead of winter. They take about 8 
weeks to reach harvest unless you like them smaller. You can eat turnip greens like cabbage or 
spinach. There are varieties developed to just produce greens. 

Grow turnips like radishes, but give them more space (about 3 "- 4").  Because the seed 
germinates fast,  it's best to seed them directly into the bed rather than transplant the seedlings. 
Because they grow fast and both tops and roots are edible, they're an efficient  food producer. 

Watercress 

This crop likes water, so plant it near the faucet and water it every day. Never let the soil 
dry out. If you can find it growing in the wild, transplant it carefully into the greenhouse. It can 
also be started from cuttings (see Plant Propagation). It likes to grow in a lot of organic matter. 
Don't let the plant flower; cut the flower buds off as soon as they appear. It takes 70 - 80 days to 
reach maturity from seeds, and slightly less from cuttings. Mix it in your salad to add a pepper)' 
snap. The taste of watercress may get to be too strong as warm weather appears. 

Summer  Crops 

Beans 

Fresh beans in early May? Yes, in the solar greenhouse you can have a crop that early if 

you plant in March. You may even be able to push the harvest earlier. 

There are two major  types of beans: vines, such as pole beans, and bush or dwarf types. 
The  vines  utilize  vertical  space when trellised  and can grow up to 25' high  if conditions are 
right. The problem  is finding a tall enough basketball player to pick them. Vining beans yield 
over a longer period than bush beans, but take about  10-20 days longer to reach maturity. The 
bush or dwarf  beans need no trellising, as they reach only  12" high.  You will get more total 

Crops 

115 

yield and use space more efficiently  with vining 
beans, but the bush types grow well in containers 
and do especially  well when planted toward the 
south  end  of  beds  where  little  shading  occurs. 
There  is always a place for some bush beans in 
your greenhouse. 

Three ways of supporting  bean vines 

Vining beans provide good summer shade 
when  grown over  the front  of  your  greenhouse 
mass and may prevent excess heat gain in water 
or rock storage  media. The cooler temperatures 
c 
or your shaded mass may help keep the summer 
greenhouse air cooler.  Wherever you are growing vining or pole beans, make a trellis for the 
plants to climb. Plant one seed every 4" along the trellis. To prevent shading problems among 
plants, think about where your summer shadows fall before you plant the pole beans. Running 
trellises along a north-south axis will eliminate problem shadows in most greenhouses. 

i_  J  J 

" 

i_ 1  1 

.i_ 

Bean seeds need a soil temperature of at least 60°  F (15°C) for best germination.  Lower 
temperatures  often  cause  the  seed  to  rot  in  the  soil.  A  crusty  soil  surface  also can  cause 
problems  to  emerging  seedlings.  A  mulch  will  prevent  this crustiness.  Applying  a  legume 
innoculant  (available  in most  seed catalogs) to the soil will utilize  the ability of  microbes to 
provide beans with nitrogen from the air. But this only works on beans, peas and other legumes. 
There are a few  rare bean varieties that need an insect pollinator in order to produce beans. If 
you end up with such a variety, there won't be beans produced after flowering. If this happens, 
switch to another common  variety.  But in general most pole and bush beans set fruit  without 
pollination. Scarlet Runner beans are an exception and are not recommended. 

Beans are susceptible to a number of diseases, so here are a few precautionary tips: 
•  Use disease-free  seed from a reputable seed company. 
•  Don't work among your bean leaves if they are wet. This spreads disease. 
•  Don't  soak  seeds  before  planting.  One  diseased  seed  will  contaminate  the  whole 

batch. 

•  Each season rotate beans with other crops. 
If a disease occurs, find out what it is with the help of your county agricultural extension 
agent. Then look through the seed catalogs for a bean variety that may have some resistance to 
the disease. Plant it next season. 

In the solar greenhouse, be sure not to let your temperatures get much above 9o  F (3> C). 
Such  high  temperatures  will  cause  beans  to have  lower  yields  because  the plant  may  drop 
flower blossoms. Blossom drop will also occur when you over or under-water the  plants. 

You  can  get  up to three crops of beans  in the summer  season.  I have  found  Kentucky 
Wonder  to  be  a  good  pole  bean.  The  asparagus  bean,  which  makes  foot-long  beans and  is 
cooked  like  asparagus,  has done  well  in solar greenhouses,  but  it grows  quite tall.  A great 
catalog  to  look  into  is printed  by The  Vermont  Bean  Seed  Company.  They  have the  most 
extensive selection of bean and pea varieties to choose from. 

For greenhouses in the north country, think about trying some longer season beans that are 
usually hard to grow in your outside garden. Garbanzo beans, also known as chick-peas, and 
lima beans  require at least  100 warm days to produce. There are some bush limas, however. 

116 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

that  are  somewhat  quicker.  Garbanzo beans like sandy, drier soils and their leaves look like 
locust  tree  leaves.  Garbanzos  are good eating; when cooked  they  have a great  nutty flavor. 
Have you ever tried hummus made from garbanzos? It's a delicious dip. 

Cantaloupe  and  Muskmelon 

Northern gardeners who live in short-season areas will go wild over the new experience of 
abundant  home-grown  cantaloupes  in  the  solar  greenhouse.  I  have  even  seen  cantaloupe 
production be the prime motivator in the building of a solar greenhouse! 

There are some cantaloupe varieties that are tolerant to the diseases fusarium and powdery 
mildew. Powdery mildew can be a big problem in solar greenhouses, and when this is the case, 
mildew  tolerant  varieties will  really  help production.  I've  also had particularly  good  luck in 
getting quick production with some of the earlier varieties. So in general, you should first try to 
find  varieties  with  either  tolerance  or  resistance  to  mildew,  and  then  choose  the  quickest 
maturing  among  them.  It's wise to test a few  varieties each year.  My very favorite  is Israeli 
Cantaloupe (PMR), available from Porter and Son Seedsmen. 

I've found  it's best to build a sturdy 5' or higher trellis. Grow 
one plant every 3' along the length of the trellis. It might be a good 
idea to plant a few  seeds in each spot and later thin to one hardy 
plant. To minimize shading problems, run the trellis north-south. 
Cantaloupes  like  a  rich  soil  that's  full  of  decomposed  or(cid:173)

ganic  matter and on the wet side. Be sure the soil is friable  (not 
compacted) or on the sandy side. When flowers begin to appear, 
start  your pollinating  procedure  to ensure  fruit  set  (see Pollina(cid:173)
tion).  Remember, no pollination, no fruit. 

As the  fruits  begin  to develop on the vines, they  will need 
support.  The fruits  can get so heavy they will rip the whole vine 
off the trellis. When a fruit  is about tennis-ball size, slip it into an 
old nylon stocking and tie it securely to the trellis. Don't strangle any vines. If stockings aren't 
available, rig a supporting sling out of cheesecloth or burlap. To determine if the fruit is mature 
and ready to eat,  rotate it slightly; if it separates from the vine, it's ready.  If it doesn't, wait a 
few  days.  It's worth the wait. Expect to be half way to heaven when you eat your cantaloupe 
and share it with your friends.  Please invite me over to help you evaluate the quality. 

Cucumbers 

Cucumbers are probably one of the most productive summer season crops you can grow. 
For  best  greenhouse  production,  grow  the  European  seedless  cucumbers,  also  known  as 
greenhouse  forcing  cucumbers.  Their  fruit  resembles  the burpless cucumber,  growing  up to 
20"  long. They are very high yielding, thin skinned, seedless (parthenocarpic) very sweet and 
without  bitterness.  The  nicest thing  about them  for the greenhouse grower  is that they don't 
need pollination and will freely  and continuously set  fruit. 

The European cucumber is for fresh eating only and won't pickle very well because of its 
thin skin.  If you plan to grow any traditional cucumbers, they will need pollination. This isn't 
easy to do with the tiny cucumber flowers, but it can be done (see Pollination). 

Crops 

117 

Many  American  seed  catalogs  now carry  the  European  cucumber seeds, which  are  more 
expensive  than  most  other  seeds.  However,  the  greater  yields  make  the  price  worth  the 
investment.  There  is one  way  around  the  high cost of  hybrid  seed—see  '"cloning  around"  in 
Plant Propagation  for  a further explanation.  Stokes and Herbst seed catalogues sell a very nice 
selection  of  different  European  cucumber  varieties.  Also, two seed catalogues  from  Holland. 
Bruinsma  and  Rijk  Zwaan,  each  carry  an  extensive  selection  of  cucumber  seed  for  the 
greenhouse. 

Don't  try  growing  both  regular  and  European  cucumbers  in  the  same  greenhouse, 
especially  if there  are any  pollinating  insects around.  If the European cucumber plants  receive 
any pollen, they will  likely grow  misshappen,  odd-tasting,  bitter fruits  with seeds. Yuk! 

When  selecting  a European  cucumber  variety,  read  about the characteristics of each  and 
try  to  grow  the  one  best  suited  to  your  particular  environment.  Some  will  tolerate  higher 
temperatures better,  while others are more tolerant of lower temperatures. Other characteristics 
you can  choose  from  include: darker fruit  color,  shorter or longer fruits,  longer shelf  life,  and 
tolerance  to  some  diseases.  Toska  is  a good  variety  for  beginners  because  it  is  forgiving  of 
pruning  mistakes.  Most  varieties  have  only  female  flowers  but  a  few  also  have  some  male 
flowers.  Male  flowers  don't  produce  fruit,  and pollination only causes production of seeds and 
lower quality  fruit.  For these  reasons,  male flowers  should  be pruned off.  (See Pollination  to 
identify  the male  flower.)  If seeds do form in your European cucumbers—not  common—don't 
bother planting  them.  They  will  not grow  into European  cucumber  plants because  such  seeds 
rarely breed  true. 

Because  the  seed  is so costly,  don't  waste even one.  Here  is the best  method  I know  for 
starting  European  cucumbers:  plant  one  seed  into  a  peat  pot  with  a  soil  mix  rich  in  organic 
matter.  New  potting  soil  is best.  Maintain  a soil  temperature  of  at  least 75° F (24° C)  for  best 
germination  and keep the pots in a well-lit place after germination. Make sure the pots are moist 
at all times,  but  not  soggy.  Never allow them  to get dry.  If you  plant two seeds in one pot  and 
both  come  up,  usually  one  plant  must  be  sacrificed  unless  you're  a  pro  at  untangling  roots 
without  doing  damage.  For this  reason  (and  the high  cost  of  seeds)  it's best  to plant only  one 
European seed  per pot. 

When  the seedling has 4-5 leaves,  it can  be transplanted.  Poke a hole in the bottom of the 
peat  pot to ensure  quick  root development  after  transplanting.  It's best to transplant  into  moist 
soil.  Cucumbers  need  at  least  2'  of  soil  depth  that  is well  drained,  very  high  in  decomposed 
organic  matter  and  a pH  of  6.5-7.0.  Space  plants  about  2 '-  3'  apart.  Cucumbers  enjoy  high 
amounts of nitrogen in the soil but not high amounts of  salt. If salt damage occurs (indicated by 
leaf tips browning),  leach out the salt with a few heavy  applications of  water. 

Although  cucumbers  have  a  high  water  requirement,  excessive  watering  may  leach  out 
many  of the needed  nutrients from  the root zone. A mulch,  however,  will help conserve  water 
in the soil, prevent  excessive soil temperature fluctuation,  and help prevent  loss of nutrients. A 
feeding  of nitrogen when the plants are 5' tall is helpful  (see Getting  To the Roots  for sources of 
nitrogen). 

Cucumbers  prefer  air  temperatures  of  70°-90°F  (21°-32°C)  with  optimum  growth  at 
85° F  (30° C).  Wide  temperature  fluctuations  can  adversely  affect  flavor.  High  temperatures 
can  also cause misshapen  fruit. 

118 

The  Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Cucumbers also like high  levels of light, so growing  in the 
shade  will greatly  reduce  yields.  If you  are  watering  with cold 
water,  try  to  warm  it  up  to  60° F  (15°C),  if  possible  because 
colder water slows growth.  As with most crops, morning water(cid:173)
ing is best. Avoid getting the plants wet when watering. Ventila(cid:173)
tion will help prevent excess humidity levels, so make sure there 
is good air flow around the leaves during the day. 

The European cucumber can be grown up a trellis but is most 
productive  when  grown  up a suspended  cord or twine hanging 
from  the ceiling. As the plant grows, the main stems are loosely 
wound around the twine. Prevent any bending or pinching of the 
main  stems.  If needed,  plastic  clips, available  from  many seed 
catalogs, may be used to attach the vines to the twine. Anchor the twine to the base of the plant 
by tying a loose knot that will not slip or strangle the stem. Twine may also be anchored to a 
small stake in the ground near the plant. 

To train the plant for the best yields and use of space, prune side shoots, or laterals. There 
are a number of ways this can  be done (see illustrations). One is to cut off any side shoots or 
suckers  at  the first 4  leaf  axils. The  next  8-10  shoots  should  be cut down  to one leaf each, 
allowing  only  1  or 2 fruits  to form  here. The remainder of the shoots should be trimmed to 2 
leaves each.  Plants are usually trained to 7'  (it's hard to pick them any taller), at which point 
you can train the leader back toward the ground, winding it down an adjacent twine. You may 
want to pinch the leader at 7' and then select 2 shoots at the top to train back toward the ground. 
These plants are so eager to produce fruit that they'll often start setting cucumbers at just a 
few feet tall. For a taller, more mature, healthy plant, prune all fruit occurring within 20'' of the 
ground before  it develops because these early fruits can drain or stunt the plant. 

For best production, you must keep the fruit well picked. If too many fruit are sitting on the 
vine  at  the  same  time,  all  the  new  fruits  forming  will  begin  to  shrivel  and  die  just  after 
flowering.  That's  not what you're  after. 
The more you pick, the more you get. 

In Japan and  Europe people are ex(cid:173)
perimenting with the grafting of European 
cucumbers  onto  rootstocks  of  a  gourd, 
usually Cucurbitaficifolia. This has been 
found  to greatly  increase  yields and im(cid:173)
prove  disease  resistance.  The  grafted 
plants  begin  producing  fruit  earlier  and 
can tolerate a lower soil temperature. The 
only drawback noted so far is a possibility 
of the transmission of a virus disease while 
grafting.  Keep  your eye on news of this 
experiment  for  future  solar  greenhouse 
cucumber production. 

European  cuke  pruning 

Because European  seedless cucumbers have thin skins, moisture is rapidly lost from the 
fruits.  So to prevent wilting, it's best to wrap the fruits  in a plastic bag and place them in the 
refrigerator as soon as they are harvested. They're so sweet; no wonder this'is the only type of 
cucumber that Europeans eat. 

Crops 

119 

Eggplant 

Eggplant  does  well  in the summer season.  The seeds need 
warm soil temperatures to germinate (75°-85°F) (24°-30°C) and 
each  plant  needs  about  IV2 square feet of growing space. Egg(cid:173)
plants like a rich soil with a high level of moisture. To ensure good 
fruit formation, practice pollination (see Pollination). Some var(cid:173)
ieties  need  pollination  more  than  others.  The  types  that  grow 
long, thinner  fruit  such as Ichiban,  need less pollination; they'll 
often set fruit without any pollination at all, or like tomatoes, with 
just  a  tap  to  the  flowers  with  a  stick.  When  it  comes  time  to 
harvest, do it before the fruits lose their glossy appearance. 

Eggplants are in the tomato family and are susceptible to many of the same diseases. So 
they aren't  a good  rotation to follow  a tomato or pepper crop. Grow one plant for every two 
people you are feeding  . . . unless you're addicted to eggplant. 

Husk Tomato - Ground Cherry - Strawberry  Tomato 

The husk tomato is a close relative to the true tomato. A lower growing plant, it produces a 
unique tasting and very sweet fruit within a leafy husk. Each plant should be 1 xh'- 2' away from 
other plants. Grow them much like true tomatoes. Requiring about 70days to harvest, the fruits 
are ripe when they turn gold, but because husk tomatoes don't utilize vertical space very well, 
your vertical space can probably be better utilized with a more productive crop. They are used 
for fresh eating, sweetened as a desert or made into taco sauce. 

Jerusalem Artichoke  - Sun  Choke 

This  is  a  sunflower  that  produces  potato-like  tubers.  It has  no  relationship  to the  true 
artichoke.  It  grows  about  6'  -  8'  tall.  Although  the  plant  will  grow  and  produce  in  your 
greenhouse,  it  is  not  an  efficient  food  producer  for  the  amount of  space  it requires.  When 
planted outside of the greenhouse adjacent to the glass, it can shade the front of the greenhouse 
and thereby moderate summer temperatures. 

Luffa  - Vegetable  Sponge 

Luffa,  in the squash family,  will grow abundant vines up just about anything. It needs at 
least  100 warm days to reach maturity in the greenhouse. The flowers  need pollination to set 
fruit; follow the procedure for squash. When the fruits are immature (5"- 6" long) they may be 
eaten like summer squash. But if you let the fruits mature, they should be dried, peeled and used 
as bathing sponges. The luffa  likes high temperatures. They aren't a good choice for smaller 
greenhouses because they require so much space. I have seen them grow to the top of a 15' high 
trellis. You may want to start them early in a peat pot in a warm place in the greenhouse for later 
transplanting into your summer garden. 

120 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Mushrooms 

Grocery  store  mushrooms  are possible, but  difficult  to grow  in dark areas of  the solar 
greenhouse because they require very exacting conditions which are generally hard to control. 
For this reason I don't recommend planting mushrooms in your greenhouse. Chances are slim 
that  you'll  have  anything to harvest.  But it is common to see mushrooms (not the cultivated 
types) popping up all over.  I've  had edible mushrooms come up in some growing beds in the 
greenhouse  where none were planted, but before eating them, I first had a local expert tell me 
they were closely  related to the cultivated mushroom Agoricus campestris and assure me they 
were OK to eat.  In 5 square feet  we harvested more than 20 pounds from  under the broccoli. 
They were good eating. 

If you have wild mushrooms come up spontaneously, don't eat them until you've had an 
expert  positively  identify  them.  I've seen wild poisonous mushrooms growing in beds where 
people had planted edible mushrooms. It can get a little scary. Better safe than sick or dead. 

If you are interested in growing wild, edible mushrooms, a book on the subject. Growing 
Wild Mushrooms by Bob Harris, is published by Wingbow Press. It covers a wide variety of 
mushrooms and gives directions for culturing and cultivating them. If you want to try growing 
the grocery  store type, follow the instructions that come with the spawn (available from many 
seed catalogs). 

Okra 

Although okra  is hard to grow in short-season areas, it usually does fine in the summer 
greenhouse season. It will be new to many northern gardeners, except those who were raised in 
the South where it enjoys great popularity. This relative of cotton and hibiscus is often  used in 
soups or it is sliced and fried.  I enjoy it pickled with hot peppers. 

Okra varieties differ considerably. Height can vary from 5'-10'.  Pod size varies in length 
and  width.  Varieties  also  differ  greatly  in pod  shape  and  color,  leaf  shape,  and  flowers.  I 
haven't had a chance to test all the many varieties, but what I've grown have produced well. It 
seems that  the taller  plant  varieties produce  more total yield,  but the dwarf  varieties (which 
grow 4'-5' tall) also do nicely in the greenhouse. 

Before planting, be sure your soil is not too rich in nitrogen. An excess will cause heavy 
leaf production at the expense of flower and pod production. Overwatering may also cause this 
problem.  Seed germination  will be faster  if the seed is soaked overnight. Okra likes a sunny 
place  and warm  temperatures  and  should be spaced about  1' apart.  It transplants fine in the 
seedling stage and does well interplanted with other crops. 

The  immature  pods, which are what you harvest,  begin to develop after  flowering.  The 
okra flower is one of the most beautiful of all vegetable flowers. It needs no hand pollination to 
set harvestable pods. Harvest begins about 70 days after planting. Production will slow greatly 
with the cooler temperatures of fall. 

Peppers 

Peppers, in the same family as eggplants, tomatoes and tobacco, grow best in full sun and 
warm temperatures. They like a moderately rich, well-drained soil. Each plant needs approxi-

Crops 

121 

mately 4 square feet unless the variety you have is a smaller, dwarf type. Being a relative of the 
tomato, the pepper, unfortunately,  is susceptible to many of the same diseases as the tomato. 
Cayenne and bell peppers can grow as high as 4' and often benefit from staking. This will 
prevent the plant from  falling over, will promote vertical growth, arid will increase your yields 
per square foot. As with staking any plant, use a piece of soft cloth to loosely tie up the plant and 
prevent stem damage. 

Pepper seeds can take as long as 9 weeks to germinate. For best germination and seedling 
growth,  place  them  in a  warm  (at  least  65°F  [18°C])  sunny  place.  However,  hot  summer 
temperatures above  100°F (38°C) can damage pollen and prevent fruit set. Also temperatures 
below 60°F (16°C) will greatly slow fruit  production.  High levels of nitrogen in the soil can 
cause luxuriant  leaf  growth at the expense of fruit  production,  so be alert  if you suspect this 
problem.  Although  peppers  do  best  in warm  temperatures,  I  have found  that  they  actually 
overwinter better than a tomato and will even produce a few fruits in the dead of winter. 

There is a wide variety of peppers to choose from including: bell peppers, which produce 
sweet large fruits; cayenne peppers which are usually slim, pointed fruits  ranging in hotness; 
pimiento  peppers  that  are  sweet,  slightly  pointed  peppers  used  for  canning  and  stuffing; 
tabasco, that are usually hot peppers, slim or tapered; and celestial peppers that are hot  fruits, 
produced  upright,  up to 2"  long, and often  used  as ornamentals.  Bruinsma  Seed Company 
from  Holland  offers  a few  bell  pepper  varieties  developed  for the greenhouse  environment. 
They are somewhat disease tolerant and grow taller than standard varieties. As most peppers 
mature,  they  change  color  from  green  to  purplish  to  red.  Peppers  benefit  from  high  soil 
moisture levels until fruits begin to mature. At that point, cut back on water somewhat. 

Squash - Summer  squash 

Summer  squash  includes  zucchini,  patty  pan, gold,  yellow  squash, etc.  It is known  as 
summer squash  because  the  fruits  are harvested  immature  in the summer and  usually  eaten 
fresh. Winter squash, on the other hand, is allowed to mature and can be stored into the winter. 

Most available  summer squashes are bush varieties. There is a wide range of varieties; 
some grow more compact, some are more open. I have found the straight neck and crook neck 
yellow squash very prolific producers, but it's hard to keep on top of their needed pollination. 
Summer squash yields abundantly  in the warm solar greenhouse, but when temperatures 
consistently drop below 55° F (13° C), it lives but doesn't produce much. Seed may be started in 
peat pots and transplanted as bed space becomes available. It may also be planted directly into 
the bed. 

Squash  likes  soil  rich  in well-decomposed  organic  matter. 
Each plant will need at least 9 square feet by the time it's ready to 
produce. (While it is still small you can often sneak a few radishes 
into the area the mature squash will soon occupy.) It can also be 
grown in 5-gallon containers in a very rich soil mix, one plant per 
container.  Plant  squash  in  a warm place that  receives  plenty of 
light.  After  the plant  has started fruit  production,  it will  benefit 
greatly  from  a soil  feeding  such as manure  tea.  However,  if the 
plant shows any signs of salt damage, avoid this practice. Though 
most summer squash are classified  as a "bushy plant,"  I've had 
luck  making  them  grow  up a thick,  suspended  string.  After  the 

122 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

stem is about 2' long, I lift the tip of the plant so the whole stem is vertical. (Be very gentle now, 
the stem cracks easily.) Now wind the string (with a little slack) down through the squash, and 
loosely tie it to the base of the plant or anchor it to a ground stake. By growing them vertically 
you can use space very  efficiently. 

A  relatively  new  variety  of  summer  squash  known  as  Gold  Rush  (a  golden  type of 
zucchini),  is  very  resistant  to  environmental  stresses  of  all  sorts  including  overwatering, 
underwatering, heat and cold. And it is also tolerant to powdery mildew. Gold Rush is available 
from  most seed catalog companies. 

Any  summer squash you grow will need pollination,  so be sure to read Pollination for 
details.  If you see any varieties that are listed as being predominantly female  flowering, pass 
them  by because you will need male flowers to pollinate all the female  fruits.  During cooler 
periods a much lower percentage of male flowers is produced, making it difficult  to pollinate. 
On  the  leaves  of  many  zucchini  squash  you  may  see  small,  angular,  whitish-colored 
splotches. This is not a disease, but a common characteristic of summer squash. Don't  confuse 
it with powdery  mildew, a white powder-like disease found  in random, round splotches. See 
Pests and  Diseases. 

Harvest most summer squash when they are relatively small (8" long for zucchinis). This 

is when they're the sweetest. And the more you pick, the more they'll produce. 

Winter  squash 

Winter squash  includes many of the well known  "storage"  squashes such as butternut, 
buttercup, hubbard, pumpkin,  acorn and spaghetti squash. They are considered mature when 
thumbnail pressure doesn't mark the skin. If stored properly (50°F [ 10°C]), they will keep for 
many months. These squashes usually grow vine-like, but some bush varieties are available. 
All non-bush varieties should have a trellis to grow on. 

If you are trellising winter squash, place one plant every  12 square feet. If you have to tie 
up the vines, as usual use soft pieces of cloth to avoid strangulation of the stems. These vining 
varieties  can  really  spread,  so you may have to prune back some of the vines to prevent the 
conquest  of  your  sunspace.  Bush  varieties  are  more restrained  in their growth  and  may be 
grown in 5-gallon containers. 

Winter  squash  is  a  heavy  feeder  and  benefits  from  soils  rich  in  decomposed  organic 
matter.  It  requires  pollination  to  set  fruit,  and  needs  100-150  warm  days  before  fruit  is 
produced. Greenhouses enable people living in the very short season areas to produce the long 
season winter squash where they can't get the squash to mature properly outside. 

You  can  also eat your  winter  squash before  it matures,  like summer squash. This will 
increase your total yields, as the more you pick from  it, the more squash your plant will offer 
you. Immature squash won't keep long so use it within a few days. For best quality, store it in 
the  refrigerator. 

Northern gardeners may also use the greenhouse to start winter squash inside for outside 
transplanting.  Whenever  transplanting  any  squash,  use  larger peat  pots that  can  be planted 
directly into the ground—their roots are sensitive to naked transplanting. 

Crops 

123 

Tomatoes 

As in outside gardens, tomatoes are probably the most popular greenhouse crop. I think 
it's because tomatoes bought at the store are often  low in quality and high in cost. It is hard to 
beat a home grown  vine-ripened,  sweet flavorful  tomato.  Anything else is a poor substitute. 
Outside garden tomato production techniques will work in the greenhouse, but using methods 
specifically  developed for the greenhouse will give you even better yields, less problems with 
pests and diseases,  and  most  important—better  quality  tomatoes. The  advantage of  a solar 
greenhouse crop is that you can produce tomatoes earlier and for a longer period; and they'll 
usually be bigger than those grown outside. Because tomatoes are so perishable, they are often 
very expensive to purchase. The greenhouse provides a great alternative. 

There's such  a wide range of characteristics  in the many tomato varieties available that 
choosing the best ones can make a large difference  in fruit yields, quality and overall growing 
success.  Tomato  varieties  have  "bush"  growing  characteristics  (called  "determinate")  or 
"vining"  characteristics  (called  "indeterminate").  The  indeterminate tomato has a growing 
tip that's capable of growing indefinitely. The determinate tomato, 
on the other hand,  will eventually produce a flower cluster which 
"tops off'  the growing point, producing a low, bushy plant. The 
determinate  tomato  commonly  is  used  on  large  acreages  with 
mechanical  harvesting  and  by  home gardeners  who like smaller 
and more manageable  plants  and early production.  In the green(cid:173)
house the bush tomato is best grown in containers. Vining tomatoes 
can be trained to grow vertically, and will have higher total yields, 
especially in raised beds, so they're best for maximum greenhouse 
production.  In the catalogs, you'll find many other characteristics 
to choose  from  besides bush and vine. These include tolerance of 
wanner and cooler temperatures, resistance to cracking, fruit size, 
earliness, coloring and disease tolerance. 

Tomatoes are a warm season crop and grow best at temperatures between 65°F and 80°F 
(18°-27°C).  Growth  slows  greatly  at  temperatures  above  95°F  (35°C)  and  below  50°F 
(10°C).  It isn't hard to keep a tomato plant alive down to 32°F (0°C), but it won't grow and 
may look  sickly due to the great stress  it's under.  Along  with warm temperatures, you must 
have full  sun striking the plant for much of the day; so leave the shady sections of your solar 
greenhouse for other crops. 

Tomatoes  do  best  in  a  well-drained  soil.  And  be  sure  there  is plenty  of  decomposed 
organic matter in the soil. It is important to keep phosphorus levels high, especially for fruit and 
flower formation.  Bone meal is an excellent source as it provides not only phosphorus but also 
calcium, which helps prevent the tomato disorder called blossom end rot. Do a soil test to see 
exactly what your soil needs. Tomatoes are sensitive to a buildup of soluble salts, so if you use 
chemical fertilizers,  avoid those that contain any chlorine or sodium, or high amounts of raw 
manures. Tomatoes need pollination in order to properly set fruit. Please turn to Pollination for 
further  instructions. 

To prevent the spread of disease, be sure to wash your hands with soap before  handling 
any tomato seed or plant. Seed can be sown into a peat pot or flat. In flats, don't sow seeds too 
close together; crowded plants are more susceptible to disease. One seed every  1W  is usually 

124 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

adequate. In peat pots sow 2 seeds per pot and pinch out one if both germinate. Be sure to pinch 
because  pulling  out  seedlings  injures  the  remaining  plant's  roots.  Germination  is  best  at 
75°-85°F (24°-30°C). After germination, seedlings need full sunlight to prevent stem elonga(cid:173)
tion.  The  usual  soil  temperature  for  growing  seedlings  is 65°F  (I8°C).  It has been  found, 
however, that seedlings exposed to "cold treatment" produce as much as 25% more total fruit. 
But to do the cold treatment you need good control of temperatures. Here's the procedure for 
cold treatment of tomato seedlings. 

After the first true leaves emerge, reduce the soil temperature to 52°-56°F (11 °- 13°C) for 
10 days  (sunny  conditions)  or 3 weeks  (cloudy conditions).  Try to maintain  optimum  light 
during the cold treatment period to prevent stem elongation. A cool bright corner of the floor in 
your solar greenhouse or a cool south-facing  house or garage window may provide the cooler 
temperatures and light. Check it with your thermometer. The "cold treatment" is an easy way 
to increase your yield. 

Tobacco, a relative of tomatoes, is a carrier of the disease called tobacco mosaic virus, 
which smokers can spread when working with tomato plants. Milk helps prevent transmission 
of  virus diseases, so spray the seedlings with skim milk before transplanting.  After the spray 
dries,  the plants will be protected  from  viruses for about  12 hours. Again, always wash your 
hands  with  soap  before  transplanting.  Transplanting  tomatoes  is  a  job  best  reserved  for 
non-smokers. 

Tomatoes  need  less  water  than  cucumbers  but  should  not be so dry or hot to become 
wilted. Be sure to water at regular intervals as irregular watering will promote blossom end rot. 
Mulches  help  to  lessen  any  type  of  water  stress  and  will  buffer  widely  fluctuating  soil 
temperatures  and help prevent this rot. See Pests and Diseases for more information  on both 
blossom end rot and tobacco mosaic virus. 

Space  each  tomato  plant  at  least  2'  apart.  Tighter  spacing  increases  the  incidence of 
disease.  In  areas  of  many  cloudy  days,  it might  help to space  your plants  wider to provide 
optimum light penetration. And I've found that tomatoes receive the most light when rows are 
planted  north-south. 

To best utilize greenhouse space, prune or train your plants. 
Greenhouse tomatoes can grow as high as  10' plus, and if prop(cid:173)
erly trained can yield all the way up the vine. Pruning should be 
done  only  to  "greenhouse  variety"  tomatoes  or those  listed as 
indeterminate or vining.  Never prune bush or determinate vari(cid:173)
eties.  As with  transplanting  and  seed  sowing, before  pruning is 
begun wash your hands with soap to prevent the spread of disease. 
Plants  should  be  trained  to  one or  two  main  stems.  This 

involves pinching out side growing points, or suckers (see illus(cid:173)
tration). These side shoots are found directly above a main leaf at 
the crotch where the leaf stem (known as the petiole) attaches to the main stem. If these are not 
pruned  early,  they will  enlarge  rapidly  and  soon be hard to distinguish  from  the main stem. 
Begin pruning as soon as the first side shoots appear, and do it at least every 5 days. After plants 
are  8'-10'  tall, prune the tip of the main stem to hasten development of the last fruits.  Many 
people prefer  growing tomatoes with two growing points per plant in a V-shape. To do this, 
follow the above procedure but early on let one sucker survive pruning at about  1' and become a 
second  main  stem.  Keep this second  stem pruned  as you did in the single stem method (see 

Crops 

125 

illustration).  Space  plants at about 3' apart using this system. To prevent spreading disease, 
always prune any plants suspected of disease last. You don't want to spread it with your fingers. 
To support the plant as it grows, attach it to a long sturdy pole buried 2' deep in the soil, 5" 
from  the  seedling.  As the plant gets taller,  tie the stem to the pole with a soft  strip of cloth. 
Tying it too tight will strangle the plant and prevent it from growing any taller. Another slightly 
better method that's commonly used is to hang some plastic twine or soft thick string from the 
ceiling directly above the plant. Tie the end of the twine (not a slip knot) to the base of the  plant, 
leaving  slack  in  the  loop  (see  illustration).  Then,  as  the  plant 
grows, begin to wrap the plant around the string. Begin with some 
slack in the length of the string as it will be taken up when the plant 
gets tall.  You  can  also anchor the string to a small  stake  in the 
ground rather than to the plant,  which will prevent strangulation 
of  the  stem.  Outside  gardeners  have  popularized  growing  to(cid:173)
matoes  in  round  wire  cages.  This  method,  though  not quite as 
efficient  as  the  training  methods  outlined  above  works  in  the 
greenhouse and  is simpler for  novices. In the greenhouse, how(cid:173)
ever,  make your wire cage taller (about 6' high) and about 2' in 
diameter. 

Don't  remove  leaves covering  the fruits.  They prevent the 
sun from heating the fruit,  which would cause cracking. Ventila(cid:173)
tion is very important in controlling tomato diseases. Sometimes 
it helps to cut off some of the  lower leaves of a tall tomato plant to 
get better air circulation under and through the plant. Keep at least 5xh' of vertical leaf area on 
the plant  and,  except  for  suckers,  never prune  leaves above any blossoms or forming  fruit. 
Don't get too carried away with pruning; remember, each leaf is producing energy and sugar 
for the plant and for fruit  formation. 

-  ' 
Stringing tomatoes 

'" 

Sweet  100 is one of the few  cherry tomatoes that grows indeterminately.  It bears  large 
clusters of fruit like grapes. The Sweet  100 fruits are as sweet as candy, rich in vitamin C, and 
seem to be quite cold-tolerant. 

I'm sure you'll want to test your greenhouse's winter tomato production ability. I suggest 
that you try to overwinter a few of your tall healthy full tomato plants, as well as starting some 
of the early, cold-tolerant varieties found  in northern seed catalogs. Often these early varieties 
are determinate or bush plants and should not be pruned as pruning will only lower their yield. 
Some good winter bush tomato varieties are Sub-Arties and Scotia. 

The  most  common  difference  among  tomato  varieties,  especially  those  developed  for 
greenhouse culture, is the response to diseases. Though many varieties have some tolerance or 
resistance  to many  of the common  diseases, unfortunately  there  is no such  thing as a  100% 
resistant  variety.  At  best,  one  variety  may  have tolerance  or some  resistance  to 4  separate 
diseases.  There  is  ongoing  development  of  tomato  varieties  with  resistance  to  multiple 
diseases, and each year new ones are available.  In order to select a variety with resistance to 
your plant's  particular disease, first  you must get positive identification  of the disease. Then 
consult  the catalogs.  Help can  be obtained  from  a local  plant disease clinic, usually  located 
through your nearest state land grant college or county agricultural extension agent. For further 
help in controlling plant diseases, turn to Pests and Diseases. 

126 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Watermelon 

Growing watermelons is much the same as growing cantaloupes, though I've found that 
cantaloupes generally  yield more in the greenhouse.  So cantaloupes are preferred,  but if you 
just  must  grow  a  watermelon,  start  the  seeds  in  a  warm,  bright  location.  Be  sure  your 
greenhouse maintains night temperatures well above 50°F (10°C) before you start your plants 
in spring.  Because they don't transplant very well, start them in peat pots. When transplanted 
into the bed, give each plant 8 square feet. While plants are young, you can intercrop with some 
other  plants  such  as carrots  or chard.  But as  soon  as they  start 
producing vines, they need all of their allocated space. Watermel(cid:173)
ons  like  well-drained,  sandy  soil,  high  in  decomposed  organic 
matter. 

Like cantaloupes, watermelons should be trellised  and pol(cid:173)

linated (see Pollination). It is best to run trellises north-south. Also, 
like  cantaloupes,  the  fruits  need  a  sling  so  the  trellis  directly 
supports the weight of the fruit (see the Cantaloupe section of this 
chapter). 

About  the  hardest  thing  about  growing  watermelons  is 
knowing  when they're  ripe.  You can  read all the garden books 
you want, talk to all the old experts, thump it, look for when the 
tendrils rum brown near the fruit,  count the days, etc., and still 
pick  your  one  prize  watermelon  too early or too  late.  I've  concluded  that knowing  when a 
watermelon  is ripe  is a God-given gift  reserved  for the chosen few  with the best watermelon 
karma.  For this  reason,  I always grow the smaller  icebox watermelons. They produce more 
fruits per vine, which gives the unblessed grower a better chance of catching a ripe melon. The 
smaller fruits  are also easier to support on the trellis. 

Flowers for the Food Greenhouse 

Growing  flowers  in the food  producing solar greenhouse  is often  thought to be a waste of 
space, but don't believe it. Flowers are wonderful, especially in the dead of winter. Besides being 
beautiful and real pleasure producers, they can also contribute to your overall food growing efforts. 
Flowers provide  a back-up food  source for many 
beneficial  insects.  When  predators  or  parasites 
can't  locate any insects to feed on, they will often 
obtain food from the nectar and pollen within flow(cid:173)
ers.  So the presence of these flowers may prevent 
the starvation of a beneficial insect. 

Many believe that marigolds secrete a sub(cid:173)

stance into the soil that inhibits the establishment 
of nematodes, a small destructive root worm that 
weakens plants and nasturtiums may be grown as 
a  "trap crop."  When nasturtiums age, they be-

Crops 

127 

gin to be very attractive to aphids. This attraction will draw them off other plants and onto the 
nasturtium. When many aphids are seen on the nasturtium, destroy the large aphid population 
by pulling  up  the  nasturtium  (don't  shake  the  aphids  off!)  or by  spraying  the plant  with  a 
botanical pesticide. The nasturtium is sprayed or sacrificed for the benefit of the growing beds 
or the whole greenhouse. Besides being a trap for insects, they are also edible. Their best part is 
the flower. The tail of the flower is full of nectar and has a great flavor, like a sugar-sweet mild 
radish. The sweet taste of nasturtium flowers is stimulating, and they add nice color to a salad. 

When growing  any flowers  in the greenhouse, be sure there's not an overabundance of 
nitrogen in their soil. Heavy amounts of nitrogen promote leaf growth at the expense of flower 
production.  On  the  other  hand,  bone  meal  and  high  phosphorous  fertilizers  help  stimulate 
flower production. So do what's appropriate for your plants. 

By using  outside techniques,  most common garden  flowers  will grow well in the solar 
greenhouse during the summer. But in the winter greenhouse it is important to grow only those 
that can survive the cool nights and still bloom. 

The  following  is a list of hardy, flowerng  plants for your winter solar greenhouse.  It is 
best, however, to avoid planting any of these in the dead of winter. Plant in late summer or early 
fall for winter flowers, and early in the spring for late spring flowers. Late summer planting is 
preferable.  If  winter planting  must be done, place the planted seed  in a warm  place (70°F, 
21°C) for best germination. 

Allyssum 

Good border plant; start from seed. It grows low and smells good. 

Begonia 

Provide partial shade. 

Calendula 

Blooms all winter and gets about  1' high. Always remove old blossoms. Flowers are used 

in soups. 

Carnation 

Start  from  seed  or  rooted  cuttings.  Provide  a cross  hatch 
horizontal, multilevel trellis for support. To get the largest  flow(cid:173)
ers, pinch out all but one flower bud per stem. High heat (above 
80°F, 27°C) will cause reduced growth and poor quality flowers. 
Sudden cold will also cause poorly shaped flowers.  Cut  flowers 
for  sale  to  florists,  restaurants,  etc.,  may  provide  some  extra 
income. Plants can be productive up to two years. 

Chrysanthemum 

Try starting cuttings from  store-bought  plants (see Plant Propagation). For best growth 
pinch out  the growing tips. Provide full  sun.  Flowering  is related to the length of night, and 
occurs only in fall and spring. 

128 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Geranium 

Well suited to the solar greenhouse environment, they are able to withstand very high and 
low temperatures, even on the same day. They will flower all year long and do best in full to 
partial sun. They are propagated by cuttings or seed. Cut them back if they get tall and lanky. 
There are thousands of varieties from which to choose. Different types include: colored leaves, 
dwarfs,  rose-flowered,  ivy  leaf  and  scented.  Scented  geraniums are always  interesting; the 
range  includes  rose,  lemon,  strawberry,  coconut,  orange,  apple,  pine,  chocolate,  mint, 
nutmeg,  almond and anchovy. Well, maybe not anchovy. According to one supplier, scented 
geraniums have been used as teas or for flavoring in cooking. None of the varieties have been 
reported to be toxic, but to be safe, go easy on eating geraniums. 

Geraniums have great potential in a commercial solar greenhouse. Two good catalogs for 

geraniums are: 

Cooks Geranium Nursery 
712 North Grant 
Lyons, Kansas 67554 

Marigold 

Carobil Farm and Greenhouse 
Church Road, Rt. 1 
Brunswick, Maine 04011 

Well known for their insect repellent properties, they can be 
grown  year-round  in the solar greenhouse. For interplanting and 
borders,  use  the  dwarf-French  types.  In the  winter,  marigolds 
tend to have short lives and look old much faster. Always have a 
few seedlings to plant in empty areas. For large cut flowers, grow 
the tall African  varieties. However, the African varieties don't do 
as well in the cold as do the French types. 

Nasturtium 

As previously mentioned, not only can this plant be used as a trap crop for insects, but the 
flowers are edible. Plant nasturtiums on the edges of your raised beds and let them trail over the 
edges.  Dwarf  varieties are more manageable and don't take too much space. Nasturtiums are 
also good in hanging pots. Seeds will rot in cold wet ground, so try germinating them in a warm 
place and then transplant. The Alaska variety has beautiful  leaves as well as flowers. 

Pansy 

Pansies are faithful  winter bloomers—and I'm not referring 
to a brand of insulated underwear. I've had good luck bringing in 
plants from outside in the fall. The Swiss giant varieties have long 
stemmed  blooms  that  are  ideal  for  cut  flower  arrangements. 
Majestic giants are noted for their heat tolerance. 

Crops 

129 

Snapdragons 

Having  great  potential  as  a  commercial  solar  greenhouse 
crop,  they  do  fine  in the winter  with  a great yield of  beautiful, 
delicately  scented  flowers.  The main trick  for winter  is to grow 
only those varieties that are listed for "forcing" or  "greenhouse 
culture."  Check  the  catalogs  closely.  Varieties  developed  for 
outside will grow bushy and produce few flowers in winter. Start 
seed  in early  August  for winter flowering.  Provide  a horizontal 
trellis (also see Carnations) support for straight flowering spikes. 

Cut Flowers 

A wintertime benefit of having a solar greenhouse containing flowering plants is bringing 
some of the flowers  inside to brighten up those dreary winter days. The color and scent of a 
bunch of flowers can turn the entire day around. 

Cut  flowers  remain  better  looking  for  longer  periods  if  you  practice  the  following 

procedures: 

1. Cut with a sharp knife in the late afternoon. This is when the flowers, stems and leaves 

have the highest sugar content. That's their food,  and it keeps them alive longer. 

2.  Immediately  place  in warm water  (not  hot) that  contains  1  tablespoon  of sugar and 
either 2 tablespoons of vinegar or  1  tablespoon  of lemon or lime juice per quart. The 
warm water is taken up better by the plant and the vinegar (lemon or lime juice) makes 
the water more acidic and therefore less susceptible to rotting organisms. And the sugar 
is food  for the blooms. A mixture of  1  part soda pop to  1 part warm water also works 
well. 

A Word of  Caution 

Many  flowers  and houseplants  are poisonous when eaten.  Please be sure your children 
understand what is food and what isn't. All kids go through a period when everything goes in 
the mouth. Keep any questionable plants out of reach, O.K.? 

Herbs 

Herbs  are  enjoying  a  well-deserved  increase  in  popularity.  Though  often  considered 
' 'exotic,'' don' t be fooled; for the most part, herbs really are very easy to grow. Growing herbs 
in the solar greenhouse (hopefully) will provide you with a new opportunity to leam more about 
their many amazing  properties.  Herbs can provide teas, medicines, tonics for natural health, 
home  remedies  and  fresh  flavorings  for  cooking  and  salads.  They  may  even  be  used  as 
cosmetics. Herbs also can be made into pest repellents and insecticides and they have beneficial 
effects  when  interplanted  with  food  crops (see both Crop Layout and Pests and Diseases ). 
Most of us know that food tastes better when cooked with herbs and many people now believe 
that food takes on a better flavor when it's grown adjacent to them. 

130 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Because  there  already  exist  so  many  fine 
books on herbs,  I won't go very deeply  into the 
subject.  There  are, however,  some special con(cid:173)
siderations when growing herbs in a solar green(cid:173)
house.  In  the  winter  solar  greenhouse,  most 
herbs  can  survive  and  be  productive.  But  in 
general, the most  hardy herbs for the winter are 
perennials and biennials. Tender annuals such as 
basil are the hardest to overwinter and may die in 
the  cooler  temperatures.  At the other extreme, 
the  winter  solar  greenhouses  may  not  get  cold 
enough  to trigger  flowering  in certain herbs; lavender  is a good example.  So in that case, I 
suggest  growing  the herb in a container and leaving it outside from  about October through 
December or January to trigger flowering. 

People,  especially  children,  are always pleasantly  impressed  when  you take them on a 
small tour of your herbs. I recently gave a tour to a class of first graders. When they smelled the 
mint, they said it was toothpaste; when they smelled the dill, they swore it was pickles; and the 
fennel, they knew was disguised black licorice! 

Herbs  have  great  possibilities  as  a  cottage  industry.  A  medium-sized  greenhouse can 
produce many herb plants for sale. Dried herbs and herbs processed into oils also may be sold or 
traded. An herb business could even be expanded into growing rare medicinal herbs for medical 
research.  But the best use of your greenhouse-grown herbs is for your own needs. What could 
be better than to pick fresh herbs for a Christmas dinner, to be followed with some home-grown 
fresh  herbal tea? 

Most herbs you plant to grow through the winter are best started the previous spring. That 
will  give  the  plant  time  to  produce  a  well-developed  root  system  that  will  promote  more 
productivity during the winter months. Herbs that are started in the fall and winter grow very, 
very  slowly,  taking  a long time to produce.  And as with  most  seedlings, they  are harder to 
germinate and get established in winter. 

Place perennial herbs in areas that will not be disturbed during seasonal plantings. 

Herb Processing 

Herbs may be processed in a number of ways, including drying and freezing. Many of the 
books on herbs explain this in depth. You may wish to construct a solar dryer to dry the herbs. 
Usually it is hard to get herbs to dry in the solar greenhouse because the humidity is frequently 
too high.  And they may even grow dangerous molds. So after cutting, always dry herbs in a 
place with low humidity—not in the greenhouse. 

Using your herbs fresh is a real treat. Many people have never had this opportunity and are 
familiar  only  with  dried  herbs.  When  using  fresh  herbs—prior  to  cooking,  making  teas, 
etc.—be  sure to bruise or crush them to bring out the full  flavor.It takes 4 parts fresh  herbs to 
equal  1 part dried herbs when cooking or making teas. 

Following  is  a  list  of  herbs  that  do  well  in  a  solar  greenhouse,  along  with  tips  and 
comments  on  their cultivation.  There are thousands of  herbs,  and  I list only  some common 

Crops 

131 

ones. You're encouraged to experiment and try those that aren't listed; you'll find that most will 
do very well. Why not start a few seeds today? 

Aloe  Vera 

Aloe vera is known as "the healing plant." The clear juice contained in the leaves is used 
to help heal burns and cuts, and to prevent skin wrinkles. New evidence is showing that when 
taken  internally,  it also heals many  stomach ailments. The best 
thing about aloe vera is that it seems to work. 

Growing it is easy. It is usually propagated from  side shoot 
plants  that  arise  advantageously  next  to  a  larger  plant.  Water 
thoroughly  after  planting.  Most  problems  in growing  aloe  vera 
arise  because  it's  often  treated  like  a cactus  and  kept  dry  in a 
sunny place instead of being given moderate moisture levels and 
only partial sun. Too much sun is indicated by leaves purpling or 
turning a little brown. It prefers a bright place, but not full sun all 
day long. That should be easy to find  in the greenhouse. 

This plant does well in solar greenhouses and stands up to cold temperatures. However, it 
can  show  signs  of  rot  if  it  is  overwatered  while  being  grown  at  cool  temperatures.  No 
greenhouse or windowsill should be without this amazing healing plant. 

Anise 

Anise is an annual herb that may be mistaken for a licorice stick. It's not that it looks like 
one, just that it smells like one. Anise will overwinter well in the solar greenhouse if started in 
the  late  summer  for  winter growth.  Avoid excess  nitrogen  fertilization,  as it may  inhibit or 
delay seed production. Each plant requires about  1 square foot of growing space. Outside, this 
plant  needs  a  long  season  to  mature;  inside  your  greenhouse  it  will  thrive  and  mature 
year-round. 

Basil 

This is one plant that's hard to overwinter in the solar green(cid:173)
house, especially if your winter temperatures often fall below 45°F 
(7  C). But it's still well worth planting for production during spring, 
summer and fall. There are many varieties to choose from, including 
a purple leaf variety that's as beautiful as it is fragrant. Basil does fine 
planted in either pots or beds. Give it full sun and even watering, and 
harvest  leaves  during  flowering.  Pinch  back  flowers  to stimulate 
more  leaf  production.  Each  plant  grows  to  about  l!4'-2'  high. 
According to an old tradition, you should curse the seeds as you plant 
them. I've found it's best to do my planting and cursing after paying 
my phone bill. It's great therapy. 

132 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Borage 

Borage grows larger than most herbs, so be sure to provide it 
with 2-3 square feet of growing space per plant. It will also get up 
to 3' high, even in winter.  If you grow it in a pot, make sure the 
pot is at least  12" wide. Borage produces well year-round in the 
solar greenhouse.  Its flowers  have a sweet cucumber flavor and 
when eaten, are said to make you happier with life. The leaves are 
often  made  into teas to give  a cooling effect  and  provide  some 
relief from congestion and coughing. 

Catnip 

Catnip  is a mint relative.  It is a perennial and usually  is grown from  seed, but it can be 
started from cuttings. It likes full sun. Watch out for cats because they will often destroy young 
seedlings and  anything else nearby  in their passion for this plant.  It grows year-round  in the 
solar  greenhouse  and  produces  abundant  leaves.  It  is  said  that  catnip  can  help  repel  that 
infamous greenhouse pest, the white fly.  Make some catnip tea to relax; it has a great calming 
effect  for nervous days, unless you've got a feline nature. One plant usually takes up about 2-3 
square  feet. 

Chamomile 

In the dead of winter, have some fresh picked chamomile tea 
from  your  solar  greenhouse.  To do  so  start  the  seeds  in early 
summer. The seeds are tiny, so lightly cover them with peat moss 
to insure germination. Transplant the seedlings when they are 1" 
tall. A mature plant takes up about  1 square foot of space, so each 
plant should be about 7" away from other plants. Chamomile can 
take partial sun. It is a perennial and will grow year-round in the 
solar greenhouse. To harvest, cut the flower heads and crush them 
for fresh  tea, or dry them for later use. Watch out for aphids; they 
love chamomile and are experts at camouflage. 

Chives 

Nichols Garden Nursery offers a variety developed for winter greenhouse production (see 

seed catalog appendix). 

Coriander/Cilantro 

Coriander  is  also  know  as cilantro by many  Hispanics.  It is an annual,  but  will thrive 
through  the winter in a solar greenhouse. Plants are started from  seed and do best in full sun. 
Both  leaves  and  seed  may  be  used  for  flavoring.  Growing  it  for  seed?  If  so,  avoid  using 
fertilizers high in nitrogen because high nitrogen levels will delay flowering and seed ripening, 
as well as reduce the total seed harvest. Each plant needs almost  1 square foot in which to grow. 

Next time you cook up a pot of beans or hot sauce, throw in some cilantro leaves; it adds a great 
complementary  flavor  that's  quite  refreshing.  The  leaves  smell  strong  but the flavor  of  the 
cilantro mellows when cooked. 

Crops 

133 

Dill 

Dill is an annual that is ideal for the winter solar greenhouse. It 
can be productive through both high and low temperatures, and does 
fine in partial shade. Dill plants may reach heights of up to 8' but 
there's a shorter dwarf variety called Bouquet. Each plant should be 
about  8"  away  from  any other plant.  Anticipate  its long shadow 
when you plant it. This plant can be prolific  and will easily reseed 
itself if allowed to go to seed.  If this happens, you may soon have 
thousands of seedlings sprouting, so consider harvesting before the 
seeds drop to save yourself hours of weeding. Both foliage and seed 
may be utilized, and dill leaf is excellent in salads. 

Fennel 

Except for its celery-like stalk, fennel greatly resembles dill. 
Just  about  the  whole  fennel  plant  is eaten—seeds,  leaves  and 
stalk.  Like anise, this plant tastes  like licorice.  It's a perennial, 
and is usually started from seed. It grows abundantly in the winter 
solar greenhouse and can tolerate partial shade. It grows 4'-5' tall 
and  takes up about  1  square  foot  of bed space. It's excellent as 
flavoring  in soups and salads. 

Garlic 

Garlic grows year-round  and tolerates a wide temperature range. It can be started  from 
store-bought divided bulbs. Plant about 2" deep. It doesn't take up much space so if you like 
garlic now you can have it fresh anytime. I cut the green tops off and use them much like chives 
or green onions, leaving the bulbs to produce more greens. 

Lemon  Balm 

This hardy  perennial  is relative to the mint  family,  but has 
wonderful  lemon-flavored  leaves.  It  can  be  started  with  either 
seeds or cuttings and survives solar greenhouse winters very well. 
Lemon balm needs full  to partial sun and at least  1  square foot of 
growing  space.  It  grows  about  1'  tall,  and  rapidly  becomes 
rootbound  in small  pots. This herb  makes a refreshing  tea—try 
mixing it with camomile. It's also great in salads. 

134 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Marijuana 

Marijuana is among the more commonplace "herbs" in America. Conservative estimates 
are that 20 million Americans use it regularly. More use it occasionaly. It's almost as red white 
and blue as a six-pack of beer. 

Home grown pot can eliminate the worry of smoking herbicide (Paraquat) treated leaves 
which  are  very  damaging  to  the  lungs.  It  also ends  an  association  with  dealers,  the  black 
market, the mafia and exploiters. Above all, it's free. Just one problem to consider before you 
plant your seeds . . . it's illegal. The penalty differs depending on your local laws. And getting 
caught  would kind of ruin your day, wouldn't  it? While I don't recommend  its cultivation or 
use, people often ask if they can grow a few plants in their solar greenhouse. And because many 
people will try to grow it anyway, here's some information. 

Marijuana  is a warm season crop, preferring temperatures around 90°F (32°C) and doing 
poorly  below  50°F (10°C). Seeds need a soil temperature around 70°F (21°C) to germinate 
well. Grow plants in full sun, and space them about 2' apart. They will eventually shade other 
plants,  so  placing  them  against  the  southeast  or  southwest  corner  will  help  minimize  this 
problem.  Seedling diseases are often a problem so read Pests and Diseases. 

To help promote large bud development, keep the soil high in phosphorus; work in bone 
meal or ground phosphate rock or super phosphate. Fertilizers such as tomato or African violet 
plant foods will also do. High nitrogen soils or fertilizers produce many leaves at the expense of 
buds. THC, the substance that gets people high, is increased in the plant during dry periods and 
is concentrated in the buds. For this reason, it is common to let the plants stay on the dry side for 
2-3 weeks before harvesting. Many people even let them die from wilting after a long artificial 
drought. Cruel, but effective.  Harvesting may be done at anytime, but the crop is most potent 
during its flowering stage. 

Winter crops are possible only if temperatures are kept relatively high (well above 50  F, 
10°C),  but  there  is  a common  problem  of  plants  flowering  when they  are too small. Early 
flowering  will often  reduce  the total  leaf  and bud yield  and the overall potency of the plant. 
Flowering  is triggered  by  long  nights—nights  longer than  10 hours.  But  mis can  vary with 
different  plants  from  different  stock.  You  can  fool  plants  and  prevent  early  flowering  by 
leaving a light on within  10' of the plant. One 60 watt incandescent bulb will do. Plug it into a 
timer so that the plant sees a total of  15 hours or more of light including the daylight hours. This 
light will not grow your plants faster; it will only help control the flowering  response. 

All  sources  agree  that good plants come from  seeds of good plants. So plant only seed 
from  proven herb. One sub-species related to the common marijuana plant (Cannabis sativa) is 
a  native  of  Afghanistan.  It  flowers  earlier,  has  fatter  leaves  and  grows  a  bit  shorter  than 
common  sativa.  It  is  called  Cannabis  indica.  It  is  the  common  variety  grown  in  northern 
California,  and seeds are hard to come by. Cannabis indica is definitely  better suited for the 
solar greenhouse. When you're ready to harvest the plant, dig it out of the soil, roots and all. 
Wash off all the soil. Hang the plant upside down in a dry place. 

If you're  going to grow  it,  it may be wise to avoid clear glazings such  as glass, and to 

minimize showing off your greenhouse. 

Crops 

135 

Mint 

There are many varieties of mint. These perennial plants do so well in the solar greenhouse 
all year-round that they can spread rapidly and become almost a weed. Be sure you don't let this 
happen. To contain it, you may have to put in edging (a barrier)  1' down into the soil around the 
plant. If not, it'll take as much space as it can get away with. Mint does well in shade and likes a 
lot of  water.  It can  be started  from  seeds, cuttings  and  transplants.  It gets root bound  very 
quickly if grown in containers. 

Oregano 

Oregano, a perennial, produces year-round. Propagate from cuttings or start it from seed. 
The seed is small, so just barely cover it with soil and keep it moist. It is a low-growing plant 
and will hang over the edge of a bed or a large pot. Oregano does very well in containers. Best 
quality leaves should be harvested during and after flowering, though leaves may be harvested 
at any time. Oregano usually takes up about  1 square foot of space, grows low to the ground and 
likes full to partial sunlight. 

Rosemary 

This plant is an evergreen perennial. It grows slowly, about 
1' per year, but is a beautiful plant that provides great flavoring. It 
grows  upright  and  resembles  a pine tree.  It can  be started  from 
seed or cuttings, and cuttings are most successful  if taken in late 
summer. Give it  1  square foot for each plant.  It does best in full 
sun.  It's  nice  to  have  at  least  one  rosemary  plant  in  the  solar 
greenhouse for its beauty and year-round source of fresh leaf. It's 
reported to have medicinal and cosmetic qualities besides being a 
flavoring.  Also,  it is traditionally  believed that where  rosemary 
thrives, the woman is dominant. Watch for results. 

Sage 

Sage is a hardy perennial that easily survives solar greenhouse life. It is propagated from seed 
or cuttings. Locate it in a place that receives full sun. It also likes a well-drained soil. After two or 
three years, it becomes woody and sprawling. Sage grows about 1 xh' high and needs about 1 square 
foot of space. Leaves may be used year-round as flavoring or in a healthful tea. The flowers are a 
beautiful  shade of blue and will often bloom throughout the winter. 
Chewing sage flowers is a good substitute for chewing tobacco. 

Summer  Savory 

Savory is one hardy annual that grows through the winter, but it 
lives only one full year. Start seeds in late summer. Savory needs sun 
and a lot of moisture. Keep plants  10" apart. They will grow about 
2' tall. Try savory tea; it tastes like what its name implies. 

136 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Tarragon 

Ah, fresh  tarragon all winter long. No problem in the winter 
solar greenhouse. It is usually started from either cuttings or from 
plants purchased  from  commercial growers.  1  found  a neighbor 
who  let me divide  her plant and take a portion with good  intact 
roots.  Seed is not only hard to find but also hard to germinate. It 
grows  2'  high  and  needs  about  1 square  foot  of  bed  space.  It 
tolerates full to partial sun. Tarragon is a perennial, so locate it in 
a place that  will not be disturbed.  Besides using it for  food  and 
vinegar, I like to throw the fresh  leaf into salads. 

Thyme 

Thyme is a hardy perennial that overwinters well in the solar 
greenhouse. There are more than 40 varieties, differing  in shape, 
size and  flavor.  The  most common has small  leaves and creeps 
low, so try it as a border plant. It also does well in 1-5-gallonpots. 
Thyme likes full  to partial sun.  Use the leaves when the flowers 
begin  to  open.  In  years  gone  by,  thyme plants  were  found  in 
almost every garden and were said to be the home of good spirits. 

Permaculture 

Gregory  Bateson  once  described  life  on this planet  as being  "on  a river  of  change." 
Nothing in our lives seems to be permanent or forever.  Realizing this makes me feel good and 
bad, depending on my present attitude about my life (which also constantly changes). All this 
holds true for plants, though some plants naturally live for only a few weeks while others can 
survive  for hundreds of years, almost seeming permanent.  I have classified the life cycle of a 
plant  into three catagories: 

Annuals=Plants  that  live  one  year or less.  During  this time the plant  grows,  flowers, 

produces seeds and dies. 

Biennial = Plants that grow only leaves and roots the first year.  In the second year they 

flower, produce seeds and die. 

Perennial=Plants that live for more than two years, often flowering  and producing seeds 

each year. 

Most of our food  producing crops are annual or biennial. Agriculture systems based on 
annual and biennial plants require soil to be totally worked over almost every year,  regularly 
disturbing the agricultural ecology. Quite unlike nature. 

When  we  think  of  perennial  plants  most of  us think  of  trees.  But  there  are also many 

perennial shrubs, vegetables and grasses. 

Imagine  most of America's  farmland  filled  with trees, and other perennial crops. They 
could  eventually  supply  us with  many  of  our  agricultural  needs:  fruits,  vegetables, fibers, 
fodder and, of course, wood for fuel and shelter, not to mention paper for solar greenhouse food 
books. 

Crops 

137 

This  lush,  productive  Nirvana  may  sound  like  a  dream,  but  many  agricultural  futurists 
believe  we  can  make  outside  crop  production  more efficient  if we depend  more on  perennial 
food  crops  than  annual  crops. Why?  Because  perennial  crops utilize a permanent  root  system 
rather than  having  to establish  new plants each year. The word commonly used for this type of 
agriculture  is  permaculture. 

Permaculture  is a  relatively  new term,  combining  permanent  plus agriculture. The  value 
of permaculture  lies in its permanence and potential for working with nature rather than  fighting 
it.  It is a low  maintenance,  whole  systems approach  to  agriculture.  Envision  a shrub,  planted 
once,  that  grows  for  10  years  while  continually  producing  spinach-like  leaves  in  great 
abundance.  Compare  this to planting  spinach  20 - 30 times in  10 years, each  time waiting  for 
the seed to germinate  and the root system to develop before  the harvesting period even  begins. 
Then you find that just when  it really starts to yield, it goes to seed and  dies. You have to start all 
over again. Not very efficient,  is it? 

In the solar greenhouse, those permaculture crops with the highest potential  for top yields 
are.  for  the  most  part,  totally  unfamiliar  to  most  people.  Unfortunately,  it's  very  hard  to  get 
people  to eat  new  types  of  foods.  Ever tried  breadfruit,  tamarind,  or naranjilla?  Maybe  in the 
year 2042 they'll  be as common  as apples and oranges. 

Much  research  needs to be done on the horticulture  of  such potential  crops.  It seems  that 
many  of  the  perennial  crops  familiar  to  us  are  not  very  good  food  producers  compared  to 
traditional  annual  crops.  Although  tomatoes,  peppers  and  eggplants  are  usually  grown  as 
annuals,  they're  really  perennials that have the potential  to grow for many years . ..  as long as 
they don't  freeze.  Research has shown, for example, that tomato production drops off after  the 
first five months. That's why  most growers replant the crop or grow it as an annual. Tomatoes, 
peppers  and  eggplants  are  all  native  to  tropical  climates.  Both  the  familiar  and  unfamiliar 
permaculture  crops  best  suited  for  the  greenhouse  also  tend  to  be  tropical  or  sub-tropical  in 
origin.  This  works  out  well  because  the  environment  created  within  a  solar  greenhouse  is 
usually  sub-tropical,  that  is,  an  environment  in  which  temperatures  approach  but  never  fall 
below  freezing. 

If you are interested  in locating experimental  permaculture crops for the solar greenhouse 

and  need seed or information,  turn to the end of this chapter for a list of places to check  out. 

It's  unfortunate  that  there  is little,  if any,  greenhouse  research  or  funding  going  into the 
increased  food  potential  of  unfamiliar  crops.  I encourage  all  of  you  with  curious  hearts  and 
minds  to  do  your  own  research  on  new  perennial  food  producers.  If  you  come  across  any 
interesting plants with potential, please contact me and we'll get the word out in future editions. 

Uncommon Perennials 

Let's look at some of the possibilities of various unheard-of  crops. This is just to whet your 

appetite,  so you  begin to think about  unorthodox crops. 

Chaya  (cnidoscolus  aconitifolius) 

This  drought-tolerant  and  fast  growing perennial  shrub produces spinach-like greens that 
must  be  cooked  before  eating.  The  leaves  are  reportedly  high  in  Vitamin  C,  protein  and 

138 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

minerals. According to the National Academy of Sciences, the horticulture of chaya has never 
been studied. Any takers? 

Naranjilla  (solanum  quitoense) 

This  dessert  fruit  is native  to Columbia  and Ecuador.  It is 
said to have a flavor of both pineapple and strawberry. Are you 
listening,  Sunkist? Like  humans,  it  takes about nine  months to 
bear  fruit  and  then  produces  tennis-ball  size  fruits  year  round. 
Unlike humans, however, it only produces for a little more than 2 
years. It can reach a height of 5' and is quite productive. 

Spirulina  (spirulina platensis and spirulina maxima) 

Spirulina  is a high protein  blue-green  algae. It was originally cultured by the Aztecs in 
shallow ponds and used as a main source of protein. It grows best in alkaline water with a pH 
between  7  and  8.  It  prefers  to  grow  at  temperatures  of  87°F  (3l°C)  and  higher. Extreme 
caution  must be taken to prevent  contamination by toxic  micro-organisms. For this reason I 
would be wary of eating any home grown algae before it's been positively identified.  There's 
no apparent obstacle to devising thermal mass containers to provide an ideal growing environ(cid:173)
ment  for  algae.  It could be harvested  with  nets, dried,  and  then eaten as high protein  food. 
There may be other types of algae better adapted to the solar greenhouse which could grow with 
even lower temperatures; it's just a matter of finding out. 

More  Exotica 

The  possibilities  are  limitless; breadfruit,  papaya,  mango  and  tamarind  (all  interesting 
candidates because all have edible leaves and fruits), as well as undiscovered foods, herbs and 
medicinal  crops.  Many of these can be beautifully  adapted to the solar greenhouse. There is 
much work to be done here; we all need to experiment and learn. 

Familiar Tropical Crops 

Imagine a totally balanced ecology of insects, spiders, animals, annual food crops, and a 
large selection of edible permaculture crops with the end result being food, herbs, medicine and 
joy.  Maybe someday  there will be solar greenhouse research institutions that will have plant 
breeders  who  will  incorporate  great  adaptability  along  with  a  wide  genetic  diversity  into 
greenhouse food crops. Yields will have no ceiling. The future  will be exciting. 

Let's look at some familiar tropical crops, perennial in nature, which we can grow now. 
As mentioned before, the yield of these crops generally doesn't compare with the yields of most 
common annual vegetables. Is it worth the sacrifice of some space to have one prized artichoke 
plant or fig tree for your more exotic moments? If your answer is yes, here's some basic advice. 
Always place perennial crops  near the thermal  mass for moderating temperatures.  And keep 
them in areas where the soil will not be disturbed, hopefully  not in constant shade. 

Crops 

139 

Artichoke,  Globe 

This plant,  resembling  a large thistle, is grown  for  its bud or 
immature flower head. Artichoke plants grow about 4' high and up to 
5'  wide. They do fine  in a ground bed, but may also be planted in 
5-gallon containers, such as old plastic paint buckets. 

Artichokes can be started from seeds or roots that are available 
through many seed and nursery catalogs.  I've had excellent results 
with seeds. They will produce the globular buds primarily in the spring 
and fall. Feed the plants manure tea or some other source of nitrogen if 
the older leaves begin to yellow. They also benefit from bone meal. 
Sometimes  plants  will  completely  die back.  Don't  worry,  usually 
they'll  soon send  up a new shoot  and start over again.  Be sure to 
harvest the globe while the bud is tight (before it begins to open up). 
Greenhouse-grown artichokes are the sweetest you'll ever eat. 

Avocados 

Here  is your  chance to go for the big time with your little avocado seedling.  Avocados 
prefer  a relatively cool, dry, climate. Plant them in soil that is very well drained because they 
are susceptible to root rot. 

There are many different varieties of avocados. The small round smooth-skinned fruits are 
known as the Mexican  varieties. The  larger pear-shaped types with the dark smooth skin are 
known as the West Indian varieties. The medium sized dark rough-skinned variety is known as 
the Guatemalan.  I like the Guatemalan best. Most commercial avocados are hybrids of all of 
the above. For best pollinating results, grow two very different  looking types. Cross pollinate 
betwen the different types by using a small paint brush to transfer pollen from one tree's flowers 
to the other's. 

Avoid touching the leaves. Avocados seemed to be plagued by a variety of leaf and root 
diseases and give few fruits  in the greenhouse. For these reasons, I recommend growing them 
only as a novelty. With that attitude, it will be a nice surprise if you have good luck and find 
yourself in guacamole heaven. 

Banana 

Bananas won't survive very well when the temperature falls below 50°F (10°C), making 
them poorly suited to the winter solar greenhouse. But if you want to try, they can be ordered 
from mail order nurseries in the southern United States. They like a warm sunny place. Be sure 
to grow only the edible varieties, as there are many ornamental ones that aren't worth your time 
and energy. 

Citrus 

Almost  any  citrus  crop  will  grow  in  the  solar  greenhouse.  You  can  start  them  from 
supermarket  seeds,  but generally  such  plants  will produce sour fruit.  Instead,  I recommend 

140 

The  Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

purchasing the plants from  nurseries or by mail order. As with most of the crops mentioned in 
this section, citrus  in the greenhouse seems to do best near the thermal mass. And be sure to 
avoid heavily shaded spots. 

A common  problem that arises is chlorosis (when new growth turns yellow between the 
veins).  Raw  manures,  too  much  nitrogen,  high  soil pH and  salty  soils all contribute to this 
problem. Chlorosis can be solved by applying some iron chelate or by trenching-in peat moss or 
leaf mold compost. The chelate, which is faster acting, is available at most garden stores. 

Brush the blossoms with a small paint brush to bring about pollination. I like growing a 

few citrus plants just to smell the orange blossoms in winter. 

Coffee 

Yes, you can grow it, but don't plan to be drinking your own Java for some time. Yields 
will  be  slim.  Like  banana  plants, coffee  has trouble  with temperatures below  50°F (10°C). 
Grow it near the mass, but unlike banana plants, it will appreciate some shading. After the plant 
is  around  5'  tall,  pinch  off  the  tall  vertical  tips  because  flowers  and  beans  occur  only on 
horizontal branches. Coffee plants like growing in sandy soils, and don't like manure fertilizers 
at all. Coffee  has low tolerance for salty soils (indicated by leaf tips turning brown) and for soils 
with a pH higher than 6.5. 

If you are lucky and get some of those coffee beans produced, soak the beans in water for 5 -10 

days, then roast and grind. Mmmm, good. 

Figs 

Figs are more productive than most of the crops already mentioned.  However, commer(cid:173)

cial  Fig varieties will  not set fruit  unless there is a special pollinating wasp present. But don't 
despair; there are varieties available that will set fruit  without any need for pollination. These 
include: Mission, Adriatic, Kadota, Brown Turkey, Everbearing, Conradia and Celeste. 

Figs seem to prefer soils that have some clay in them. A fig plant grows into a tall tree, so 
be conscious of where its shadow will be cast when it grows up. I planted mine against the north 
wall water drums, and to keep it from shading the mass, I didn't 
let  it get bushy  until  it grew taller than the drums. You may also 
grow  it as a bush by keeping the tips pruned. In the winter it may 
or may not lose its leaves. During the winter months it won't grow 
and  may  become  more susceptible to insects, mites or diseases. 
So don't let pests get the best of your plant during this time. It will 
usually regain its health come spring. 

Fig plants are available from  nurseries or you can propagate 
your own from cuttings (see Plant Propagation). Harvest the figs 
when  they  are dark  and soft,  but before  they start to split. They 
will be the sweetest you ever ate! Whenever you break the skin of 
a fig tree—either for harvesting or pruning—it will exude a latex-type juice that irritates some 
people's skin, so you may want to wear gloves. 

Depending on how large and how old your purchased plant is, it will take 2 - 4 years before 
you're ready to harvest fruit. If you like figs, it's worth the wait as long as the plants don't take 
up too much space. Two-story greenhouses have an advantage here because they can grow tall. 

Crops 

141 

Grapes 

Greenhouse  grape  production  has long been a hobby of Europeans.  In the greenhouse, 
grapes benefit  from  a protected environment and you can grow the southern varieties that are 
not cold hardy. Grapes may be susceptible to mildews in the greenhouse, so try to get varieties 
that  are  resistant  to these diseases.  Pollinate  flowers  with  a brush,  and  make  sure there's a 
steady flow of air during flowering. 

The yields are impressive, but whether it is worth tying up the space (about 4!^ square feet 
of  bed  space  and  up  to  8'  high  per  plant)  all  year  long  is up to you.  To  use  space  most 
effectively,  it seems best  to grow  grapes against  an east wall or west wall, pruning for both 
vertical  and  horizontal  growth.  (See  a  good  fruit  production  book  for  pruning  specifics.) 
Chicken wire or any wire fencing makes a good trellis. 

Pineapple 

Pineapples will grow and survive in most solar greenhouses, but the amount of food you'll 

get for the space and time won't be much. 

Start pineapples by twisting off the tops of store-purchased  pineapples and letting them 
dry in a shady place for about  1  week. Then place the pineapple top in a mix of half sand, half 
potting  soil.  It will  help to brush  a small  amount  of  rooting  hormone  on the bottom of  the 
pineapple  top  before  planting  (see Plant Propagation). After  a plant  is well rooted  and has 
produced many new leaves, you can help trigger fruit set by treating the plant with ethylene gas. 
This gas is given off naturally by ripe fruit.  To treat a pineapple, place a freshly peeled banana 
skin  next  to the  pineapple  and cover both the banana skin and the growing pineapple with a 
plastic bag. A ripe apple will also work. Leave the plastic bag over the plant for about 5 days. 
The  gas  naturally  given  off  by  the  banana  peel  or  apple  will  often  trigger  fruiting  of  the 
pineapple. You may need to stake the plant as it begins to set fruit.  Generally, however, it is a 
hard plant to grow and get food  from. 

Tea 

A tea plant is grown as a small shrub, often  grown in India, Sri Lanka, China and Japan. 

Though commercial growers keep the plants small, they can grow as high as 30' - 40'. 

You can grow tea in the solar greenhouse, although it's sensitive to frost.  But sensitivity 
varies among varieties. Tea plants are usually planted from seed because it's almost impossible 
to obtain cuttings. The seeds are large, however, and may take up to I year to germinate. If you 
can get hold of cuttings, they're best. It will take a few years to realize your harvest from the 
plants, but if you have an extra corner, it may be worth the wait. Keep the soil damp around the 
seed. When you're ready for the harvest, here's how to process the leaves: 
Black Tea—Crush the leaves, place them in a sealed, clean plastic bag for about  10 days, then 

bake the tea at  190°F (88°C) until the leaves are dry. 

Oolong—Crush the leaves, place the leaves in a sealed, clean plastic bag for only 3 days, and 

then bake at  190°F (88°C) until dry. 

Green Tea—Crush the leaves and immediately bake at  190°F (88°C) until the leaves are dry. 

142 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Information  Sources for Permaculture  Crops 

The Future  is Abundant, A guide to Sustainable  Agriculture, 1982 Ed.  by  Larry  Kom, 
available from Tilth,  13217 Mattson Rd.. Arlington, WA 98223. 
Permaculture One,  1978 by Bill Mollison and David Tblingsen, available from International 
Tree Crops Institute, Inc., Box 888, Winter, CA 95694. 
Permaculture  Two,  by  Bill  Mollison,  1979,  available  from  International  Tree  Crops 
Institute,  Inc.  Box  888, Winters CA  95694.  Both Permaculture One and  Two are the 
"bibles"  of permaculture, but they are mostly concerned with the outside environment. 
However, both books are a good place to begin. 

Permaculture Journal, (Journal  of die National  Permaculture Association), available  from 
Permaculture, 37 Goldsmith Street, Maryborough, Victoria 3465, Australia. 
Under exploited Tropical Plants with Promising Economic Values, National Academy of 
Sciences, 2101 Constitution  Avenue, Washington,  D.C.  20418. A good book for diose 
interested  in a wide variety of promising plants for the greenhouse or tropics. 
Dump Heap (The Journal of Diverse Unsung Miracle Plants for Healthy Evolution Among 
People). This publication  was the first to propose solar greenhouse permaculture crops. 
2950 Walnut Boulevard, Walnut Creek, CA 94598. Subscription: $7.00 per year. 
Mayaguez Institute for  Tropical Agriculture,  P.O. Box 70, Mayaguez, Puerto Rico 00708. 
Send for publications list. 

Tropical  Seeds 

Casa  Yerba, (Rare herbs, tropicals). Star Rt. 2, Box 21, Days Creek, OR 97429, Catalog: 
$1.00. 

Banana  Tree J15  Northhampton  St.,  Easton  PA  18042. This is where you find banana 
plants. 
Spongier's  Exotica Seed. 820 S.  Lorraine  Blvd.,  Los Angeles, CA 90005.  All around 
source for tropical and sub-tropical food plants. Informative catalog. 
Hurov's  Tropical  Seeds.  Box  10387,  Honolulu  Hawaii  96816.  Extensive  listing of 
tropical species by scientific name. Seeds available as seasons permit. Send query first. 
Thompson  and Morgan, 401  Kennedy  Blvd.,  Somerdale,  NJ 08083. Only  major seed 
house with innovative greenhouse and tropical selections. Passion fruits, banana, coffee, 
other oddities. Costly and few seeds, but good selection. 
Hudson's  World Seed Service,  Box  1058, Redwood City, CA 94064. Big selection of all 
kinds of plants, including a few tropical and warm season oddities. 
County  Hill  Greenhouse,  Rt.  2,  Coming,  Ohio  43730.  Extensive  catalog  of  tropical 
plants; many rare and newly discovered. Catalog: $2.00. 

Crops 

143 

Spring Tranplants for Outside 

There  can  be a wonderful  connection  between  your solar greenhouse and your  outside 
garden. Giving plants a head start in your greenhouse will greatly increase the food and flowers 
that are produced  outside.  And the further  north you live, the more important this becomes. 
Even a small greenhouse can produce hundreds of seedling transplants for outside—enough for 
you and your neighbors to enjoy. 

Besides creating  higher outside food  yields, growing your own spring seedlings means 
you won't be buying them. And your plants generally will be of better quality than store bought 
transplants.  I've  come  across  many  people  with  small  greenhouses  who sell  their plants to 
neighbors, local stores and food co-ops. They don't get rich but it brings in some extra spending 
money. You may want to try it too. 

Getting  Started 

First take three steps back to Plant Propagation for the basics in starting seeds. 
For larger seeds, planting directly into the container you plan to grow them in works fine. 
Because seeds are relatively cheap, I usually put two seeds in each small pot. If both germinate, 
I pinch one out, leaving the best looking one. This two-seed method helps insure that something 
will come up in each pot. 

Containers and  Soil 

For most spring seedlings I recommend planting in a pot at least 2" x  \W.  You can use 
either  pots  manufactured  for  seedlings  or recycled  containers  ranging  from  individual  pots 
made  from  juice  cans  and paper cups  to multi-plant  containers such  as egg cartons or milk 
cartons cut in half lengthwise. Be sure to poke a hole in the bottom of homemade containers for 
water drainage. 

Manufactured  containers are usually made of plastic or compressed peat moss. It's easy to 
transplant the peat pots by just popping the whole pot into the soil without disturbing the roots. 
But I've come across quite a few peat pots that never decomposed in the garden, leaving roots 
unable to grow. Cutting a few slashes into the sides of the pots prevents this. Be sure the whole 
peat pot is buried; if any of it is above ground, the roots under the surface may dry out because 
of a wicking action that draws moisture from the pot to evaporate in the air. If you are prone to 

144 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

accidentally  skip greenhouse  waterings,  stick to plastic or homemade seedling pots because 
peat pots always dry out faster. 

Plastic pots come singly or multi-celled.  Both plastic and homemade pots work fine for 
transplanting, but with the plastic ones, you must take a little more care not to disturb the roots. 
Plastic pots can be recycled for a few years if they don't get ripped. They cost about the same as 
peat pots and require about the same energy in the manufacturing process. 

If you  plan to  sell  seedlings in spring,  use manufactured  pots because  people  are more 

attached  to  them  than  recycled  containers.  The  manufactured  seedling  pots aren't  that ex(cid:173)
pensive—often  a  few  cents  each.  However,  lower  prices  for  these  pots  are  obtained  at 
commercial greenhouse suppliers in larger cities. 

Soil  for  seedlings should be either commercial potting soil (best and easiest), sterilized 
soil or virgin soil that's never been planted before.  See Plant Propagation for homemade soil 
mixes for seedlings. 

Plant Size and  Transplanting 

When you grow plants from  seed try to time it so they are not much larger than three or 
four times the size of the pot when you're ready to transplant. If you want to grow a larger plant 
for  transplanting  into  your  garden,  better get  a larger corresponding  pot.  But  remember, a 
larger plant doesn't always mean a better plant when it comes to spring transplants. With larger 
plants  there  is generally  more  transplant  shock  and this may permanently  damage  a plant's 
productivity.  Also,  research has shown that a large  1-gallon pot with a big blooming tomato 
plant will actually produce less total yield than a non-blooming 8" plant with a stem width the 
size of a pencil. 

Warning: When  growing  transplants, keep your eyes open  for aphids  and  other insect 
pests on the tips of plants and on the undersides of leaves. If you see them, follow the advice in 
Pests and  Diseases. 

Hardening  Off 

Young plants grown in a protective environment grow very rapidly. But at the same time, 
they become very tender, making them subject  to substantial transplant shock no matter how 
talented you are at transplanting. You can reduce this shock by putting your seedlings through 
an  intermediate  period  to help them better withstand  transplanting. This period  is known as 
"hardening  off."  For  a week  before  actual  transplanting  into  your outside  garden,  totally 
discontinue any supplementary nutrient feeding. Also cut back slightly on watering, and a few 
days before transplanting, set your plants outside in direct sunlight during the day. You can also 
leave them out a few  nights as long as the evening low temperature isn't below 45  F (7  C). 
Take  care; plants  will dry out faster  outside. These  treatments will greatly reduce transplant 
shock but are rarely done to storebought spring seedlings. Once outsid", transplant shock is also 
reduced  if seedlings are protected  from  wind or direct  sun with a shingle or cardboard  wind 
break placed so that it casts a shadow over the plant. The plant should be able to stand up to the 
elements solo after a few days. 

Crops 

145 

The following is a general schedule for timing the propagation of your garden transplants. 
You'll have to fine tune it for you own area by asking advice from experienced area gardeners 
or learning from your own mistakes. But the best way to fine tune this schedule is to record the 
day you planted each crop and later analyze the results. Is the plant too big?—then plant it later 
next year. Too small?—plant  it earlier.  Record keeping will help make you a pro at seedling 
production. Remember, 65°F (18°C) is a good temperature for seed germination. 

Spring  Transplants  for  Outside 

1 

Time  From 
Planting Until 
Set Out 
5 months; 3 if propa-  T or D or C 
gated by cuttings. 
4 - 5 months 

T 

Propagation 
1 
Method 
Comments 
Transplant while small. 

4 - 5 months 
4 months 
4 months 

Very susceptible to damping off diseases. 
Avoid warm temperatures. 
Try to grow at around 60 °F (15 °C). 
Very small seed; be careful. 

T 
T 
T or D or C  Won't do well in areas with high summer 

temperatures. 

4 months 

D 

Try to keep temperature above 50 °F (10 °C) 

Crop 
Geranium 

Pansy 

Snapdragon 
Petunia 
Carnation 

Peppers 

Hot or Sweet 

(see tomatoes) 
Eggplant 

Herbs 

Oregano 
Mints 
Sage 
Thyme 
Lemon Balm 
Catnip 
Tansy 
Tarragon 

Chart Codes: 

4 months 

Shasta Daisy 
Tomato 

3 xh months 
3 months 

D or T 

DorT 
D or C 

Try to keep temperature above 50 "F 
( l O t)  (see tomatoes). 
Keep cool,  below68°F(20t). 
If you use cuttings, don't use ones you 
suspect of being diseased.  Smokers 
should wash hands thoroughly  before 
working with tomatoes. 

You will need stock plants on hand for 
the cutting method. 

3 months 

T or C 

Continued... 

T—Start seed in flat and transplant after first true leaves appear. 
D—Plant seed into the container that the mature plant will grow in. Plant at least two seeds per pot 

and pinch out the one with the weaker stem, leaving the best one. 

C—Start from cuttings. But you must have a stock plant to begin with (see Plant Propagation). 

146 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Spring Transplants for Outside 

• 

1 

Time From 
Planting Until 
Set Out 

Propagation 1 
Method 

Comments 

3 months 

DorT 

3 months 

3 months 
3 months 

3 months 
2 months 

DorT 

DorT 
DorT 

T 
D 

1  month 

DorT 

1 month 

T 

Not good in areas with extreme summer 
temperatures. 
Likes bright light. 
If grown cool they are more susceptible 
to disease. 

Five to six seeds per pot—don't thin! 

These crops can be set out four weeks be(cid:173)
fore the last average  frost  date. Grow in 
cool temperatures. 
These crops are hard to transplant so grow 
them in peat pots to lessen transplant 
shock. Use a pot at least 2'A''  wide. 

Crop 
Herbs 
Dill 
Anise 
Fennel 
Summer Savory 
Coriander 
Chamomile 
Calendula 

Marigolds 
Zinnia 

Impatiens 
Alyssum 
Cole Crops 
Cabbage 
Cauliflower 
Broccoli 

Zucchini 
Cucumber 
Watermelon 
Cantaloupe 
Squash 
Pumpkin 

Chart Codes: 

T—Start seed in flat and transplant after first true leaves appear. 
D—Plant seed into the container that the mature plant will grow in. Plant at least two seeds per pot 

and pinch out the one with the weaker stem, leaving the best one. 

C—Start from cuttings. But you must have a stock plant to begin with (see Plant Propagation). 

Note:  If  seed  is  not  up  within  2-3  weeks,  check  for  damping  off  diseases,  improper 

moisture or damaging  temperatures.  Utilize the different  micro-environments  in your green(cid:173)
house to give each crop its specific temperature and light needs. (See Crop Layout). 

9 

GETTING TO 
THE ROOTS 

At the Cheyenne Solar Greenhouse we work with hand(cid:173)
icapped  people  as  well  as teens  and  old  people . ..  all 
growing  food  together.  When I think of roots I always 
remember an  incident  that occurred  with a fellow  who 
was  mentally  handicapped  and  very  childlike,  though 
he was about 38 years old. He was at the greenhouse to 
benefit  from  horticultural  therapy (plant therapy). Un(cid:173)
fortunately,  he had a great fear of roots. He often  ..aid 
"'I  think  roots  are  scary,  don't  you?'* He was always 
afraid  to touch  them.  It was odd  for me because  I was 
hard  pressed  to  come  up  with  a reason  that  he  could 
grasp  why  roots  shouldn't  be  scary.  I  searched  my 
memories  of  childhood  and  remembered  when  there 
were parts  of  plants  that  scared  me,  too.  But,  I don't 
think  anything  I  explained  to  him  changed  his  mind 
about roots. 

One day,  however,  I had him  adding some com(cid:173)

post to the soil for an early spring planting. I left him to 
work  by  himself  on  the  bed  for  the  morning.  Later, 
when  I looked  at the bed I saw he had done a great job 

150 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

except  for  a  curious  looking  something  in  the  comer  of  the  bed.  I  pointed  to  this  big, 
many-branched root sticking out of the soil. "What's that?" I asked. He said it was an upside 
down tomato plant.  "I just wanted to see how it grows this way," he said very proudly. I dug 
around the root and sure enough there was a whole tomato plant buried under the ground. (He 
had found it in the compost pile). I told him it would be interesting to see what it did and we left 
the upside down plant in the bed. His fear was totally gone from that day on; he had found his 
own solution to his problem with roots. 

The primary  difference  between a green(cid:173)

house  and  an  outside  garden  is  that  most 
greenhouses  produce  year-round.  This  means 
year-round  depletion  of soil nutrients,  leaving 
no  time  for  soil  to  rest  and  regenerate.  When 
greenhouse  plant  growth  slows  as  temper(cid:173)
atures get colder in fall  and winter, the plant's 
use  of  soil  nutrients  also  slows.  Still,  a  sub(cid:173)
stantial amount of nutrients may be taken up by 
roots.  Greenhouse  soil  requires  special  atten(cid:173)
tion  between  crop  plantings;  that's  when  you 
return  to  the  soil  certain  elements  you've  re(cid:173)
moved  in your last harvest.  Plant nutrition and 
soil  science  is  vastly  complex.  There  are 
numerous  books  which  can  help  you  get  a 
thorough  understanding of plant and soil nutri(cid:173)
tion.  It's  my  intention  here  to  give  you  the 
information  you need to know when something 
is going wrong, how to deal with it, and how to 
maintain  soil  fertility. 

The approach  I recommend  is the minimal use of synthetic fertilizers, relying mainly on 
biological  sources  of  nutrients. Once  in a while,  however,  chemical  fertilizers  will come in 
handy, especially  when growing plants in small containers, or for hydroponics. 

Maintaining  proper  nutrition  for  your  plants  requires  testing  for  pH,  salt  content  and 
organic  matter,  as  well  as  specific  elements  such  as  nitrogen,  phosphorus  and  potassium. 
You'll  need  to be aware of  symptoms  indicating  nutrient difficiencies  or excesses. Nutrient 
excesses are very common because people often overdo things. 

Basic Requirements For Healthy Soil 

Aeration: Roots need air as well as water; they'll suffocate  from overwatering. Sandy soils and 
soils containing decomposed organic matter help aeration. Earth worms also greatly help aerate 
soil.  Bring some worms in from  your outside garden; they'll love it in the greenhouse and will 
increase rapidly. And if you fish, here's a great supply of worms. 

Organic  Matter: Organic matter  is the result of the decomposition  of things that were once 
alive, including plants, food scraps, manures, leaves, etc. It has multiple beneficial effects on 
soils, for example: 

Getting To The Roots 

151 

1.  Adds nutrients. 
2.  Increases water holding ability. 
3.  Holds mineral nutrients available for root uptake (much like a sponge). 
4.  Promotes beneficial  microbial life. 
5.  Helps aerate soil. 
6.  Keeps soil d'.:eases and nematode infestations to a minimum. 
7.  Decomposition  adds  CO2  to  the  air,  which  increases  plant  growth  (see  The Solar 

Greenhouse Environment). 

8.  Buffers  the soil pH, that is, helps raise low pH and lowers high pH. 

Moisture Holding Ability: Soil needs to retain water for the roots. Two substances primarily 
hold water  in the soil: clay and decomposed  organic matter.  Organic matter  is my  preferred 
choice. See recommendations for organic ingredients for your soil later in this chapter. 
Drainage: Greenhouse soils should drain well. This is your only defense against overfertiliza-
tion and salt problems (both of which are common). Draining is basically a matter of adding 
sand. See bed construction details in Interior Layout Design. 
Proper pH: This is not the name of an acne medication! pH is a term describing the acidity 
level of your soil, shampoo or creme rinse. It ranges from  1-14. Seven, the halfway mark, is the 
neutral point. 

Try  to keep your soil  very  close  to neutral.  A  professional 
soil  test  will  usually  include  a  pH  analysis.  You  can  check  it 
yourself  by  using  litmus  paper,  which  can  be  bought  at  drug 
stores. Buy the type that measures around 6.0 - 8.0 pH. Mix one 
part soil to two parts water, stir around, and dip the paper into the 
solution.  It  will  turn  a color  which  will  indicate  a specific  pH. 
Compare your color to the color key on the box the paper came in. 
When pH is below 6.5 or above 7.3, it is often  much harder  for 
roots to use minerals and nutrients in the soil even though they are 
present  in  adequate  amounts.  This  is why a high  and  a low pH 
may look like a nutrient deficiency.  High pH can be corrected by 
adding  well-composed  organic  matter  and/or gypsum.  Low pH 
generally  is corrected  by adding wood ash or lime. See general 
gardening books for more information on this. 
Healthy Soil Microbial Life: Microbes (microscopic organisms) 
such  as  bacteria  and  fungus  are  generally  beneficial  to  plant 
growth.  They  are  what  decomposes  organic  matter  into  more 
basic compounds. Microbes are important in controlling diseases 
as they  often  feed  on  harmful  disease-causing  organisms  much 
like lady bugs feeding on aphids. They are also essential in many 
soil  reactions  that  make  nutrients  available  to roots.  When mi(cid:173)
crobes are  in short supply,  such as in some hydroponic media or soils low in organic matter, 
there seems to be increased disease, nematode (root destroying critters) or nutrient problems. 
The  regular  addition  of  decomposed  organic  matter  will  provide  a healthy  environment  for 
microbial life. 

152 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Low  Salt  Content 

Salt is a broad term which doesn't refer to just table salt (sodium chloride), but describes 
the  result  of  a  chemical  reaction  which  occurs  when  acid  compounds  react  with  alkaline 
compounds. 

Synthetic nitrogen fertilizers and organic manures are noted for their potentially high salt 
content.  Salt problems occur when high levels of fertilizers are used in soils that have poor 
drainage. So be vigilant. It's almost impossible to escape some salt accumulation, but luckily, 
salts move with water. With heavy water applications you can leach them out to a level below 
the roots. This is why well drained soil is important. Salts will accumulate in the root zone of 
poorly drained soils; therefore  there should always be holes in the bottom of growing contain(cid:173)
ers. Salt concentration rises as your soil becomes drier.  If a lot of water has been evaporating 
from your soil, you may actually see white salt crystals on the soil surface. 

Symptoms of Salt Damage 

1.  Leaf tips or margins browning. 
2.  Leaf drop. 
3.  Soil surface  has buildup of white crystals (almost looks 

like table salt). 

4.  Slow growth. 
5.  Root damage. 

Preventing Salt Damage 

1.  Go easy on fertilizing.  Follow recommended rates; more is not better. 
2.  Avoid raw manures. 
3.  Soak old clay pots in water for a day before replanting in them. 
4.  Be sure  soil drains well.  A relatively  high sand content helps. Make sure containers 

drain water out bottom holes. 

5.  Leach  soils that show symptoms of salt damage; two or three heavy waterings usually 

do the trick. 

Nutrients 

1 usually  recommend  that  greenhouse  owners  stick  to  organic  type  fertilizers  for the 

following reasons: 

1.  As far as amounts go, they are harder to make mistakes with. 
2.  They  usually  contain  a  well-balanced  amount  of  nutrients  including  many  micro-

nutrients which are often  lacking in chemical mixes. 

3.  As organic fertilizers decompose, carbon dioxide (CCh) is produced. Increased CO2 

levels increase plant production. CO2 is often  low in winter greenhouses. 

4.  The  healthy  microbial  life  which  thrives  on  organic  fertilizer  will  help keep many 

diseases in check. 

Getting To The Roots 

153 

5.  Nutrients are released more slowly and over a longer period of time. 
6.  These fertilizers  may be produced  at home by recycling organic wastes (food scraps, 

leaves, etc.). 

7.  It meshes well with a raised bed layout. 
Synthetic  commercial  fertilizers  will  work  if  you  don't  have  organic  ones  on  hand. 
(Hopefully  you're  not just  being  lazy.)  I prefer  using  synthetic  fertilizers  with  plantings in 
containers  where  the  root  area  is  already  artificially  limited.  It's  less  trouble.  If  you  use 
synthetic fertilizers for any purpose, try to stick to the more efficient slow release types such as 
Plant Tabs. Osmocote, or Jobs plant food sticks. Water soluble house plant fertilizers also will 
work fine  in your greenhouse beds, but don't overdo it. 

Chemical  plant foods always have 3 analysis numbers listed somewhere on the package. 
It'll say something  like 5-10-5,  15-10-20, etc. This is the percentage of nitrogen, phosphorus 
and potassium, in that order. Try to get the highest percentage for your money. The lower the 
numbers,  the  less  you  get.  Except  for  leafy  crops,  try  to stay away  from  fertilizers  high  in 
nitrogen  (the  first  number).  Equal  numbers  are  generally  a  good  balance.  For  fruiting, 
flowering and seedlings, use plant foods with more phosphorus (a higher middle number) than 
nitrogen  (the first number), such as 5-10-10 or  10-20-25. Phosphorus helps root and  flower/ 
fruit development. African violet food is very high in phosphorus. This fertilizer, when diluted 
in half, makes a good food for seedlings. 

The best way to tell if there is a soil problem is by having a soil test done either professionally 
or with a home testing kit. Plants vary in how they express nutrient problems, but usually by the 
time you visually see the deficiency, a lot of yield will have been lost because plants are slow to 
show you  what's  been bothering them.  Often  a plant won't conform  to textbook  symptoms. 
Sometimes I think plants are rebellious just for the fun of it. Keep this in mind when using the 
charts on the following pages. This description of general symptoms, may be of some help. 

ism 

Note: Before adding fertilizer to correct specific defi(cid:173)

ciency symptoms,  especially ones you've never dealt with 
before, please be sure you have confirmed the symptom with 
a soil test or you may end up with an excess worse than the 
deficiency. This is especially true with micro-nutrients. Soil 
testing  is often  done at reasonable  rates through state ag(cid:173)
ricultural  colleges.  Check  with  your  county  agricultural 
extension  service for  more information  and soil sampling 
procedures. 

By regularly  adding common  ingredients to soil you can  usually provide every element 
needed for plant growth. The following is a list of ingredients grouped into two classifications, 
organic (derived from  living things) and inorganic (derived from non-living things). After this 
list are some possible schedules for maintaining plant fertility and healthy soil. 

154 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Major  Soil Nutrients 

(those needed in large quantities) 

Function 

Contained in 

Excess 

Deficiency 

Nitrogen (N) 

Phosphorus(P) 

Potassium (K) 

Required for leaf  Manure, fish and 
growth. Important  ocean wastes, food  growth, dark 
for protein and 
amino acid pro(cid:173)
duction. 

scraps, blood 
meal, urine, com(cid:173)
post. 

Luxuriant  leafy 

green leaves, few 
flowers or fruit. 
Look for salt dam(cid:173)
age. Leaf tip 
burning. 

Steamed bone 

Seedling hardi(cid:173)
ness, fruit and root  meal, around rock 
production, helps 
disease resistance. 

phosphates, ma(cid:173)
nure, compost. 

Very rare. 

Regulates water  Wood ash (see 
movement  within 
plants. Helps with 
cold hardiness. 
starch and sugar 
production. 

recommendations 
later in this chap(cid:173)
ter), granite dust. 
compost, manure. 
kelp. 

Will create a mag(cid:173)
nesium deficiency. 
Not common. 

Light green to yel(cid:173)
low leaves occur(cid:173)
ring on older. 
lower leaves. Yel(cid:173)
low leaves may 
fall off.  Stunted 
growth. 

Red to purple col(cid:173)
ored leaves. 
Dwarfed plants, 
small leaves, few 
fruits,  leaves drop 
early. 

Lower leaves mot(cid:173)
tled, with dead 
areas. Yellowing 
begins at leaf 
edge and contin(cid:173)
ues toward the 
center. Weak 
stems. Rare in 
many arid soils. 

Calcium (Ca) 

Cell wall and en(cid:173)
zyme production. 

Not very common.  Yellow, hooked, 

Bone meal, egg 
shells, dolomite.  Will cause defi(cid:173)
gypsum, lime and 
ciencies of po(cid:173)
tassium, magne(cid:173)
milk. 
sium, iron. 

Magnesium (Mg)  Chlorophyll pro(cid:173)
duction and res(cid:173)
piration. 

Causes other 
Organic matter. 
some commercial  micronutrient 
plant foods. 

imbalances. 

Sulfur (S) 

Protein pro(cid:173)
duction. 

Causes acid soil. 

Ground  sulfur. 
rain near coal-
fired  power plants, 
gypsum. 

plant tip. Tips may 
die back, short 
roots. Blossom 
end fruit  rot on 
tomatoes. Centers 
of lettuce and cel(cid:173)
ery may rot. 

Yellowing be(cid:173)
tween veins on 
older lower leaves, 
which may even(cid:173)
tually turn brown. 
Common in acid 
soils. Common on 
shade-loving 
houseplants set in 
sunny place. 

Light yellowing 
on new leaves 
including yellow 
veins. 

Getting To The Roots 

155 

-  Micro-nutrients 

These  are  essential  but  needed  only  in  very  small  amounts,  hence  over-applying  is easy  to  do. 
There  are  usually  adequate  amounts  in  organic  matter.  Defici encies  may be just a  result of  high or  low 
pH. or high  salt  accumulation. 

Function 

Contained  in 

Excess 

Deficiency 

Boron  (B) 

Cell  wall  forma(cid:173)
tion,  carbohydrate 
transport. 

Organic  matter. 

Slight excess  will 
kill plants.  May 
occur in acid soils, 
so keep soils 
neutral 

Tips of the plant 
die.  Cabbage 
family  plants de(cid:173)
velop  hollow 
stems. 

Seaweed,  kelp. 
manure,  compost. 

Rare. Causes iron 
deficiency. 

Darker  green 
foliage; then  turns 
into  magnesium 
or zinc deficiency. 

Copper  (Cu) 

Iron  (Fe) 

Enzyme  and pho(cid:173)
tosynthesis  regu(cid:173)
lation. 

Chlorophyll  for(cid:173)
mation. 

Manganese  (Mn)  Helps in photo(cid:173)

synthesis  and res(cid:173)
piration. 

Organic  matter. 
iron chelate,  iron 
sulfate  (both che(cid:173)
late and  sulfate 
are purchased  at 
garden supply  cen(cid:173)
ters. Chelate  is 
longer  lasting: 
follow  recom(cid:173)
mended  rates). 

Manganese  sul(cid:173)
phate,  organic 
matter. 

Leaves  look 
bleached.  Light-
colored veins. 

Yellowing  be(cid:173)
tween  veins on 
newly  developing 
leaves. Old  leaves 
remain  green.  Of(cid:173)
ten due  to  high 
pH  or poor 
drainage. 

Much  like  iron. 

Similar to defi(cid:173)
ciency;  dark  spots  but even  the 
present,  crinkling 
and cupping of 
leaves. 

smallest  veins re(cid:173)
main green  while 
all new  growth 
turns yellow  to 
white. Old growth 
remains green. 

Molybdenum  (Mo)  Nitrogen  fixation.  Usually  corrected 

nitrogen  metabo(cid:173)
lism. 

by raising a low 
soil  pH to neutral. 

Slight  excess 
causes death. 

Stunting,  similar 
to nitrogen  defi(cid:173)
ciency,  common 
in acid soils below 
pH  6.0. 

Zinc  (Zn) 

Chlorophyll  for(cid:173)
mation,  bud de(cid:173)
velopment. 

Zinc sulphate,  or(cid:173)
ganic  matter. 

May  result  in other  Top leaves  remain 
micronutnent 
problems.  Some(cid:173)
times  resembles 
iron  deficiency. 

very  small; 
stunting,  dwarfing. 
Mottled  yellow 
leaves. 

156 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Organic  Ingredients 

Peat  Moss.  Peat  moss is the remains of dead plants that  have partially  decayed  and may be 
hundreds of years old. Because it's often quite low in any nutrients, it is not a fertilizer, but is mainly 
a soil conditioner.  It increases soil aeration, water absorption and it helps soil hold other nutrients 
that would normally leach out or remain unavailable to roots. Some peat moss may have fertilizer 
added to it. The label will tell you if that's the case. 

Sphagnum  peat, the most commonly available, is usually mined in Canada. It's a limited 
resource being depleted more quickly than it is being replenished naturally. In some countries, 
peat is also burned as a fuel  source for cooking and heat. 

Peat moss is sold in different grades depending on its degree of decomposition. The grades 
H3.  H4 and  H5 are preferable  for greenhouse soils. It's a particularly good addition  for soils 
low in organic matter. As much as  1/3 of the total volume of your soil can be peat, as long as 
there  aren't  large  amounts of other decomposed organic  matter already present.  Excess peat 
may  cause  an  acidic  reaction  in  your  soil  and  may  result  in  your  soil  becoming  easily 
waterlogged.  Peat  varies  in  pH  from  4.0  to  neutral  (7.0  pH).  It  is  somewhat  expensive 
compared to other organic soil conditioners, and because it is a limited resource, the price will 
probably keep going up. 

Manure.  Manure is both a soil conditioner and a fertilizer.  Due to its high content of soluble 
salts it can burn crops. Manure should never be applied fresh.  Always compost it for at least one 
year, or find some old stuff. 

Manures vary greatly in nutrient content. The age and type of manure create very different 
fertilizer amounts. Generally the older the manure, the less nutrient value, but even old manure 
makes a great soil conditioner, much like peat moss. Rabbit and poultry manure are about twice 
as rich as that of horses, cows and pigs. Sheep and goats sit somewhere between the two. 

It's hard to give accurate recommendations for applications because even the same type of 

manure may vary a great deal. But I'll do it anyway. 

Before each planting in soil beds 2' deep, I usually add about a 1" thick layer of poultry or 
rabbit manure,or  IW  of  sheep and goat manure, or 2" of horse, cow and pig manure. Blend it 
in throughout the soil. To eliminate hot spots in your soil be sure to break up the manure into 
fine  pieces. If it stays in large clods, you'll probably have some salt problems and possibly an 
isolated type of iron deficiency. 

Manure  is usually higher  in nitrogen than  in phosphorus and potassium.  I like to mix it 
with a bit of bone meal and some wood ash to make a complete fertilizer.  In highly alkaline soils 
(pH above 7.3.)  always forget the wood ash. 
Sewage Sludge.  Many cities sell their sludge in a dried and bagged form. Some brand names 
are  Milwaukee's  Milorganite.  Vancouver's Grow-Rich. Chicago's Chicagrow  and Boston's 
Metroloam.  Other cities  may offer  it free  or at a low cost. Cities  vary  in their treatment and 
content  of  human  waste.  Some  non-commercial  sludge  may  need  to be composted  before 
using. Talk to your sewer plant operator about the safety of their sludge on edible crops. 

Sludges 

in  some  cities  may  contain  toxic  heavy  metals.  A  common  one  is 
cadmium, which doesn't leach out of soils and is absorbed by plants, most readily by plants in 
acid  soils  (pH  below  6.8).  The  commercially  available  sludges  usually don't  have  a heavy 
metal problem. 

1 I 

Getting To The Roots 

157 

If you're concerned, have a local soil laboratory analyze sludge for heavy metals, and 
if it tests safe, apply it to a 1*' depth and mix well into the soil. To prevent heavy metal plant 
uptake, maintain  soil at 7.0 pH or higher. As should be common practice, always wash all 
produce  before  eating  it.  Sewage sludge is quite low  in potassium  so an additional  source 
may have to supplement  it. 

Leaf Mold.  Leaf  mold is simply composted leaves; it's very high in micronutrients. It is an 
excellent source of organic matter but is low in major fertilizer contents. Use well-rotted leaves 
as you would peat moss. 
Fish  Emulsion.  This  material  is  very  high  in  nitrogen  so  use  it  sparingly  on  greenhouse 
fruiting crops. It's excellent on leafy crops, though the major drawback offish  emulsion is the 
smell, and the cost may be high depending on how landlocked you are. 
Bone Meal.  Available raw and steamed, it contains mostly phosphorus, with some calcium 
and a trace of nitrogen.  It should be worked  in throughout  the depth of the soil. Bone meal's 
great  for fruiting  crops, especially  tomatos. It also helps flowers bloom beautifully  over long 
periods. It is usually added at  1  lb. per  10 sq. ft.  Compared to garden stores, agricultural feed 
stores sell  it cheaper in 50 lb. bags. Steamed bone meal is slightly faster acting. 
Sawdust.  Sawdust can make a fine soil conditioner if the following precautions are taken. 

1.  Never use sawdust from cedar, redwood or walnut. They contain plant toxins. 
2.  Soil organisms steal soil nitrogen to breakdown raw sawdust. The organisms grab the 
nitrogen right out from under the poor plant roots, often  leaving plants with a nitrogen 
deficiency.  To  prevent  this,  either  add  compost,  manure  or some  other  additional 
source  of  nitrogen.  Sawdust  and  manure  make  excellent  composting  companions, 
creating a superb fertilizer and plant conditioner for the greenhouse. 

Wood Ash.  Wood  ash is added to soils to raise a low pH and to add calcium,  potassium, 
phophorus, magnesium and a little sulfur. The exact amounts of nutrients added to a plant vary 
from  species  to  species.  Wood  ash  is  about  two-thirds  as effective  as ground  limestone  in 
raising a low (acid) pH to neutral. If you live in arid areas where high pH soil (alkaline soil) is a 
common problem or have an alkaline soil above 7.0 pH, you should probably avoid using ash. 
If, however, your soil is acidic (below 7.0 pH), ash will help. It's commonly added at a rate of 1 
lb. per 10 square feet. If you mix it with V2 lb. blood meal,  1 
lb. of bone meal and 4 lbs. of peat moss or leaf mold, you 
will  have  a  well  balanced  fertilizer.  Wood  ash  spread 
around the base of plants also can keep slugs away. 

Coal ash  is not good for soil or plants and should be 

avoided. 
Blood Meal.  Blood meal does contain some phosphorus, 
but it is basically a nitrogen fertilizer. It is added at Vi lb. per 
10 square feet.  It can be expensive. 
Compost.  Composting  is a great way to deal with plant 
wastes. It can be used as an excellent soil conditioner because it's pure decomposed organic matter. 
There  is enough  written  in most gardening books on composting procedures.  For the 

158 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

greenhouse  specifically,  just  be  sure  all  greenhouse  compost  is  headed  for  use  in  your 
outside  garden soil,  and both outside garden compost and food scrap compost are used as 
the sole  compost  in your greenhouse. This parallel cycle will help break up possible disease 
infestations. 

For small greenhouses I recommend not taking up precious space for a traditional compost 
pile. Instead do it outside or create a compost mulch for CO2 fertilizing as outlined in The Solar 
Greenhouse Environment. 

In all the compost  piles I've  seen and worked with, the most common problems include 
not enough  carbon-type  materials  (see compost  mulch discussion  in The Solar Greenhouse 
Environment),  and poor aeration or overwatering. 

Inorganic  Materials 

Sand.  Sand  is basically  ground up rock; it contains no fertilizing  ingredients. It is added to 
soil  to  help drainage  and  aeration,  and  will greatly  aid soils high in clay.  Sands vary  in pH 
depending  on the parent material. Greenhouse soils should always be on the sandy side, but 
ocean sand should be avoided because it's too high in salts. 
Perlite.  Perlite is used for the same reasons as sand: drainage and aeration. It is many times 
lighter than sand.  It's mined as an ore, then heated till it expands like popcorn. Perlite has no 
nutrient value and a neutral pH. It has two minor disadvantages: 

1.  It' s dusty, so wear a dust mask or moisten it first to keep dust down when mixing it in. 
2.  It floats to the top in some potting mixtures. 

Rock  Phosphate.  This calcium phosphate mineral is ground to a fine powder and added to 
supply phosphorus to the soil. It is a very slow release material, even slower than bone meal. 
Super  Phosphate.  This  is  basically  rock phosphate  that  has been  treated  with  an  acid to 
speed  its action  in the soil, making phosphorus more available than either bone meal or rock 
phosphate. There is some worry that initially it can have a very acidic reaction in the soil. It is 
recommended  that super phosphate be mixed in very evenly and thoroughly. Twenty percent 
super phosphate is added at a rate of 5 lbs. per  100 square feet. 
Vermiculite.  This mica-type mineral is mined, heated and expanded much like perlite. Each 
piece  is silver-colored  and  looks like a miniature accordion.  Unlike perlite,  vermiculite can 
hold  water (up to 300% by weight). And much like organic matter,  it has the ability to hold 
some nutrients in the soil for plant roots. It also helps soils resist changes in pH and like sand, it 
improves drainage. 

Vermiculite  contains  some  potassium,  magnesium  and  calcium.  You  should  use only 

horticultural  grade  vermiculite;  it's  available  at  greenhouse  and garden  supply  stores. Con(cid:173)
struction  grade  vermiculite,  used  for  roof  insulation,  shouldn't  be  used  in  the  greenhouse 
because often  it is coated with small amounts of oil that may be harmful  to young roots. 
Gypsum.  Gypsum  is used to lower high pH and to improve drainage. People often  mistak(cid:173)
enly  think  it  raises  pH.  It  will  help  improve  clay  soils by  loosening  them.  It  also  contains 
calcium and sulfur.  It is an ancient fertilizer used by the Romans. 

Getting To The Roots 

159 

Limestone.  Ground limestone is commonly used to raise low soil pH. The amount needed to 
raise the pH one unit is approximately  1 lb. per 10 square feet. The amount will vary depending 
on how  finely  ground the limestone is and how much clay is contained in the soil. Add more 
limestone with soils higher in clay or when using more coarsely ground limestone. Follow your 
soil test recommendations. See Wood Ash for raising pH. 

Maintaining Soil Fertility 

At least twice a year, or whenever a crop is harvested and removed, rework your soil and 
replenish  what  nutrients  you  have  removed.  There  are  a  number  of  fertilizers  and  soil 
conditioners to choose from  and add. Here are several options, though you may want to devise 
your  own  based  on  experience,  local  soil  conditions,  and  soil  test  results.  For  initial  bed 
preparation refer to Interior Layout Design. For specific amounts of a nutrient or conditioner to 
add to soil see the preceeding discussion of each. Also, the package the material comes in will 
tell you how much to add for a given space. 
Option  #1 

Remove 3"' of soil from  the top of the bed. Add 2"  of well decomposed compost, bone 
meal, and wood ash (only if needed) to correct a low soil pH. Blend it in to the full depth of 
the bed (Remember, 2' deep beds are recommended). 

Option  #2 

Replace 3" of soil with 2" of decomposed manure (less if poultry) and  1'' of leaf mold or 
peat moss. Also add bone meal or ground phosphate rock. If soil is acidic, add wood ash. 
Blend all throughout soil depth. 

Option  #3 

Remove  2 " - 3"  of  soil  depth.  Add  blood  meal  or  fish  emulsion,  1"  peat  moss,  1" 
vermiculite, bone meal, and blend in throughout soil. 

Option  #4 

Remove 2"  of soil. Add 5-10-5 commercial vegetable fertilizer,  3" of peat moss or leaf 
mold, and blend in thoroughly. 
Note:  Each  time  you  work  the  soil  be  sure  that  it  is  loose  to  a depth  of  about  18". 
Compacted soil grows poor plants no matter how much nutrients are in it. 

Crop Needs 

Different  crops have differing  needs. Here are some general guidelines: 

•  Summer crops will need slightly more total nutrients, especially more phosphorus. 
•  Winter crops can get by with less phosphorus, but need slightly more nitrogen. 
•  Squash, cucumber and melon crops are heavy feeders and need about 30% more nitrogen. 
•  Tomato crops respond well to slightly lower nitrogen and higher phosphorus applications, 

especially bone meal. 

•  Peas,  beans  and  flowers  respond  to  lower  amounts  of  nitrogen  and  steady  levels  of 

phosphorus. 

160 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

•  Most crops will benefit  from a shallow compost mulch—see Interior Layout Design. 
•  Plants  in small  containers will benefit  from  regular feedings of a commercial  houseplant 
type fertilizer  at manufacturer's  recommended rates. Blood meal, fish emulsion and bone 
meal will also work well for containers, but try to avoid feeding very small seedlings unless 
you suspect a specific  deficiency. 

•  Don't fertilize germinating seedlings. 

Hydroponics 

With hydroponics,  plants are grown without soil, using a water-based  nutrient solution. 
Usually  the plant  roots are grown  in an  inert  aggregate  material such as sand or gravel with 
nutrients added in solution. For healthy growth all of the essential elements must be supplied by 
the nutrient solution  in proper quantities. 

It  always  makes  me  smile  to  hear  hydroponics  mistakenly  called  "hydrophonics." 
Hydrophonics  is water  music (or music under water) and has nothing  to do with plants. But 
after hearing it so often  1 too find myself slipping into "Hydrophonics.'' It sounds like more fun 
to me anyway. 

Despite widespread publicity these days which often  leads people to believe hydroponics 
is a revolutionary new discovery, the basic technique was formulated well over a century ago. 
I've  read  many  articles,  publications  and  advertisements  which  convey  the  impression  that 
plant growth and yields will be greater with hydroponics than with soil systems. Most research, 
however,  indicates  that  with  similar  favorable  conditions,  yields  actually  will  be  much the 
same.  Plants cannot  be spaced any closer together because light, not nutrition,  is the primary 
limiting  factor.  Also  the  nutritional  value  or  overall  quality  of  hydroponic  produce  is not 
superior to soil-grown  food. 

So why hydroponics? The main advantage is that it can be automated, which saves labor. 
This is great if you're  in the greenhouse business because labor is a major expense. For home 
greenhouses,  the  expense of  setting up hydroponics  usually  makes it  impractical.  Nutrients 
must be constantly replaced so there's the recurring cost of synthetic fertilizers.  But for large 
operations, hydroponics may pay  off. 

Regarding nutrients in hydroponics, there has been a good bit of work done on the use of 
organic materials rather than synthetic fertilizers. This usually involves an extensive process of 
making manure teas, diluting emulsion or blood meal, etc. Tome, the organic systems seem to 
create  more  work  than required by a simple soil system (employing organic fertilizers). The 
results of organic hydroponics are also quite variable because organic materials vary greatly in 
their nutrient content. 

Commercial  hydroponic nutrient  solutions may be purchased pre-mixed or you can mix 
them yourself.  There  are a number of excellent  books (listed at the end of this chapter) that 
contain recipes for mixing your own. 

Although  hydroponic  culture  can  be  successfully  used  in  the  solar  greenhouse, first 

consider the pros and cons. 

Hydroponic Pros: 
Labor saving. 
Easily automated. 

Getting To The Roots 

161 

Plants receive proper nutrition. 
Eliminates need to weed, water, cultivate. 
Can use space more creatively. 

Hydroponic Cons: 

You'll  need to regularly purchase nutrient elements. 
Not forgiving of any mistakes in mixing and adding fertilizers. 
Crops are often more susceptible to disease and insect pests. 
No wonderful  sweet smell of soil, which  is invigorating in 
the winter. 
Does not produce any CO2 to help plant growth. 

Hydroponic  plant  systems  require  fancy  plumbing, pumps 
and timers; but there are a couple of simple methods for those on 
limited  budgets.  A gravity feed gravel system is quite simple. A 
1' foot deep box is filled with pea sized gravel. The box has only 
one drainage hole. The nutrient solution is fed by a bucket with a 
hose attached  to the drainage hole. When the bucket is set higher 
than the box the solution drains into the box. Then the bucket is set 
lower  than  the box  so that  the  solution  is drained  back  into the 
bucket.  This  is  done  about  2  or 3  times  per day.  The  nutrient 
solution should be changed once a week. 

Straw Bale  Culture 

This  system  is  nice  because  it  uses  an  organic  source  (a  straw  bale)  for  the  rooting 
medium. It's kind of a cross between hydroponics and organic soil culture. I like it because the 
bale decomposes in time; and as it decomposes, it gives off heat and CO2 much like a compost 
pile.  It has great potential for the solar greenhouse and is a common procedure in Europe. It's 
not advisable for perennial crops, however. On the average one bale lasts about  10 months. 

Here are the steps involved in bale culture: 
—Spread a 3" layer of chicken manure (it can be fresh) on top of the bale. 
—Keep the bale thoroughly moist for two weeks. 
—Dig out a pouch (about 4"  deep and 4"  in diameter) into which you plan to set plants. 

Fill it with potting soil. 

—Wrap the entire bale, except the bottom and the plant pouches, in polyethylene (cheap 

kind is fine; and black is preferred). 

—Bale will heat up to over  100° F (38° C). 
—Plant your plants or seedlings in the soil pouches when bale cools to 75° - 80° F (25° - 27° C). 
—Water daily with hydroponic solution. 
—Space plants as you would in a soil bed (usually only two tomato or cucumber plants per 

bale). 

162 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

An alternative to the initial chicken manure treatment  is to use a high nitrogen  fertilizer. 
Four cups of  regular  lawn  food  (22-6-6 or some similar analysis) works well. Don't use any 
lawn food  that has herbkides  in it like "Weed and Feed.'' Keep the bale moist for 2 weeks and 
then proceed with wrapping and planting as outlined above. If the 
bale initially fails to heat up, add more fertilizer. 

Pull out any weeds that may grow in the bale. If you grow 
plants such as tomatoes or cucumbers that need trellising, be sure 
to give the trellising or strings  some slack because the bale will 
shrink as it decomposes. Tighter trellising may uproot the plant as 
the bale shrinks. 

With the heat and CO2 produced by the straw bales, you will 
be  able  to have  higher  than  normal  fall  and  winter  yields. One 
potential problem with straw bale culture is herbicides. I've heard 
reports  of  people  utilizing  straw  bales  made  from  hay  that  was  treated  with  a broad  leaf 
herbicide.  This  could  kill  most  vegetables  growing  in the bale because  most are broad leaf 
plants. Check with the person who grew the hay to be sure this isn't the case. 

Here are some books about hydroponic culture: 

The Passive Solar Greenhouse and Organic Hydroponics: A Primer by Rick Kasprzak, 
1977 from  RLD Publications, Box  1443, Flagstaff,  AZ 86002. 
Hydroponic Gardening by Raymond Bridwell, Woodbridge Press, 1972. 
The Survival Greenhouse by James Dekorne.  1975, Walden Foundation, El Rito, NM. 
Home  Hydroponics  and  How  To Do  It  by  Lem.  Jones,  1977,  Ward  Ritchie  Press, 
Pasadena, CA. 
Beginners  Guide to Hydroponics: Soilless Gardening by James  Sholto Douglas,  1976, 
General  Publishing Co. 
Hydroponic Food Production by Howard Resh, Woodbridge Press,  1978. 
Hydro-Story by Charles Sherman and Hap Brenizer, Nolo Press, 1976. 

10 

PESTS & 
DISEASES: 
WHEN THINGS 
GO WRONG 
JOKES UNDER THE LEAF 
In this fiberglass  box circling round the sun 
Two whiteflies telling jokes under the leaf 
Laughing about spiders too slow 
lacewings too dumb 
ladybugs too busy dating and mating 
Party heating up within the compost depths 
Bacteria and  fungus 
in drunken harmony 
Earthworm  sneezes 
in its subway  system 
Green pushing to light 
each seedling getting checked 
Planting and sweating and thinking on how we 

by Johnny Rhubarb 

166 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

It's when your first plant dies or becomes sickly that you fully realize your greenhouse is a 
miniature  ecological  environment  that won't  always do as you wish. You can fight  it with a 
war-like  extermination  attitude.  You  can  let  it  go  to  hell  with  pests  and  diseases  running 
rampant, or you can manage it ecologically, trying to create new balances and microenviron-
ments to produce the desired result.  . . food. 

Joan Loitz, a solar greenhouse pioneer who has written extensively on pest control, says 
that  all  new  greenhouses  go through  a  "honeymoon"  period.  It usually takes 2 - 8 months 
before the first pest or disease attacks. The first pest usually shows up just when people begin to 
get cocky about how pest-free  things are. After that, watch out. It will be constant excitement, 
with a few new pests or diseases regularly finding a way to prevent boredom in your greenhouse. 
Some will be easy to deal with, while others will be quite challenging. 

The first  step when things go wrong is to leam to look at your greenhouse. It's so easy to 
look  and  not  see.  Don't  even  attempt  to figure  out  the problem  if you're  feeling  rushed  or 
nervous.  A calm,  relaxing time of day is best. When something goes wrong, determining the 
cause  requires  looking closely  at  individual  leaves as well as examining the greenhouse  for 
general  trends.  Looking closely  is helped greatly  by a magnifying  glass. The type  used  for 
reading  will do.  Low cost hand  lenses (1 Ox) are also a great tool; usually they can be found at 
college book stores because they are often used in labs. When looking closely, don't just look at the 
top of the leaves near the aisle, but look under the leaves and into the far comers of the beds. Try to 
do this regularly. I like to do it before my day gets going, walking around the greenhouse with 
my coffee  cup in one hand and my hand lens in the other. 

Greenhouse  problems are usually caused by an organism (disease, insect or human); the 
environment (heat, light, soil nutrients, etc.); or combinations of both, making it seem mighty 
complex. Sometimes insects are not a problem in themselves but may be spreading a disease as 
they feed.  I have seen situations where too much nitrogen in the 
soil  caused  soft  lush  growth,  which  in  turn  attracted  aphids, a 
common greenhouse pest. The aphids then spread a leaf disease 
around as they fed. Is this a soil, aphid or disease problem? Its all 
connected. Nutrient imbalances may mimic a disease by causing 
yellowing  or  leaf  splotches.  And  some  sprays  used  to  control 
pests turn out to be toxic to some plants, causing  more damage 
than the original  pest—a  case of the cure  being worse  than the 
disease.  As the saying goes,  "everything  is connected to every(cid:173)
thing else." The greenhouse is no exception. 

The susceptibility of a plant to a pest or a disease is directly 
related  to its health and age. Parsley, for example,  is a biennial 
that  produces  leaves the  first  year and  a seed  stalk the  second. 
Every  time  I  forget  to pull  out the parsley  before  the  second year, bugs jump all over it. It 
appears that something clicks in the second year that makes the plant susceptible. 

When  a plant  is under  stress,  it also  becomes  more  susceptible.  Stress  is caused  by a 
number of environmental  factors: temperature, light, nutrients and water. When these factors 
are not at their optimum, stress results. I once kept an eggplant bed alive long into the winter 
even though  the daily temperatures were very cold. Eggplant prefers constant warm tempera(cid:173)
tures. The longer it lived into the cold winter, the more pests and diseases were hampering it. It 
really  shouldn't  have  been  growing  then.  Kohlrabi,  a cabbage  family  crop  that  likes cool 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

167 

winter temperatures, would have done better. But one year I planted kohlrabi in the hot summer 
greenhouse.  It soon  had bugs all over it while the more heat loving crops  like tomatoes and 
cucumbers were pest free. The kohlrabi was under stress and the wily pests knew it. 

Rather  than  trying  to understand  what's  going  on,  many  people just  resort  to poisons. 
Spraying poisons can adversely affect  human health and create a pest resistance to the poisons. 
It also can cost'' an arm and a leg." Short and long term effects of chemicals on human health 
are constantly being questioned; rarely a year goes by that another chemical isn't pulled off the 
shelves because of safety questions. In 1978 alone, 40,000 pesticide poisonings were reported. 
California  officials  believe  only  2% of  farmworker  poisonings  are  reported.  Scientists  are 
uncertain  as to whether mere  is any level of pesticides that can be tolerated  without threat to 
human  health  or  the  environment.  The  use  of  pesticides  is  especially  shortsighted  when 
comparing their often  limited effectiveness  against all their costs. Home food production may 
be our only form of independence from pesticides. 

The more we spray, the more insects become resistant to the chemicals. And they can even 
begin  to  benefit  from  them.  Compared  to  1965,  twice  as  many  insects  (including  many 
greenhouse  pests)'now  have  developed  resistance  to  sprays.  Also,  when  massive  spraying 
occurs  it kills the  many beneficial  insects that often  prevent harmful  insect populations  from 
developing. Not all bugs are bad! The use of beneficial insects to control harmful ones is known 
as biological control, and I'll go into it later. 

Because solar greenhouses are usually attached to the home for heating purposes, we must 
be especially careful how we go about controlling pests and diseases. What works in an outside 
garden may not work inside. Here's a comparison of outside and inside pest control. 

Outside Garden 

• Repellents actually repel pests out of your garden onto a neighbor's property. 
• Due to the action of pure unfiltered sun, pesticides break down  faster. 
• Wind can blow your pesticides into someone else's garden. 
• There are more naturally occurring beneficial  insects outside. 
• Purchased beneficial  insects often  fly away with the first wind. 
• You can stand upwind while spraying, breathing fresh  air. 

Attached Greenhouse Garden 

• Repellents have only limited use because the environment is enclosed. 
• Sprays easily get into household air. 
• Beneficial  insects released inside the greenhouse will usually stay there. 
• Spraying pesticides leaves no fresh air for the person spraying. 
• Effects  of a spray last slightly longer. 
• Greenhouse pests and diseases often  differ  from those in the outside environment. 

Your solar greenhouse is probably the closest garden you'll ever live with. Because of the 
many health concerns associated with chemical pesticides, it's especially  important to rethink 

168 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

traditional  methods  of pest control  for the attached  greenhouse. The best option available is 
what  entomologists  call  Integrated  Pest Management  (IPM). IPM involves  maintaining  pest 
populations  at  tolerable  levels  by  using  biological  controls  (beneficial  organisms),  cultural 
controls (such as crop rotation or growing resistant varieties) and pesticides only as a last resort 
in spot applications. There's more about IPM later in this chapter. 

There are a number of ways to control insect pests in your greenhouse.  I'll discuss each 

individually. 

Preventative  Measures 

1.  Clean it up—Keep dead leaves cleaned up and off the soil and don't let plant parts rot 
on the soil surface.  Eliminate places where pests can thrive, including weeds, poorly 
managed compost piles, debris. 

2.  Beware  of gift plants—This may be the best way to get a new pest to romp in your 
greenhouse. Don't be a hospital for a friend's  sick plants. If you must take on any new 
plant,  including  a store-bought  one,  inspect  it closely.  Take  it outside  and spray it 
before bringing it into its new home. See sprays later in this chapter. 

3.  Pull  up  plants  that  are  past  their  productive  period;  also  those  that  are  sickly  or 
infested.  Remove them from  the greenhouse . . . carefully.  You don't want to shake 
off the bugs on your way out. 

4.  Before reusing pots,  wash them with hot water and soap. 
5.  Keep air moving—Pests love stagnant air so, even in winter, run a small fan.  It'll also 
help  move  heat  into your house  and  prevent  air stratification  (hot ceilings  and cold 
floors). 

6.  Maintain plant health—When it's infested,  your plant may be telling you something. 
Are  you  growing  it at the right time or in the right location? Does it have the light, 
nutrition,  water and temperature that it needs? Maybe a different  plant variety would 
do better. Is the infested plant getting old or going to seed? Give it some thought. 

7.  Intercropping (Integrated Planting)—As detailed  in Crop Layout, planting beds with 
mixtures of crops rather than a single crop keeps infestations down. It confuses both 
insects and diseases. 

8.  Rotate  crops  from  year  to  year—don't  plant  the  same  crop  in  the  same  place  in 

consecutive years. 

Selection for  Resistance 

As  mentioned  in Selecting Greenhouse Crop Varieties, some plant  varieties  may have 
some  resistance  to  insect pests.  But do your own  testing.  You'll find one variety often  will 
develop  less of a bug problem.  It's  important  to keep records that compare the  performance 
of each variety. You will find your record keeping time pays  off. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

169 

Environmental  Pest  Controls 

Besides practicing what is listed as Preventative Measures, there are other ways to change 

the environment to your advantage and make it harder for pests to survive. Here they are: 
Baits and  Traps  The  color  yellow  attracts  many  pests,  including  white  flies  and winged 
aphids.  Yellow  fly  paper  will  help control  some populations.  Homemade  fly  paper  may be 
made by spreading grease (found  at auto parts stores) on yellow cardboard and hanging it, or 
mounting it on a post in an infested area. The pests fly right into it and die. When the grease gets 
dusty  it  must  be reapplied.  A beneficial  parasite, such as Encarsia formesia,  which controls 
whiteflies,  will also be attracted and killed by yellow sticky traps, so don't use them when this 
friendly  parasite is present or soon to be released. 

Slugs and snails are attracted to beer, so they can be controlled  with beer traps. But the 
beer must be renewed every 2 days; and there should be a trap every 5 square feet. Put the beer 
in something they can easily crawl into. (It's quite labor intensive and you may find something 
better to do with your beer.) 

Many  people use crushed  eggshells around plants to keep snails and slugs away. These 
pests don't  like crawling on rough surfaces.  Diatomaceous earth, wood ash (used in modera(cid:173)
tion), hydrated  lime, ferrous ammonium sulphate and sawdust also make a good slug or snail 
barrier around seedlings. 

The  most  common  bait  for slugs  is metaldehyde.  It's  usually  mixed with sawdust,  but 
sawdust is much easier to pronounce. Unfortunately, it has all the disadvantages of a pesticide. 
It's poisonous and should be kept off  food.  Also, it can be absorbed through the skin, so wear 
gloves. After some time it will break down in the soil. If used constantly, slugs and snails will 
become  resistant,  so  it's  best  used  sparingly  around  seedlings 
which are particularly susceptible to slug and snail attacks. Keep 
it locked  up and away from  pets and children (not necessarily in 
that order). 

Small thin boards, such as pieces of plywood, or potatoes cut 
in half placed on the soil surface work as a great trap for sow bugs, 
pill bugs and slugs. These pests are night feeders.  During the day 
they  retreat  to  dark  moist  places,  hopefully  under  your  board 
where you can dispose of them  very easily  in the morning. See 
Slug section in this chapter for further controls. 

Mice in the greenhouse that nibble on plant leaves are a problem which can be solved by 

using . . . you guessed it, mouse traps. Cats or commercial baits may also work. 

Future greenhouse  traps  may include pheromones (scented chemical sex hormones that 

attract pests into a trap). 
Sprays  for  Pest  Control  Don't  automatically  assume  I mean  synthetic  chemical  sprays. 
There are a number of things you can spray to help keep insects down. They include: 

1.  Homemade  Pesticides 
Many garden books have recipes for homemade pesticides. They include such ingredients 
as garlic, red  peppers, onions  and dead insects.  Many home  brewed pesticides are basically 
insect repellents. They work fine outside because they repel pests from your garden to someone 
else's, but in the greenhouse pests often are repelled from place to place inside the greenhouse. 

170 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

However,  stronger home formulations  such as soap and tobacco may be used.  Nicotine 
tea,  a spray  made from  cigarettes, is very effective.  Before  spraying, let it steep overnight til 
it's dark, and don't  inhale the vapor. Wear gloves and a respirator. Don't use it on peppers or 
tomatoes because  it may spread tobacco mosaic virus to these tobacco relatives. Take proper 
precautions because it's poison to people too. A mild soap spray is very effective (especially on 
soft-bodied  insects such as aphids), and unlike tobacco, it's safe. Always use soap before you 
try a stronger pesticide. Mix 2 tbs. of a mild detergent such as Ivory Liquid or Dr. Bronner's in 1 
gal. of water, or mix  1 oz. of Fels Naptha or Ivory Flakes in  1  gal. of water. Before using, test 
on a leaf and wait a day to be sure it doesn't bum the leaf. If it does, further dilute the mixture, 

I've used a commercially available insecticidal soap that's been formulated to be hard on 
bugs  and  easy  on  plants  and  people.  It's  more  expensive  than  regular  soap.  For  more 
information  write: Safer Agro-Chem, 3233 Vista Diego Rd., Jamul, CA 92035. 

2.  Botanical Pesticides 
Derived from plants, they're commonly believed to be easier on our environment. These 
commercially  available pesticides  usually  have a low toxicity to humans compared  to many 
synthetic pesticides, but they also have a shorter effective  life in your garden. For this reason 
you may have to spray more often.  Unlike many botanicals, nicotine derived from tobacco has 
a very high toxicity to humans and extreme caution is urged if you use it. It's sold commercially 
as Nicotine Sulphate or Black Leaf 40®. 

When spraying any commercially available botanical spray, treat it with the same safety 
precautions you would a chemical pesticide. You can get sick, dizzy, headachey and nauseated 
just  as fast  with botanicals as with synthetics. Safety procedures are outlined at the end of this 
section  on page  172-173. Commercially available botanicals also kill beneficial  insects and 
should not be used at all when you're using a biological control, or else use it only in very rare 
spot applications. Here's a list of commonly available botanicals: 

A.  Rotenone—An extract of certain tropical legume plants, Rotenone is a contact and 

stomach poison that's active on most common greenhouse pests, including slugs. 

B.  Pyrethrum—Derived  from  the flower heads of the pyrethrum chrysanthemum,  it is 
produced  in Africa  and South America. It is a contact insecticide that is commonly 
combined  with Rotenone  in commercial preparations.  It is effective  on most com(cid:173)
mon greenhouse pests, especially flying ones such as the white fly.  Pyrethrum plant 
seeds are available from  most seed catalogs. Home preparations may be made from 
the flower heads ground into a dust or brewed into a strong tea for spraying. 

C.  Sabadilla—Derived  from  the  seeds  of  a  tropical  plant  resembling  com,  it's  a 
powerful  contact  and stomach poison that's active on most vegetable pests except 
some spider mites. 

D.  Ryania—As  with most botanicals, it's derived from  a tropical plant, actually  from 
the ground  stems of a shrub. It is often  used effectively  on aphids and is said to be 
easier  on  beneficial  insects.  Unfortunately,  it's  usually  sold  as a dust.  But spray 
formulations,  when found, usually work best in the greenhouse. 

E.  Nicotine—It's  an age-old  pesticide with high toxicity to both humans and insects. 
Even if you smoke cigarettes you'll still be surprised how sick you can get if you use 
this pesticide improperly. Its vapors are quite toxic. Keep it off your skin. It should 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

171 

be  used  only  with  extreme  caution!  See  "Spraying  Procedures,"  later  in  this 
chapter. 

Botanicals are available at your local garden store or from: 

Pratt-Gabriel Div. 
Miller Chemical & Fertilizer Corp. 
122 Sharon Rd., P.O. Box 8 
Robbinsville, NJ 08691 

Organic Control, Inc. 
5132 Venice Blvd. 
Los Angeles, CA 90019 

Burgess Seed and Plant Co. 
905 Four Seasons Rd. 
Bloomington, IL 17862 

3.  Microbial  Pesticides 
Like biological warfare, these formulations of microbes attack specific pests by causing a 
disease  that  kills  them.  Luckily,  microbial  pesticides  won't  affect  humans  or  even  most 
beneficial  insects.  They  usually  kill  only  the  target  population.  They  are  the  only  safe 
commercial  insecticide that can  be used in conjunction  with biological control. The primary 
microbial agent that's available currently  is Bacillus Thuringiensis, commonly sold as Dipel® 
or Thuricide®.  It affects  only army worms, cabbage worms, cabbage looper, tent caterpillar, 
gypsy moth, leaf roller, horn worms, and many other caterpillar family pests. It will not harm 
most other insects and is very safe for people. 

Store it in a cool place but don't let it freeze. If you don't use all that you mix, don't bother 

storing it because diluted formulations  in the sprayer won't be effective  past  12 hours. 

4.  Synthetic Pesticides 
These  are  totally  human-made  preparations  known  for  quick  results  and  long  lasting 
activity.  But that's a mixed blessing because the long lasting activity is also bothersome to the 
ecology.  Also, the many strange products these pesticides break down  into may be worse to 
ecologies  than  the  original  formulations,  so I recommend  the use of  botanical  sprays over 
synthetic formulations because the breakdown products are generally safer. Few synthetics are 
compatible  with biological control methods. 

There are a few synthetic formulations that are questionably safe. However, I discourage 
the use of these chemicals unless absolutely necessary. It should be done only as the very, very 
last resort. Common ones include: 

A.  Malathion—Controls  a  wide  array  of  pests  including  aphids  and  mites.  It  has a 

relatively short life. 

B.  Sevin—Effective  on many common  vegetable  pests, and according to the EPA, it 
has low toxicity for humans. It has been known to have backfire effects, however, by 
helping to cause spider mite outbreaks. 

C.  Methoxychlor—It  kills a broad spectrum of pests, and according to the EPA it has a 

relatively low toxicity for humans. Works better on the larger insect pests. 

Never Use Systemic Pesticides 

or those that are not rated 

on the label for use on' 'food  crops'' 

172 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

5.  Other Pest Sprays 
A.  Sulfur—Sulfur  is active on certain diseases (see disease section later in this chapter) 
and  is also helpful  in controlling mites. It's available as a spray or a dust and may 
cause some leaf burning, so always test it on one leaf and wait 24 hours to see if it's 
too strong. 

B.  Rubbing  Alcohol—This  is  effective  against  mealy  bugs  as  well  as  many  other 
insects.  Spray a mixture of  1  tbl. per pint of water.  As with sulfur,  do a leaf check 
before overall spraying because it may harm the plant. Individual mealy bugs may be 
dabbed  with  a Q-tip dipped  in  alcohol,  but  avoid getting  it  on  the  plant  as pure 
alcohol will bum leaves. 

Spraying Procedures  Before even considering spraying, be sure to confirm  that what you 
think  is a pest really is doing damage.  More than once  I've  come across greenhouse owners 
about to wipe out a bug that turned out to be a baby ladybug (it looks nothing like the adult). The 
young lady bugs help contol many pests. Ask yourself what damage the "pest"  is doing. Get 
out your hand lens and check around the back beds to see what's going on. 

If you've got a pest and want to spray (having decided against other listed options) pick out 
a safe pesticide, and be sure it will be effective. The label should tell you what it will kill—and 
on  what crops  it  is cleared  for.  If common botanical sprays are unavailable and you need to 
spray  something,  call your  nearest county agricultural  extension  agent.  Ask them to recom(cid:173)
mend the most effective  and safest spray for your particular pest. The EPA has set up a system 
to measure pesticide toxicity. They use "LD50"  numbers. LD50 is a measure of how much 
pesticide it takes to kill test animals. Pesticides with the highest LD50 numbers are safest (that 
is,  it takes  more  chemical  to kill  them).  Use this as a measure  to compare  the safety  of all 
pesticides. These numbers for various substances should be available from county agricultural 
extension  agents.  Sprays can  be made  more effective  by adding material  that will cause the 
spray to spread out on the leaf rather than bead up. Here's how: mix 2 tbls. of mild soap (not 

detergent)  per  gallon  of  spray.  Commercially  prepared  "spread(cid:173)
ers,"  as  they  are  known,  do  the  same  and  are  available  from 
agriculture supply houses. A spray is not as effective if it beads up on 
the leaf. Too much soap or spreader may be harmful to leaves, so be 
careful; more is not necessarily better. 

You can use either the common inexpensive hand-held plastic 
squeeze sprayer available at most garden  stores or you can  buy a 
fancy pump-up metal compressed air sprayer. Hand sprayers take a 
little longer and don't work quite as well, but they're adequate. You 
can also buy the spreader formulation in an aerosol container or hand 
pump Windex®-type sprayer built into the spray can. 

The best sprayer available  is a  1-2 gallon stainless steel hand 
pump—the compressed air type. Sprayers range in price from $2.00 
to $50.00. Even if you never plan to use pesticides in your greenhouse, a sprayer will come in 
handy for spraying soap or misting leaves with water. You should get one. 

Other equipment to have on hand with your sprayer includes: 
1.  A chemical respirator mask—available at agriculture supply or feed stores. Even with 
botanicals,  a  paint  or  dust  mask  is  not  enough.  The  greenhouse  is  an  enclosed 
environment and you need protection! 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

173 

2.  Plastic  or  rubber  gloves  because  many  pesticides  are harmful  and  can  be  absorbed 

directly through the skin. 

3.  Goggles to prevent any spray from getting into your eyes. 
4.  Toothbrush.  Nozzles are constantly getting plugged and an old toothbrush is the best 
way to clean them out. But don't reuse it on your teeth! Never clean nozzles with metal 
pins or the like. It will damage nozzles permanently. 

Spray Techniques (including botanical, microbial and synthetic chemical sprays) 

1.  Read the label at least twice. It can tell you a lot about the material: how to store it, 
how to apply it, what it controls, what plants it's been developed for, and often how 
long before the food is safe to eat. Call the local county agricultural extension agent if 
you have any unanswered questions about a spray. 

2.  Seal off the greenhouse from the home. 
3.  Wear protective clothing: gloves, goggles, respirator. 
4.  Use the recommended dosage; more is not better. 
5.  Spray  mostly  undersides of  leaves and tips of plants; that's where  most pests hang 

out. 

6.  Spraying is usually best done in the afternoon or evening, with 70°F (21°C) being the 

temperature at which sprays are most  effective. 

7.  Spot spray if possible; cover only infested plants. Don't miss any infestations. 
8.  Follow days-to-harvest guidelines given on the label or found out from your county 
agricultural extension agent. Even with botanicals, it may be a few days before your 
food is safe to eat. 

9.  Use soap and water to clean the sprayer after every use. Don't forget to spray soapy 

water through the hose and nozzle too. 

10.  Store the stuff as recommended on the label—away from children and pets. 
11.  With  most  botanical  or  synthetic  sprays,  wash  hands  and  change  clothes  after 

spraying. 

Dusts  Many  of the common  pesticides,  both botanical and synthetic, are available in dust 
formulations to be spread on and around plants. They have the problem of not getting coverage 
on  the  underside  of  the  leaves. There  is also the problem  of  people  inhaling  the dust when 
applying it, so a respirator mask is helpful. With some exceptions, sprays are generally superior 
to dusts in the greenhouse. 

One material that is found only as a dust is Diatomaceous earth. It is fine silica remains of 
the skeletons of prehistoric one-celled organisms. As pests crawl over this material the silica 
cuts  up the  insects'  bodies  and dries them out.  It's effective  against soft-bodied  insects and 
slugs.  Some  brands  are  blended  with  a small  amount  of  botanical  pesticide  to  increase  its 
effectiveness.  Your pest  must have physical contact  with  it before  it works. It's  usually not 
harmful to beneficial  insects. 
Freeze Out  This is where people open up their greenhouse in the dead of winter to freeze out 
all the pests. It's often done in desperation. I question its effectiveness.  In some corner, there'll 
be a few  survivors ready to repopulate; or they'll come back from  a nearby greenhouse, in a 

174 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

neighbor's clothing or on a salad leaf at a pot luck. They'll  fly or hitchhike, but whatever, the 
pests will return soon. You end up where you began except without the winter crop, which was 
frozen out. It merely postpones the problem. 
Eat Them?  Eat the pests in your greenhouse? Just the idea of it will make some of you ill. If it 
does,  skip this part.  Eating bugs is probably more nutritious than what you  last ate. Roasted 
grasshoppers  have  about  75% protein  and  20%  fat  and  are  high  in  niacin  and  riboflavin. 
Grasshoppers were sold in ancient Greek markets (mostly to the poor; the wealthy preferred the 
domestic  oak  grubs  fattened  on  flowers . . . yum). Many cultures depend on insects as their 
food  source, roasting them, making flour out of them or frying them. The very idea of this may 
seem repulsive to modern sophisticates who dine on delicacies such as snails, rocky mountain 
oysters, frogs'  legs and chicken embryos (eggs), not to mention BHA, BHT, sodium nitrite, 
polysorbate 80, saccharin, and artificial colors galore. 

I've  eaten  raw aphids (usually  by mistake); they  are tiny  sweet morsels. It takes a real 
infestation  and a lot of time to get full;  it won't ruin your appetite for dinner unless you're a 
heavy aphid consumer. 

Slugs are very closely related to and taste similar to garden snails, which the French call 
"escargots." Many Europeans eat slugs to cure arthritis. People are often offended  by the idea 
of slug eating, but it certainly would add a touch of class and elegance to your next dinner party 
to serve greenhouse escargots. If you can find some snail shells, no one will ever know. 

I'm  really not  very serious about this as a pest control or a food source, but think about 
this. Many people are repulsed by the thought of chomping on pests for human food; shouldn't 
we  be equally  repulsed  by poisoning  our food,  air and water with  synthetic pesticides  in an 
often  futile and many times unnecessary crusade to rid our garden of bugs. Which is truly more 
civilized? 

Biological  Control/Integrated  Pest Management  (IPM) 

Integrated  pest  management  is, as the name implies, a strategy  for the management of 
pests, not their total annihilation. The end result is a tolerable level of pests in balance with the 
environment. IPM uses biological control, crop rotation, integrated planting, cultural controls, 
and also (but only when absolutely necessary—and very rarely) some spot pesticide spraying of 
isolated plants. In the greenhouse this can be tricky. 

Bilogical control is the management of pest populations by use of natural enemies known 
as beneficial  insects. The beneficial  insects are classified  either as predators (organisms that 
control the pest by eating it), or as parasites (organisms that must 
live  in or on  the  pest  at  the expense of  the pest).  Predators are 
usually  general  feeders  who work on  many pests.  Parasites are 
specific,  usually able to control only one target pest. 

Biological control is the cornerstone to IPM. In using IPM I 
deal  with  infestations  by first releasing a predator or parasite to 
feed  on it. Supplementing this action I use the spraying of home 
remedies,  hand  picking  the  pests  off  of  the  plants,  planting 
resistant  varieties, baits and  traps,  and  integrated  planting  (see Crop Layout).  I spray pesti(cid:173)
cides,  (mostly  botanicals),  only  as  a  last  resort.  The  only  exception  is  spraying  microbial 
pesticides. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

175 

When an  infestation  occurs, first  consider pulling out and discarding the infested  plant, 
taking the plant outside if it's in a container and spraying it with a botanical pesticide, or spot 
spraying a botanical pesticide in the greenhouse.  Spot spraying  is still chancy, so it's a good 
idea to hang a piece of plastic around the area you're going to spray to help prevent drift,  thus 
minimizing  injury to beneficial  insect populations. These insects have much less resistance to 
most sprays than do the pests. And when they are all killed by spraying, you must reestablish 
the beneficial  insects all over again. 

With IPM, you must ask yourself at what level is a pest or disease personally  tolerable? 
Rather than choosing to use a chemical on a wipe-out basis, think about how to safely bring the 
number of pests down to a level that is manageable and tolerable.  It takes more thought and 
detective  work,  but  it's  a  joy  to  understand,  work  with,  and  cultivate  your  greenhouse 
ecosystem.  Besides,  IPM  pest  control  is often  more  effective  than  conventional  spraying. 
Compared  to  the  risks  of  massive  spraying,  it  is  the  only  sane  choice,  especially  with  a 
greenhouse attached to and opening into your home. 

Biological  control is not a new science. There was a flurry of activity in researching and 
applying biological  control techniques  in the first  half of the twentieth century.  But with the 
advent of DDT and other effective  chemicals developed during World War II, use of biological 
control  measures  almost  came  to  a  halt.  However,  there  was  a  rediscovery  of  biological 
controls in the  1970s—and for good reasons. The expense, ineffectiveness and health questions 
associated  with synthetic, petroleum-based  pesticides are some of the best arguments for the 
renewed use of poisonless pest control. 

In nature, biological control is a continuing action, constantly creating and maintaining a 
dynamic balance. Of the approximately  1,000,000 insects listed as plant feeders in the United 
States, only  1 percent are listed as pests of agriculture. 

To acquire beneficial  insects, either you must order them through the mail (see addresses 
later  in  chapter),  bring  them  in  from  the  outside  environment,  or  find  a  local  supplier. 
Establishing  a  biological  balance  that  keeps  pest  populations  in check  requires  certain  en(cid:173)
vironmental  conditions.  First,  create  a pesticide-free  greenhouse.  Next,  remember that this 
type of control requires patience because it can take many weeks for the beneficial  bugs to get 
established.  You just have to put up with this "out-of-control"  period. Their establishment is 
helped  by  not  letting temperatures  get  above  90°F (32°C) which  can  happen often  in solar 
greenhouses.  High temperatures are very detrimental to insect populations, although  freezing 
temperatures  are not good for either bugs or plants. I've  found  that winter is generally  not a 
good time to introduce any beneficial  insects. When you release your insects, try to do so on a 
cloudy  day. A light mist on the plants will also help, except when establishing predator mites 
that prefer drier conditions. Having blooming flowers in your greenhouse not only adds beauty, 
but the nectar and pollen contained within the flowers provides a back-up food source for many 
of  the beneficial  insects. Have a few dill, fennel,  or celery  flowers  around  because they are 
loved  by  many  beneficial  insects and  are a good food  source  for mem.  Having  a large pest 
population also helps to successfully  establish a beneficial  insect population—they won't lack 
for  food. 

Identification  of both the beneficial  and harmful  insects is essential. To do this you will 
need a lOx hand lens—a cheap one will do. When your beneficial bugs arrive, get a few of them 
under a good light and look closely at them. Know them well. Give them your best blessings. 
Release them on the plants that have the highest populations of pests. Mark these plants with a 

176 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

tag  so  you  can  periodically  check  on  their  performance  with  your hand  lens.  Look  on  the 
underside  of  leaves  and  always  check adjacent  plants  for  indications of beneficial  insects at 
work. Don*t release any new general predator in an area where another general predator already 
exists. To do so will greatly lessen the chances of establishing the new predator. Watch your 
plants closely and don't let a problem sneak up on you. And obtain your beneficial bugs as soon 
as you see a high population of pests. 

A good  example of the benefits  of establishing  and spreading  a beneficial  insect  is the 
white  fly  parasite.  The  encarsia formosa  (white  fly  parasite)  will establish  itself  in an area 
heavily  infested  with  white  flies,  and  you  can  use  this  place  as  a  base of  operations.  For 
instance,  if  you  have  established  the encarsia  on  a tomato  plant  to control  a bad  white  fly 
problem,  the  plant  will  soon  be  covered  with  many  little  dark  spots.  The  dark  spots  are 
parasitized white flies and contain young encarsia soon to hatch out of what was once a young 
white  fly.  If you  spot a white  fly  infestation  beginning  in another area, pluck a leaf with the 
encarsia on it (with black spots) and hang it directly near the new infestation.  On a daily basis, 
use your hand lens to follow their progress. Use similar techniques with all releases. 

If  biological  control  is something  you  want  to be  involved  with,  eliminate  the  mental 
programming that all bugs are bad. If you are used to using "total wipe-out" pesticides, it may 
be hard to be comfortable  with plants that always have some pests and some beneficial  insects 
working  on  them.  You  will  have  to put  up with  some  pest  damage, but  it's  well worth  the 
reward  of  having  a  self-perpetuating  insect  control  system  that  is  guaranteed  not  to  have 
harmful  long-term side effects.  Not only will you have a garden of plants, but also a garden of 
animals—all  in balance. 

When it comes time to purchase beneficial  insects you may find that the prices seem a bit 
high. Keep in mind that if you are successful, you will be purchasing these critters only rarely, 
as they often will repopulate themselves. An alternative to paying the high price individually is 
to buy cooperatively. Share the cost with friends, or members of a co-op or gardening club. For 
people  with  attached  greenhouses,  split  the  smallest  order  of  beneficial  insects  available, 
giving priority  to the greenhouses with the worst infestation.  Soon they may even be able to 
supply many other folks with the needed predator or parasite. As people become more familiar 
with using the biology of natural greenhouse pests controls, they will gain skill in rearing and 
maintaining  these  beneficial  insects.  There  is  a potential  for  developing  cottage  industries 
around rearing predators and parasites for use in solar greenhouses. I see exciting possibilities 
for a good deal of small-scale economic development involving the solar greenhouse. 

Besides insects, other greenhouse pest control friends are reptiles such as small, harmless 
snakes, toads, chameleons and other lizards. These reptiles have excellent appetites for insects 
and  may  have  an  important  place  in your pest control  program. 
Slugs, flying pests and even a few (oops) beneficial insects will be 
part of their diet. Watch closely to be sure they are feeding mainly 
on  your  pests.  If  the  reptiles'  food  supply  gets  low,  they  may 
require  supplemental  food,  possibly  available  at  pet  stores. 
Experiment. 

The experience  of having a self-contained  ecosystem exist(cid:173)

ing within your greenhouse  is a source of continual  amazement. 
The fun of working in a greenhouse that produces food is doubled 
when you're not only growing plants, but also animals and insects 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

177 

living  in  dynamic  balance.  It  will  become  a  self-contained  biological  island  (or  at  least  a 
peninsula) to help bring your mind, body and spirit into a better dynamic balance of its own. At 
the least, it may help you get through a long winter. 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Pest  Controlled: 

How to Acquire: 

Comments: 

Greenhouse  Friends 

Ladybug or Ladybird Beetle 
General predator 
Adult: 3/16" long, oval-shaped; red-orange outer wings with dark spots. 
Young:  l/16"-l/8" long; flat-looking; tapering to the rear; dark grey with 
orange spots. 
Eggs: Elongated football-shaped,  1/16"-1/8" long; yellow; laid in bunches on 
the leaf. 
Feeds  on  many  insects  including  aphids,  white  flies  (young),  mites, 
mealybugs, scale. Usually best with aphids. 
Usually through the mail—may come into greenhouse naturally. Purchase 
by the gallon, quart or pint. One gallon is approximately 75,000 ladybugs. 
A pint is plenty for a small greenhouse. 
Ladybugs will store in the refrigerator for up to 3 months, but do not freeze. 
Use as needed out of refrigerator; release in the evening after watering. You 
may pluck one inner wing under the orange ones to keep the ladybugs in a 
problem  area—it  usually  works.  They  will  survive  this.  (Not  for  the 
squeamish.) Temperatures above 85°F (30°C) cause  ladybugs to die  off. 
fly off,  and generally have negative attitudes. 
Ladybugs may not be available during certain 
times  in  winter  so  check  with  a  supplier. 
Ladybugs will feed on flower  nectar and pol(cid:173)
len during times of few pests. They may need 
to  be  periodically  re-introduced  into  your 
greenhouse.  Generally  ladybugs  aren't  all 
they're  cracked  up  to  be  in  the  solar  green(cid:173)
house; some of this is due to high temperatures and their feeding habits. It's 
hard  to  figure.  I've  seen  them  do  wonderful  jobs  on aphid  populations. 
Then there are an equal number of times when the aphids almost dance in 
front of the ladybugs' noses; the ladybugs yawn (perhaps they're often too 
preoccupied with mating) and fly  away without eating . ..  no pest control. 
So I've found that they are sometimes good, sometimes not, and it's hard to 
say exactly why. 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Praying Mantis 
General predator 
Adult:  Resembles  walking  stick;  large,  up to  5"  long; brown  to  green. 
Triangle-shaped head; large forearms to catch prey. 

178 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Pests  Controlled: 

How to Acquire: 

Comments: 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Pests  Controlled: 

How to Acquire: 

Comments: 

Young: Resembles an adult, only  much  smaller—14" and larger.  Almost 
looks like a large mosquito. 
Eggs: Born from an egg case (up to 200 eggs per case). The case resembles 
a wad of brown, rigid foam about  I'A"  in diameter. 
While  young, they  feed  on many  soft-bodied  insects.  As they  get older, 
they feed on larger insects, including each other. 
Usually through the mail. In warmer climates egg cases may be collected 
from outside in late fall and winter. Look for egg cases on branches. 
Hang  mantis  egg  cases  from  a branch  in areas with  pest  problems.  Egg 
cases do not change appearance appreciably  after young have hatched, so 
watch  closely.  Cases  are generally  available  only  from  January  through 
June.  While  young,  mantises  do  a  fine  job  on  many  greenhouse  pests. 
Contrary to what many suppliers say, adults often begin to feed on ladybugs 
and may greatly deplete their population. Mantises are fun to have around 
and can become friendly with people. If treated gently, they will not bite. 

Green Lacewing Flies (young known as Aphid Lion) 
Predator 
Adult:  Up  to  1"  long;  slender  green  body;  large  lacy  wings;  beautiful 
golden eyes; large antennae. 
Young: 1/16"-1/8" long; large jaws: tapered body down to tail; looks like 
small centipede without all the legs. 
Eggs:  1/16"  round; found on the end of a 3/4" long, thin, hair-like stalk. 
Only young are predaceous; adults feed on nectar.  Young feed on a wide 
variety of greenhouse pests including aphids, mites and some white flies. 
Aphids are the primary  food. 
Usually through the mail. They will fly in from the outside on their own but 
only if your vents aren't screened. 
Green lacewings are usually very good predators but are subject to be eaten 
by other predators and each other.  For this reason,  don't  try to establish 
green lacewings in areas where you have already established predators such 
as  ladybugs.  The  young green  lacewing  is a nocturnal  predator.  They're 
usually purchased as eggs, which may be held in the refrigerator  for up to 8 
days. But it's best to release them immediately. When the eggs are grey in 
color, they are just a few hours from  hatching. If eggs have hatched when 
they arrive, release them immediately, as the young will eat each other. To 
release, scatter on leaves, in crotches of stems and as near to pest infestation 
as possible. Early morning application is said to be best. 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Fireflies or Lightening Bugs 
Predator 
Adult:  W-W 
long;  flat  narrow  beetle.  Abdomen  often  luminescent. 
Range  in  color  from  black  to  brown;  sometimes  has  lines of  yellow  or 
orange. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

179 

Pests  Controlled: 
How to Acquire: 

Comments: 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Pest  Controlled: 

How to  Acquire: 

lA"-W 

Young: 
long,  dark-colored;  flat,  well-protected  back  and  head. 
equipped  with  strong sickle-like jaws. One or more segments  may glow  in 
the dark. 
Eggs:  Found  on  moist  ground,  may  be glowing.  Found  in damp,  swampy 
areas. 
Snails and slugs. 
Not commercially  available. Must be collected outside the greenhouse  and 
released  inside. 
Slugs  and  snails  are  hard  pests to  deal  with  in any  greenhouse.  There  is a 
possibility that some control  may be obtaned with the firefly  but much  more 
work  has  yet  to  be  done  with  these  critters.  The  young  form  is  the  main 
predator; it usually takes  1-2 years for the young firefly  to become an adult. 
It  is a  great  fantasy  to  imagine  your  greenhouse  lit  up at  night  by  a  large 
number  of  happy  fireflies  eating  slugs  for  dinner.  Remember,  it's  still 
experimental  for  the  greenhouse  and  control  information  is  vague.  I've 
released  them  and  had  trouble  keeping  them  alive  for  any  period  of  time. 
But my experience  is limited.  I feel there's good  potential  here. 

i  '•  '~*':nr*^f~y%^-' 

1/16"-3/8"  . ..  Looks 

Syrphid  Fly - Hover Fly 
Predator 
Adult:  3/8"-1/2".  Resembles  a  wasp  but  is 
really  a  fly.  Has  yellow  or  orange  rings  on  a 
black  body.  Has  the  ability  to  hover  like  a 
hummingbird  or bee (usually  around  flowers). 
Young: 
small 
grey or brown  maggot or  caterpillar. 
Eggs:  Laid singly; oval; white;  1/32". 
Usually  only  young  are predaceous,  and  have 
a good  appetite for aphids. 
Young  are  much  harder  to  spot  than  adults. 
Flowers attract adults into your yard and greenhouse. They look like a wasp 
with  a  fly  body  (but  not  so  segmented).  Besides  the  orange  stripes,  their 
superb flying  ability and the way they hover in the air is the best giveaway to 
their  identification. 

^  ty/mBB 

^ A S^ 

like 

•• 

••' 

^% 

•• 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Spiders 
General  predator 
Usually 4 pairs of segmented legs. Often  found in webs. Abdomen  strongly 
constricted at base. 

Pests  Controlled:  Spiders  feed  on  many  small  flying  insects  including  winged  aphids  and 

How  to  Acquire: 

white flies.  They also feed  on other crawling insects. 
Not  available  commercially.  Can  be  found  outside and brought  in, or will 
arise naturally as you resist the spraying of pesticides. Smaller spiders seem 

180 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Comments: 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Pest Controlled: 
How to Acquire: 
Comments: 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 
Pests Controlled: 
How to Acquire: 
Comments: 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Pest Controlled: 
How to Acquire: 
Comments: 

more active and better for the greenhouse. Besides, they're not so scary to 
people! 
Spiders are an important general predator that you should make friends with 
in  your  greenhouse.  Let  them  live  peacefully  in  out  of  the  way  places 
(corners,  under  benches)  and  they  will  help your greenhouse  crops  stay 
healthy. Spiders aren't insects but are often grouped under the title "benefi(cid:173)
cial insects." 

Predator Mite—Phytoseiulus persimilis 
Predator 
Very small—1/64", resembles pest mite but has longer legs and is reddish 
in color. Hard to distinguish from other mites. 
Mites only. 
Usually obtained through a commercial supplier. 
This predator mite has a healthy appetite for its pesty brothers and sisters— 
two-spot  and  red  spider  mites.  Release  the mite immediately  in areas of 
mite infestation.  Keep a close watch on its progress. This particular mite is 
best  on  greenhouse  crops.  There  are  different  mites  available  for  other 
crops.  Don't water before or immediately  after  releasing. Predator spider 
mites  aren't  insects  but  are  usually  grouped  under  title  of  "beneficial 
insects." 

Predator Mite—Amblyseius californicus 
Predator 
Adult: Similar to the phytoseiulus persimilis mite, but it moves a bit slower. 
Red spider and two-spot spider mites. 
Through commercial suppliers. 
If you are having a mite infestation  and your greenhouse  runs hot  (often 
above  90°F, 32°C)  the californicus  mite may be a better choice than the 
phytoseiulus  persimilis  because  it  withstands  higher  temperatures  quite 
well. 

Cryptolaemus montrouzieri 
Predator 
A cousin to the ladybug, it is a blackish hairy beetle with reddish thorax and 
wing tips. 
Mealybugs. 
Only through commercial supply houses. 
This beetle has the distinction of having helped to save California's  citrus 
industry in the early  1900s. It feeds only on mealybugs and works well in 
greenhouses.  Recolonization  is often  necessary because this beetle depresses 
mealybug populations to such low levels that they themselves subsequently 
starve. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

181 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Kn tarsia  formosa 
Parasite 
Adult: A very small harmless wasp about the size of a large speck of dust 
(not easy to see even with a hand lens.) The head is black and the abdomen 
light yellow. 
Eggs: Black and round, about 1/32". Found on the underside of leaves near 
and among young white fly populations. 

Pest Controlled:  White flies. 
How to Acquire:  Usually through commercial suppliers. May occur naturally or be collected 

Comments: 

from other greenhouse growers who use the wasp for white fly control. 
An excellent way to control the white fly. There has been concern that solar 
greenhouses are too cool for encarsia to be able to keep up with the white fly 
population.  Ideal  temperatures  are  70°-80°F  (21°-27°C)  days  and 60°-
70°F (15°-21°C) nights. My experience has shown that the encarsia keeps 
up with white flies in solar greenhouses with their lower and more fluctuat(cid:173)
ing temperatures (40°-100°F, 4°-38°C.) They seem to over-winter fine in 
solar greenhouses. The encarsia  is very tiny and will  not harm people or 
plants whatsoever. 
When purchased, the wasps will arrive as black eggs on a leaf. Hang this 
leaf on a plant that has a high  infestation  of white flies  in an area of your 
greenhouse that's also infested. Tag plant(s). The young wasps will hatch 
out of round black dots and fly to the area where many white fly young are 
developing. These developing white flies  look  like round white scale-like 
(1/32") dots under leaves. The young white fly is immobile. The encarsia 
will  lay eggs  into these  developing  white  flies  by  "stinging"  each white 
dot. The new encarsia young will begin to grow in the developing white fly 
scale, feeding on and eventually killing the white fly. The white scale will 
eventually turn black as the wasp grows within the white fly. The wasp will 
then emerge from  this former  white fly and eventually  lay more eggs into 
more developing white flies. In completing their life cycle, they control the 
white fly. They parasitize only the white fly.  Establishment of the encarsia 
formosa  is  indicated  by the blackening of  many young developing white 
flies.  After  establishment,  you  can  spread the encarsia  to other  problem 
areas by plucking off a leaf full of the black dots (developing encarsia) and 
hanging it in a new area of infestation.  While establishing the wasp, don't 
prune the plants in the area of initial release until the wasp has begun some 
control  of  the  white  flies.  Also,  while  using  the encarsia  in your green(cid:173)
house, don't use any control methods for white flies involving yellow sticky 
traps or boards. The encarsia will  also perish on these boards. One small 
order  from  a  supply  house  is  usually  enough  for  two  small  attached 
greenhouses or one large-size greenhouse (up to  1,000 sq. ft.).  Establish(cid:173)
ment of encarsia may take up to 2lA months, so be patient. To over-winter 
the encarsia  in your solar greenhouse, maintain some hardy tomato plants 
or geraniums near the warmest part of the greenhouse (usually against the 

182 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

north  wall  near the thermal  storage). Let the encarsia  and the white  flies 
spend the winter here. As the temperatures warm up and the white flies start 
doing  damage,  repeat  the  spreading  of  encarsia  eggs  around  the  green(cid:173)
house, using over-wintered tomato or geraniums as the starting point. 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Pest Controlled: 
How to Acquire: 

Comments: 

from 

or  black,  small  wasp 
'. Young larva stage is parasitic. 

Brachnid Wasp 
Parasite 
Brownish 
1/16"- 3/8' 
Aphids. 
No commercial suppliers listed; you must lo(cid:173)
cate  them  outside  and  bring  them  in.  They 
may  move  in  from  the  outside  garden  nat(cid:173)
urally. 
Most  good  parasites  are in the wasp  family. 
The  brachnid  is  among  the  better  parasites. 
Look for copper-colored, bloated aphids as an indication of control. Try to 
locate  aphid  populations  in outside  weeds  during  the summer.  Look  for 
parasitized  aphids  (copper  colored  and  bloated)  among  the  outside  col(cid:173)
onies.  Bring  these  parasitized  aphids  containing  the  brachnid  wasp  into 
your greenhouse where, hopefully,  they will set up shop, working on your 
greenhouse aphids. I've had great success with this. 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Pest Controlled: 
How to Acquire: 

Comments: 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 

Gall Midge (Aphidoletes aphidimyza) 
Predator 
The  adults are  less than  1/16"  in length,  and have  long trailing  legs and 
translucent wings that are larger than the body. The orange-colored larvae 
are slightly larger than the adults; they are worm-like and taper to the head. 
It is the larvae that feed on the aphids while the adults feed on flower nectar 
and pollen. 
Aphids. 
Not currently  available commercially. They may find their way into your 
greenhouse  naturally or you can  bring them in from  outside. There  is an 
indepth discussion on collecting the gall midge for greenhouse pest control 
in the excellent booklet. Biological Control of Greenhouse Aphids, listed at 
the end of this section. 
During the winter months, the gall midge will often hibernate in the soil. 

Zebra finch (taeniopygia guttata castanotis) 
Predator 
Males: orange beak  and  feet,  black  and  white striping on chest and  tail, 
white belly, orange cheek patches, chestnut flanks dotted with white spots. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

183 

Pests Controlled: 
How to Acquire: 
Comments: 

black  patch on upper chest. Females: same coloring except they  lack the 
orange face patches, the chestnut flanking, and the black chest patch. 
Aphids, worms and other soft bodied insects 
Pet shops and private breeders or local bird clubs. 
These are predators you turn  loose  in the greenhouse.  It's best to acquire 
babies and cage them while you acclimate them to your home. See a manual 
on their care and culture. They will need to be taught to eat the aphids and 
worms. Here's how: introduce infested limbs into their cage and allow them 
to  discover  the  delicacies.  Once  they  develop  a  taste  for  the  insects, 
introduce the birds into the greenhouse. Birds introduced in warm tempera(cid:173)
tures will do fine in winter. The birds, however, will shred plant material to 
build nests when breeding season arrives (usually  spring),  so it is best to 
provide  other  nesting  material  for  them  (such  as  twigs,  grasses,  burlap 
shreddings, dryer lint, etc.) Be sure all string-like pieces are no longer than 
3"-4".  Put  the  nesting  material  by  their  feeding  station.  Also,  the  little 
avians need vegetable matter in their diet (just as we do) for fresh  vitamins 
and  minerals;  so  by  providing  washed  fresh  vegetables  (i.e.  spinach, 
broccoli, com,  squash, cauliflower,  etc.) you accomplish excellent nutri(cid:173)
tion for a creature who's mean body temperature is 104°F, plus, spare your 
valuable  plants  from  possible  destruction.  You  will  get  much  song  and 
delight form these birds, while employing a natural insect control. 

Name: 
Biotype: 
Description: 
Pests  Controlled:  Slugs  and  assorted  flying  and  crawling 

Toads, Chameleons, Lizards and Snakes 
Predators 
Reptiles. 

How to Acquire: 
Comments: 

insects. 
Pet shops, or collect from outside. 
Chameleons and toads seem to feed on flying 
insects. They position themselves on the tops 
of plants in search of food. Lizards, salaman(cid:173)
ders  and  snakes  will  feed  on  grasshoppers 
and  slugs.  There  is  a  lot  of  room  for  ex(cid:173)
perimentation.  Be sure to put away your mouse poison; it may also kill the 
reptiles.  If food gets low for these predators, you may have to feed them 
supplementary  food  such  as  mealworms,  available  at  pet  stores.  These 
predators are not recommended for community or commercial greenhouses 
because  these  great  little  creatures  often  scare  the  hell  out  of  people. 
Otherwise, give them a try—you may find a good friend under the scales. 

184 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Sources of Beneficial  Critters for your Greenhouse-

Abbott  Laboratories 
14th and Sheridan  Roads 
North Chicago, Illinois 60064 

Beneficial  Insect Company 
P.O. Box 323 
Brownsville, CA 95919 

Bio-control  Company 
10180 Ladybird Drive 
Auburn, CA 95608 

Biotactics 
22412 Pico Street 
Colton, CA 92324 

California  Green Lacewings, Inc. 
2521 Webb Avenue 
Alameda, CA 94501 

Natural Pest Controls 
9397 Premier Way 
Sacramento, CA 95826 

Norman Evans 
3423 Devin Rd. 
Grove City, OH 43123 

Ladybug Sales 
Rt.  l,Box93A 
Biggs, CA 95917 

Mincemoyers Nursery 
Route 526 
Jackson, NJ 08527 

Organic Control, Inc. 
P.O. Box 25382 
Los Angeles, CA 90025 

Pyramid Nursery 
4640 Attawa Ave. 
Sacramento, CA 95822 

Rincon Vitova 
P.O. Box 95 
Oakview, CA 93022 

Bacillus thuringiensis 

Ladybugs 

Ladybugs and praying mantis egg cases 

Spider mite predators 

Green lacewing flies 

Predator  mites,  scale  parasites,  green  lace 
wing  flies,  cryptolameus  (mealybug  preda(cid:173)
tor), ladybugs, praying mantis 

Praying mantis 

Ladybugs 

Praying mantis 

Bacillus thuringiensis 

Ladybugs,  praying  mantis,  green  lacewing 
flies 

Green  lacewings,  ladybugs,  predator  mites 
encarsia  formosa,  cryptolameus  (mealybug 
predator) 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

185 

More Reading  on Biological  Control 

A Guide to the Biological Control of Greenhouse Aphids by Mariam Klein and Linda Gilkeson, 
available  from  Memphremagog Group,  P.O. Box 456, Newport,  VT 05855.  $5.00 The best 
publication yet on greenhouse biological pest control with good details on collecting your own 
predators and parasites from outside. 
Common Sense  Pest Control by Helga Olkowski. Consumers Cooperative of Berkeley,  Inc. 
4805 Central Ave., Richmond, CA 94804 
The Bug Book, Harmless Insect Controls by Helen and John Philbrick, Garden Way Publish(cid:173)
ing, Charlotte, Vermont (1974) 
Windowsill Ecology—Controlling Indoor Plant Pests with Beneficial Insects by William H. 
Jordan, Jr., Rodale Press, Inc. (1977) 
Handbook on Biological Control of Plant Pests, Editor, Cynthia Westcott. Brooklyn Botanic 
Garden, Brooklyn, NY  11225. (1960) 

Common Greenhouse Pests 

Note:  for  more  indepth  discussion  of  each  control  mentioned  here,  see  previously  listed 
techniques 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 

Control: 

Aphids 
Pear shaped and quite small with long legs and antennae. They have a pair 
of small  "exhaust pipe" structures on their rear end. They vary greatly in 
color,  ranging  from  black,  grey,  red,  yellow  or  green.  Adults  may  be 
winged or wingless. Females can give birth to 
live young without mating. Offspring  can re(cid:173)
produce  within  7-10  days.  Fast,  huh?  Col(cid:173)
onies are found on new buds and under leaves 
near veins. Especially check young seedlings. 
Also, ants may carry aphids to your plants. 
Aphids  are  sucking  insects  that cause  spotty 
marks  on  leaves,  and  deformed  and  curling 
leaves  and  flowers.  In high  populations they 
can greatly  stunt growth or even  kill plants. 
They  also  secrete  a  sticky  substance  called  honeydew  which  drips  onto 
lower leaves. Then a black mold often  grows on the honeydew. This black 
mold,  commonly known as "sooty  mold,"  is also damaging to fruits  and 
leaves.  Aphids  may  transmit  plant  diseases  that  may  result  in yellowing 
tissue and plant death. 
General predators, brachnid wasps, gall midges, ladybugs, soap sprays and 
botanicals.  Control the ants associated  with aphids. Ants often  herd these 
pests  around  like  cows  because  they  feed  on  the  honeydew  that  aphids 
secrete. Ants are amazingly repeled by spreading the herb tansy around the 
greenhouse. 

186 

Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 

Control: 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 

Control: 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 

Control: 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 

Control: 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 

Cabbage Looper, Green Worm 
Green  caterpillar  up to  W 
move with a looping gait. Adults are small white moths. 
The caterpillar causes small holes in leaves. May defoliate plants. Usually 
found on cabbage and cabbage relatives but may be on other plants. 
Use microbial insecticide. Dipel® orThuricide® (safe for biological control). 

long;  may  have white  stripe  on  sides.  They 

Fungus Gnat 
'/a" long, grey-black, long legs. Found near soil surface, especially where 
there is decomposing organic matter. Larvae are white and wormlike; about 
W  or smaller. Looks like a cloud of 4 or 5 dots at the base of the plant. 
It is often  more annoying to people than to plants. Larvae may sometimes 
feed on roots, which in turn may promote root rot organisms. 
Cultivate soil surface, dust soil with tobacco from cigarettes or Rotenone® 
dust if you're sure the gnats are doing actual damage. 

Leafbopper 
Small,  light  colored  (yellow  to  green)  up  to  "A"  long.  Look  for  them 
jumping and flying when foliage  is disturbed. They are fast. 
Cause  spotting  on  leaves  and  known  for  transmitting  diseases.  Also, 
sucking effects similar to aphid damage. 
General predators give slight control; spot spraying with botanicals. I have 
found  that leafhoppers  are attracted to calendulas, which may be used as a 
trap crop. 

Leafminers 
Very  small  flies  (1/32"-1/16")  with  black  and yellow  markings,  Adults 
seen  flying  when  foliage  is  disturbed.  Eggs  are  laid  in  leaves,  through 
which larvae make characteristic tunnels. 
Damage  is  usually  more  visual  than  actual  to vegetable  crops.  Look  for 
serpentine  tunnels  in leaves. That  is the main  indication  that  you have a 
problem. 
Control measures required only in extreme cases. Spray for adults. 

Mealybugs 
White to tan, oval shaped, about  1/3" or less. 
They  produce  a wax-like cottony  substance. 
Found near buds and leaf bases. 
They  are  sucking  insects  causing  problems 
similar to aphids, including honeydew secre(cid:173)
tions. They damage crops by removing plant 
sap. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

187 7 

Control: 

Rubbing alcohol, botanical spray, soap solu(cid:173)
tion, cryptolaemus predator. 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 
Control: 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 

Control: 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 

Control: 

Millipede, Centipede, Symphylids 
Long, slender, white to brown bodies with many legs. Up to 1" long.Found 
on soil surface, often under debris. They run for cover fast when disturbed. 
May occasionally feed on roots, causing stunting of plants. 
Practice  good  sanitation,  keep debris off  soil surface.  Even  when  pest  is 
present, the need for spray is rare. 

Mites (two-spot and red spider) 
Small  (l/32"-l/16");  pale  yellow  to  light 
brown  to  reddish;  they  may  have  red spots. 
Because they are spiders they have 8 legs. Get 
a hand  lens or magnifying  glass to see them. 
Adults  may  have two spots on either side of 
the body. This  is the "two-spot  mite." They 
look like tiny dots associated with webs found 
on underside of leaves and growing tips. 
They  feed  with  sucking  mouthparts.  Injury  causes  leaves to  look  lighter 
colored as if they are drying out or parched. Upper surface may look spotty 
or  "stippled."  Also  look  for  webbing  over  foliage.  High  populations 
greatly reduce yield and may kill plants. 
Phytoseiulus  and  amblyseius  (predatory  mites)  are  excellent  biological 
controls. Also try spraying soap, water (which sometimes knocks them off 
the plant) or botanicals. 

Slugs, Snails 
Slugs are slimy, dark-grey soft-bodied  creatures up to  1" long. They glide 
on the plants leaving a silvery reflective  trail. They are usually nocturnal 
feeders,  and  are  found  hiding  under  debris. 
Snails  are similar  in habit  and  appearance to 
slugs  except  they  have  a  round  shell  which 
varies in color and markings. 
They eat holes in the leaf about !4"-l" round. 
Often  they kill seedlings and make foliage so 
full of holes it is unmarketable or unpalatable. 
Avoid  mulching  and  keep top of  soil  clean. 
Baits and traps  (see environmental  controls); 
metaldehyde; set out small flat boards or pota(cid:173)
toes cut  in half on soil surface,  in morning handpick  pest from  underside 
and destroy; diatomaceous earth will protect young seedlings. 

188 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 
Control: 

Name: 
Description: 

Damage: 
Control: 

Name: 
Description: 
Damage: 
Control: 

Name: 
Description: 
Damage: 

Control: 

Sowbugs, Pillbugs 
Grey, flattened, oval bodies (up to 1/3") with 
large scale-like plates. May roll into ball (pill-
bugs) or run away (sowbugs) if disturbed. 
Occasionally feed on roots, seedlings and stems. 
Cultivation, keep soil surface clean, dust with 
"Dipel  II"® granules  (a special  formulation 
of bacillus thuringiensis), trap under boards or 
potatoes cut in half and placed on soil surface. 
Dispose of them in morning. 

White Flies 
Small (1/16") white flying insects. Eggs, which 
usually go unseen, are very small, black, slender 
specks; young are roundish, flat and white. All 
are found on underside of the leaf. 
Similar to aphids. 
Encarsia formosa is excellent biological control, 
yellow sticky traps (not to be used with encarsia 
control), botanicals, general predators. 

Thrips 
Very small; yellow to brownish; cigar-shaped;  1/50"-1/32" long. 
They suck on the leaves, causing a stippling of the leaf. 
Spray underside of leaf with garlic or hot pepper solution. 

Nematodes 
Live in soil, not visible to the eye; root feeders. 
Leaves  may be  abnormal  color,  plants  become  very  prone  to  wilting, 
discolored roots, low productivity. Hard to positively identify  this damage 
as being attributed to nematodes. You may need an expert. 
Unless  common  in your  area,  nematode  damage  is hard  to confirm.  In(cid:173)
tercrop marigolds. Work decomposed organic matter into the soil, as there 
is  a  fungus  that  lives  in  organic  matter  that  actually  is  predaceous on 
nematodes. 

Name: 
Description: 
Damage: 

Control: 

Cats and Dogs 
You know. 
Plant  flattening,  uprooting of plants,  leaves chewed on; common  around 
catnip. 
You know. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

189 

If you cannot identify  a  pest... 

try to capture some and put them in a small jar of alcohol. Take it to your county agricultural 
extension  agent  for aid  in identification  and control. Take their spray recommendations with 
some caution, especially if you're already releasing beneficial  insects. Extension agents tend to 
favor chemical control. 

Diseases 

There  are  a  lot  of  fancy,  scientific  defini(cid:173)
tions  for  plant  disease  but  let's  keep  it simple. 
How  about:  Any  deviation  from  the  normal in 
your plant  that you don't like. A broad definition 
but you probably already have an idea of what a 
disease is anyway. 

A disease may range from causing the death 
of  a  whole  plant,  death  to  parts  of  a  plant,  a 
cancerous  overgrowth of plant tissue, to dwarf(cid:173)
ing.  Not  all  diseases  are caused  by organisms. 
From  the  plant's  point  of  view,  many  are  the 
result  of  an  adverse  environment.  These  may 
resemble organism-caused  diseases and may be 
just  as  destructive.  Conversely,  some diseases  resemble  a plant  nutrient deficiency,  or vice 
versa...  or  your  plants  may  be  afflicted  with  a  combination  of  both.  Don't  let  it  get  too 
confusing.  Read on; you can handle it. 

The solar greenhouse is not a sterile environment; it's full of life at all times and sometimes 
it will seem as if insects and diseases appear out of thin air. Please take your time about dealing 
with what you think may be a disease. All too often  I have come across greenhouses where the 
supposed cure turned out to be worse than the "disease" itself. As with insect and pest control, 
we should approach spraying only as the very last resort. 

Solar  greenhouses  often  run  at  high  humidities, especially  in winter  months; and  high 
humidities  are  conducive  to  development  of  disease  organisms.  Also,  most  greenhouse 
glazings  filter  out the sun's ultraviolet radiation  (which has been shown to kill many disease 
organisms), so lower ultraviolet levels may contribute to a higher incidence of disease. To what 
extent is not known. 

As with insect infestations,  diseases often  affect  plants with poor health or those that are 
under stress. So maintaining general plant health and healthy soil is the first step in preventing 
disease. 

Environmentally  Caused  Diseases 

There are a number of plant maladies common in greenhouses that are solely the result of 
the environment. Environmentally caused symptoms usually occur on many plants of different 
species in a broad  area of your greenhouse (such as near glazing or a cold vent), rather than 
affecting  an  individual  plant.  Disease  organisms,  however,  usually  affect  only  one  plant 

190 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

species  such  as tomatoes,  but not herbs, cucumbers or other plants in the immediate  area. 

The  following  chart  may  help you  identify  environmental  maladies. 

Symptoms  of Common  Environmentally  Caused  Diseases 

Cause 

Symptoms/Comments 

Cold  damage: 

Smoke: 

Nitrogen  oxides: 

Ammonia: 

Pesticides: 

Nutrient  defi(cid:173)
ciencies: 

Wind  damage: 

Finger  blight: 

Ethylene: 

Sun  scald: 

Dark  green,  wilted  or  dry  leaves  occurring  on  plants  nearest  glazing  or 
vents with air leaks. Also misshapen fruit,  poor fruit  set and blossom drop. 
Yellow,  tan or papery blotches between the leaf veins, while veins  usually 
stay  green.  All  ages of  leaves affected.  Affects  most crops,  but  lettuce  is 
somewhat  resistant.  Check  any  heaters  for  down-drafting  (not  good  for 
people either). 
Same  symptoms  as  smoke  damage,  along  with  growth  suppression. 
Common  with  greenhouses  located  near manufacturing  plants,  refineries. 
combustion  of  fossil  fuels,  and busy  highways. 
When  high  amounts  are  in  the  air.  leaves  may  have  splotchy,  cooked 
appearance ranging from brown to red.  Damage may also appear as tan and 
white  spots  on  cabbage  family  plants,  and  leaves  may  drop  off.  Some 
people  believe  small  amounts  of  ammonia  may  actually  help  plants,  but 
there  is debate. 
Variable  symptoms.  The  herbicide  2.4-D  causes  unusual  leaf  and  stem 
curling.  Many  pesticides cause  burn  spots on  leaves.  Pesticides  should  be 
used  only  as  a  last  resort.  When  used,  please  read  the  label  for  safety 
precautions  and  for  a  list  of  crops  that  the  pesticide  is cleared  for.  Even 
strong  soap  may  cause  some  leaf  damage.  Spray  drift  may  also enter  the 
greenhouse  through an outside  vent  in summer. 
A  little  fertilizer  is  good,  more  is  often  disaster.  If  you  suspect  you 
overfertilized,  look  for  burnt  leaf  tips.  Read  Getting  to  the  Roots  for 
guidance.  Also see discussion  of blossom  end  rot  in tomatoes  later  in this 
chapter. 
Brown,  papery  leaf  spots,  wilting,  stunted  growth.  Occurs  on  plants 
nearest vents, fans  and  windows. 
Dead  green  areas  on  the  leaves  due  to  too  much  handling.  Occurs  most 
often  on  unusual  plants  or  scented  herbs  and  other  plants  located  near  a 
walkway.  Also,  smokers  transmit  tobacco  mosaic  virus  to  tomatoes  by 
touching the leaves. 

Growth reduction; leaf buds and flowers  may fall off;  also leaf  deformities. 
Ethylene  comes  from  leaks  of  L.P.  or  natural  gas,  methane  gas.  auto(cid:173)
mobile exhaust and combustion of  fossil  fuels. 
Areas  of  round  or  angular  browning  caused  by  water  droplets  acting  as 
magnifying  glasses  in greenhouses  with  glass glazing.  Also may occur  in 
greenhouses  with  aluminum  foil  on  walls where  light  was  focused  on  the 
plant  surface. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

191 

Lack of light: 

Wherever there is shading, look for plants with stems becoming elongated 
and spindly. This can be helped by the addition of a light colored mulch 
over the soil  and by painting  white everything  that is not thermal mass, 
plants or soil. Try hanging white sheets over thermal mass in summer. 

Organism  Caused  Diseases 

Micro-organisms, both disease causing and beneficial,  have very complex biologies. To 
even begin to understand the ecology involved is a great task. Identifying the disease symptom 
is essential to proceeding with the proper steps of control. 

Diseases  are  caused  primarily  by  three  organisms:  bacteria,  fungus  and  virus.  Many 
species of each group cause disease, and symptoms of one type will sometimes mimic another. 
Depending on the microbe, they may survive and move through the air, water, soil, plant debris 
or  be  carried  by  insects.  In these  same  environments,  however,  there  are also  predator  or 
parasitizing beneficial  microbes that attack the disease-causing microbes. That is why a sterile 
environment  doesn't  always  offer  the  best  control.  In  fact,  the  more  we  encourage  high 
microbial  populations,  especially  in the soil, the less we see disease organisms taking hold. 
Much  like  beneficial  insects,  the  harmful  microbe  populations  are controlled  by  beneficial 
microbe  populations.  In a soil culture this means adding organic matter to increase  microbe 
populations (See Getting to the Roots). This may be why I* ve found plants grown hydroponic-
ally somewhat more susceptible to disease problems. 

Before we look at specific diseases and organisms, let's first look at the options we have to 

control disease. 

Prevention of Disease 

The  adage,  "an  ounce  of  prevention  is  worth  a  pound  of  cure,"  also  applies  in  the 

greenhouse. Here are some guidelines: 

1.  Maintain  plant health.  Avoid overcrowding  and provide a healthy growing environ(cid:173)

ment with proper levels of ventilation, humidity, water, light, nutrition, etc. This also 
involves maintaining soil health. 

2.  Sanitation.  Keep  your  greenhouse  clean.  Remove  diseased  plants.  Keep  the  hose 
nozzle off  the ground.  Clean pots with hot water and soap before replanting in them 
and keep dead leaves, etc., off the soil surface. 

3.  Start  young  seedlings  in clean containers using storebought  potting  soil, or sterilize 

your own seedling mixture (see discussion later in this chapter). 

4.  Compost  from  greenhouse plants should be used only in an outside garden. Outside 
garden  plants may  be composted  for greenhouse use. Running two compost  piles in 
this parallel system helps to break disease cycles because outside and inside diseases 
are often  different. 

5.  Try to avoid taking on other people's plants, especially sickly looking ones. 
6.  Air circulation—Keep the air moving. Diseases, like insects, love stagnant air (see the 

insect control section earlier in this chapter). 

192 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

7.  Crop Rotation. This helps to break disease cycles. Keep a map of your planting layout 
to be  sure you  are rotating.  Avoid following  crops with  their relatives (which  often 
occurs within the large cabbage family or the tomato family). See Crop Layout for crop 
family lists. 

8.  Interplanting. This will greatly slow a disease, as well as insect infestation. Again, see 

Crop  Layout. 

Environmental  Management 

The environment can often  be slightly altered to help control your disease problems. The 

action you take depends upon the specific disease. Here are a few examples: 

Powdery  Mildew—unlike  most mildews, this fungus  disease can't spread when there is 
water on the leaves, but it does spread with high humidities. It may be a fine line between 
the two. 
Early Blight—this disease, like many other fungus diseases, spreads rapidly with water on 
the leaves. 
Seed  and  seedling  diseases—they  are  more  of  a  problem  with  salty  soils,  fertilizer 
applications, planting in old soil, low light conditions and overcrowding. 
High  humidities—this  will  increase  the  incidence  of  many  diseases  (see Greenhouse 
Environment). 

Resistant  Varieties 

Disease resistant plant varieties are much more common than insect resistance. Don't be 
mislead; seed companies use the term "resistant"  much too freely.  Usually they will be only 
more tolerant than other varieties. Resistant varieties may still become infested with the disease 
to which they are supposedly resistant. But the increased tolerance to a disease is still worth it. 
Read catalogs for descriptions of resistant varieties. If none is available, do your own varieties 
testing to discover more tolerant types. Whenever you see the word "resistant,"  replace it in 
your mind with "tolerant."  (See Selecting Solar Greenhouse Crops and Varieties.) 

Spraying 

As with spraying for insect control, spraying for disease control is a last resort. Refer to the 
insect  section  for  spraying techniques and methods. There are some homemade  preparations 
that may be of minor help. 

Homemade  Sprays 

Milk  has been shown to prevent  tomato seedlings  from  picking up mosaic virus. Dried 
skim milk  is often  added to pesticides because it helps the spray stick to the plant better (see 
tomato disorders later in this chapter). 

Acetic Acid (Vinegar) is an old method to help prevent seedling diseases in the soil. A % 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

193 

quart,  .8% solution per  1  square foot of planting tray is the recommended dose. Let it sit 5-6 
days before sowing seeds. This may be an alternative to purchasing sterilized planting soil or 
sterilizing soil yourself for seedlings. 

Baking Soda sprayed on leaves may be of some help in controlling powdery mildew. Mix 

4 tablespoons of baking soda to  1 gallon of water. Spray every 5-7 days. 

Synthetic  Sprays 

A wide choice of fungicide  sprays rated for food crops exist. But it should be a very rare 
case where you need to use a fungicide.  It might be better to forget that crop for the season. If 
you do  want  to spray,  ask your county agricultural extension  agent for the safest  food-rated 
fungicide.  Follow all directions and safety  precautions outlined  in the insect spray section of 
this book. 

Dusts for  Disease  Control 

Many  fungicides  as well as pesticides are available in both spray and dust  formulations. 

The two that are most commonly used in the greenhouse are sulfur and Thiram®. 

Sulfur  is an  age-old  fungicide  used primarily  for  mildew control.  It will also kill mites 
(both good and bad mites). On occasion I've used sulfur against powdery mildew with success. 
If used in moderation it is safe. However, high quantities of sulfur may burn leaves, particularly 
squash, cucumbers and houseplants. Always try a test dose on a leaf. 

Thiram®  is  a  synthetic  chemical  used  to  protect  seeds  from  seedling  diseases.  It's 
frequently  used in place of clean or sterilized soil for starting seedlings; for home gardeners it's 
really a lazy substitute. Thiram® dust in the air is harmful to breathe or get on your skin, so use 
extreme caution. First try all other controls for seedling diseases (see Damping Off later in this 
chapter). 

Soil Sterilization 

Soil sterilization, also known as pasteurization, is the heating of the soil to  180°F (65°C) 
for 30 minutes to kill any pests and diseases in it. It must be done before each planting because 
pests and diseases are quickly reestablished. 

Sterilization  is  a common  practice  for commercial  growers  who are set  up with  steam 
heaters or electric soil sterilization units. But for the small greenhouse owner it is usually more 
trouble than  it's worth.  Can you  imagine how hard  it would be to rig up your greenhouse to 
sterilize  all  your  soil  every  4-6  months?  Instead,  small  greenhouse  owners  should  practice 
techniques  to  promote  soil  health  and  disease  prevention.  The only  exception  would  be to 
sterilize the soil in which you start seedlings for later transplanting. Small amounts may be done 
in the oven.  If you try this in your oven, preheat for 30 minutes and wrap the soil in aluminum 
foil.  However,  it's even easier to buy a sack of commercially  made potting  soil for  seedling 
starts. It has been sterilized, it's usually a good mix and it's relatively cheap. 

Another method of sterilizing soil is to use the sun. Place  1 gallon of soil in a clear plastic 
bag and set it in the sun for a week (longer if cloudy).  Be sure the soil feels warm inside or it 
won't  work.  Turn  the bag every other day.  It may be hard to find a warm sunny  spot  in the 
winter. 

194 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

If your soil is high in decomposed compost, the sterilization process may cause an increase 
in soluble salts, which may be detrimental to plant growth. If this is a potential problem, read 
the salts section in Getting to the Roots. 

Disease Organisms 

Viruses 

Viruses are very small—ultramicroscopic—and  very unusual life forms. They don't even 
have cell walls.  Symptoms of virus infections  include mosaics (yellow mottling or spotting), 
angular yellowed or brown areas, many yellow spots, and occasional leaf curling. 

Viruses are commonly transmitted by insects such as aphids. But people can also spread 
the disease, as in the case of tobacco mosaic on tomatoes, spread by tobacco-smokers' fingers. 
Controlling  viruses usually involves growing resistant varieties, being careful  when handling 
plants, eliminating insects that transmit the disease, and using disease-free seeds or cuttings for 
propagation. 

Bacteria 

Many  people  think of bacteria  when they think of disease, but only  a small percentage 
cause disease.  Many,  in fact,  are beneficial  and essential  to our lives.  Bacteria  enter  plants 
through  leaf  wounds, places damaged by insects, or through natural microscopic openings in 
plant leaves. Bacteria need relatively warm temperatures to live. 

Symptoms of harmful  bacteria include both circular and angular leaf spots. At first,  leaf 
spots often appear to be some shade of green in color, then gradually they rum yellow, brown or 
black.  Other symptoms include bacterial rots where the plant tissue disintegrates, and is often 
slimy  and  smelly.  Control  involves  disposing  of  plants  mat  are  infected  and  practicing 
greenhouse  sanitation  such as keeping the soil surface clean and removing any dead parts of 
plants  from  both  the  plants  and  the soil.  Often  bacterial  problems  are associated  with  high 
humidities and overwatering in a warm greenhouse. 

Fungi 

Fungi cause the great majority of plant diseases, but there are also very beneficial  species 
that control some diseases.  Fungi generally reproduce by spores which spread in the air, soil 
and plant debris.  Fungi characteristically have complex life cycles which have many  different 
stages. 

The  symptoms of  fungus  diseases  include  leaf  spots, wilting, rots,  mildews,  rusts and 
blights  (a  rapid  withering or decay of tissue  without rotting). They are controlled  with good 
sanitation, resistant varieties, environmental management, and lastly, spraying fungicides. 

In general,  fungus  diseases are very difficult  to identify  unless you work with them on a 
daily  basis.  They  are  famous  for  mimicking  each  other  or  deviating  from  the  textbook 
symptoms.  If you  have a particularly  major  problem and need a positive  identification  get it 
diagnosed by a plant pathologist at your nearest agricultural university or experimental station. 
Mailing instructions are at the end of this chapter. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

195 

Because  most  people  grow  tomatoes  in their greenhouse, here's  a rundown of  tomato 

disorders, followed by a list of greenhouse vegetable diseases, and how to control them: 

Disease Name: 
Description: 

Cause: 

Control: 

Disease Name: 
Description: 
Cause: 

Control: 

Disease Name: 
Description: 
Cause: 
Control: 

Disease Name: 
Description: 
Cause: 
Control: 

Disease Name: 
Description: 

Common Greenhouse Tomato  Disorders 

Blossom End Rot 
First,  water-soaked  spots appear  at the blos(cid:173)
som end of fruits.  Later the spots increase in 
size  and  become  sunken,  flat,  brown  and 
leathery round areas. 
Environmental—low  moisture,  stress,  low 
calcium levels in soil; vertical training intensi(cid:173)
fies the symptoms. Non-infectious. 
Mulch the  soil.Use  bone  meal  for extra calcium  in the soil. Spray a  1% 
solution of calcium chloride on the leaves for immediate results. 
Resistant varieties: Texto, Tropic, Manapal, Floradel. 

Catfacing 
Deformed  marks, lines on fruit.  Odd shaped fruit. 
Insect  damage,  growth  disturbances,  and  cold  temperatures.  Non(cid:173)
infectious. 
Provide  even  growing  conditions.  The  variety  "Walter"  is  listed  as 
resistant. 

Fruit Cracking 
Cracks in skin of tomato fruit. 
Widely fluctuating temperatures.  Non-infectious. 
Maintain  foliage  covering  fruits  to avoid  direct  radiation  on fruit's  skin. 
Moderate  temperatures.  Resistant  varieties include: Jumbo,  Pink  Forcing 
TMV, Floradel, Manapal, Early Cascade, Pink Delight Hybrid. 

Grey Mold (Botrytis cineria) 
Fruits rotting during and after harvest. Some molding on stems. 
Fungus. 
Promote good air circulation. Lower humidity, raise temperature (if possi(cid:173)
ble), remove all infected stems or fruits.  Keep area clear of debris. 

Leaf Mold (Cladosporium fulvum) 
Whitish spots on upper surface of older leaves. They may enlarge and turn 
yellow. The underside has a velvet, olive-brown coating. Spores spread by 
air and watering. Sometimes carried on seed. 

196 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

Cause: 
Control: 

Fungus. 
Improve  air  circulation.  Lower  humidity.  Grow  resistant  varieties: 
Floradel, Marion, Marglobe, Globelle, Vetamold, Tuckcross 533. 

Disease Name: 
Description: 

Cause: 
Control: 

Disease Name: 
Description: 

Cause: 
Control: 

Disease Name: 
Description: 

Cause: 
Control: 

Fusiarium (Fusiarium oxysporum) 
Usually at first all leaves on one side of the stem become yellow and wilt. 
Later all  leaves  wilt and die. There  are two main  races,  Fusiarium  1  and 
Fusiarium 2. 
Fungus. 
Best control is resistant varieties and healthy soil. 
These  varieties  are  resistant:  Marglobe,  Floradel,  Manalucie,  Tropic, 
Tuckcross 533. 

Verticillium (Verticillium hydromycosis) 
Yellowing of older, lower leaves which later turn brown and die; wilting of 
the  tips  of  plants  during  the  day;  may  recover  at  night.  Defoliation  is 
common.  Branches  droop.  Leaves  are dull  in appearance  and  fruits  are 
small. Brownish discolored vascular system within stem. 
Fungus. 
Promote  a  healthy  soil  life.  Use  resistant  varieties:  Floradel,  Marglobe, 
Tropic, Bonus. 

Early Blight (Alternaria solani) 
Tan-colored spots appear on leaves and sometimes stems. Spots enlarge to 
J4"-V6".  Close  inspection  shows concentric rings inside of spots. Whole 
leaf may yellow and defoliate. Fruit may show dark brown spots. 
Fungus. 
Keep humidity  down, avoid water on leaves. Control  insects better,  they 
spread  Early  Blight.  Use tolerant  varieties: Floradel,  Manapal, Calypso, 
Early Cascade. 

Disease Name:  Grey Wall 
Description: 
Cause: 

Control: 

Grey-brown streaks on fruit; blotchy ripening. 
Low  light  intensities,  low temperatures, high  nitrogen  levels,  low potas(cid:173)
sium levels, high soil moisture levels, sometimes caused by mosaic virus, 
but usually  non-infectious. 
Keep soil  potassium  level  high.  Try  to increase temperature above  60°F 
(15°C). Use resistant varieties such as Tropic, Floradel and Walter. 

Disease Name: 
Description: 

Tobacco Mosaic Virus (Marmor tabaci) 
Plants infected early—Stunted growth, light green and dark green mottled 
areas or mosaic pattern. Few blossoms set. Inferior quality  fruit. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

197 

Cause: 

Control: 

Name: 
Description: 

Cause: 
Control: 

Name: 
Description: 

Cause: 
Control: 

Name: 
Description: 
Cause: 
Control: 

Plants  affected  after  blooming  stage—Light  green  and dark green  mottled 
areas.  Yellow  netting  appearance on  leaves.  Uneven  fruit  ripening,  some(cid:173)
times yellow streaks on  fruit. 
Virus.  Lives  in  Solanoceae  family  such  as  tobacco,  tomato,  eggplant  and 
pepper. 
Avoid  use of tobacco in any form  while  handling tomato plants. Don't  allow 
smoking. Don't  let strangers touch plants. Wash hands before handling tomato 
plants. Wash  after touching infected  plants. 
Pull  up  all  infected  plants.  Control  insects.  Prune  infected  plants  last.  Clean 
pruning knife  with disinfectant  between use on plants if infection  is suspected. 
Pour  milk  into soil of suspected  infection  area.  Milk that  would otherwise  be 
discarded  can  sometimes  be  obtained  from  school  lunch  programs.  Grow 
resistant varieties: Tropic, Jumbo, Tuckcross 533. 

C o m m on  Greenhouse  Vegetable  Diseases 

Mildews, powdery and  downy 
White  to greyish  leaf  surface  growth  with  a powdery  appearance.  Downy 
mildew  has  a  grey  appearance,  unlike  powdery  mildew  which  is  white. 
They severely  reduce  yield. 
Fungus. 
Use resistant varieties; sulfur  applications  (be careful  of  leaf  burn); baking 
soda  spray.  Powdery  mildew  is  inhibited  by  wet  leaves.  Downy  mildew 
thrives  when  leaves  are  wet.  Both  love  high  humidity.  Disease  growth  is 
slower in dry  air. 

Leaf Rot 
Top  portion  of  leaves  have  wet,  brownish  rot.  Often  found  on  heading 
lettuce, cabbage, Chinese cabbage. More  serious in shady  locations. 
Usually  bacteria. 
Try  to minimize  splashing  soil while  watering or the problem  will  spread. 
Overwatering,  high  humidities  and  poor  air  circulation  aggravate  this 
problem.  Also try different  varieties or, in the case of lettuce, switch to leaf 
rather than  heading varieties. 

Root  Rot 
Plants wilt constantly, roots rot. 
Fungus and  bacteria. 
Often  caused by overwatering,  which  is the unfortunate  urge  when  people 
see  a wilting  plant.  Try  replanting  in new  soil  with a higher  percentage  of 
sand.  Water only  when  soil  needs it (see Greenhouse  Environment). 

198 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Name: 
Description: 

Cause: 
Control: 

Name: 
Description: 
Cause: 
Control: 

Description: 

Leaf Spot 
Leaf  is  covered  with  spots  ranging  from  pinpoints  to  larger-sized.  Leaf 
spots are caused by a variety of insect pests, diseases and the environment. 
You may have to use outside help to positively  identify. 
Usually bacteria, fungus and insects. 
Based on identification.  For leaf spots on tomato plants see discussion of 
tomato diseases earlier in this chapter. 

Sooty Mold 
Black, sticky, dirty, dusty-like growth usually on lower leaves. 
Insect drippings triggering fungus mold. 
Control sucking insects—see Aphids section of this chapter. 

symptoms 

Damping Off (seedling diseases) 
Damping  off  is  a  general  term  des(cid:173)
cribing  many  different  seedling  dis(cid:173)
eases.  The 
include: 
1)  stem  rotting  near the soil  surface 
and  the  seedling  falls  over;  2)  seed 
decays in soil before or after germina(cid:173)
tion; 3)  root rots after plant is germi(cid:173)
nated  and  growing.  Plant  first  ap(cid:173)
pears  stunted,  then dies. Roots  often 
turn a rust color at rotted point. 

Cause: 
Control: 

Usually  fungi. 
Control  the environment.  Certain  environments  tend to increase the inci(cid:173)
dence of damping off.  In order to know how to control the damping off of 
seedlings, we must first understand the environment that fosters it. 

Environments Affecting the Promotion of Damping Off Diseases 

1.  Overwatering—of course you should never let your seedlings dry out, but overwater-
ing and maintaining soggy soil will increase damping off.  Keep the soil moist, but not 
dripping wet. 

2.  Fertilization—the  higher the level of nitrogen in the soil, the softer the plant growth 
will  be.  The  softer  the  growth,  the more  susceptible  the  plant  will be to  seedling 
diseases. 

3.  Light—seedlings grown in ample light are more resistant to seedling diseases. If your 
seedlings  are  showing  signs  of  a  light  deficiency  (elongated,  lanky  growth;  light 
green  leaves), they will also be more susceptible to damping off diseases. 

4.  Soil  salinity—if  your  soil test  shows a high concentration  of  salts  in the soil or an 

unusually high pH (about 7.5 or more) you'll see more damping  off. 

Pests And Diseases: When Things Go Wrong 

199 

5.  Temperature—seeds germinate best at temperatures between 65°-80°F (18° - 27°C) 
depending on the specific requirements of each crop. When seeds are grown at higher 
or lower temperatures than what's optimum for each crop, they'll be more susceptible 
to damping  off. 

6.  Poorly  aerated  soil—a  great  place  for  damping  off  diseases  to  grow.  Add  extra 
amounts of sand and decomposed organic matter such as peat moss to increase the 
aeration of your germinating soil. Too much organic matter or peat moss, however, 
may tend to make the soil hold too much water. (See Plant Propagation.) 

7.  Old,  infested  soil—using  soil  that  previously  had  seedlings  or  greenhouse  plants 
grown  in it will increase the incidence of damping off diseases. Such soil tends to be 
infested  with the damping off disease organisms. Virgin soils, or soils that have not 
been  used  for  growing  for  at  least  I  year  usually  have  less  of  a  problem.  To 
successfully  use older soil for seedlings, try sterilizing it first.  Store-bought  potting 
soils are already sterilized and work great for starting seedlings. 

8.  Depth of planting—planting seeds too deep delays the plant's emergence and keeps 
the seedlings more susceptible to damping off diseases. A seed should be planted at a 
depth that's 2 times its width. 

9.  Age of  seed—older  seed tends to be weaker,  and  as a result, they  may have more 
problems with damping off.  Use new seeds if damping off  is a problem. Store seeds 
in cold, dark, dry places in dry, air tight containers. 

10.  Crowded  seedlings—thickly  planted  seedlings  compete  for  light,  water  and  nu(cid:173)

trients. This creates a stress situation for the seedlings, which in turn makes it easier 
for them to be attacked  by damping off  diseases. Give each seed plenty of room to 
grow  so that it would be some time before the adjacent  seedling leaves touch each 
other. Also, when starting plants in flats or cut milk cartons, etc., it is better to plant 
the seedlings in rows rather than to broadcast or scatter them about in the container. 

When all else fails you need to get  a. .. 

POSITIVE DISEASE  I D. 

I know it's rough to figure out exactly what your problem is. This is just a brief list  from 
hundreds  of  possibilities.  For positive  identification  mail  a sample of  your problem to your 
nearest state agricultural university. Your county agricultural extension agent should have the 
address. Here's how to prepare the sample: 

1.  Clip a few diseased leaves, stems or roots and place them in a plastic bag containing a 

moist paper towel. 

2.  Seal the bag and place it in a crush-proof box for mailing. 
3.  Enclose  all  the  information  about  the  plant  and  disease  you  possibly  can  think  of, 
including: plant variety and its age, soil type, location in the solar greenhouse, fertilizer 
or sprays applied, etc. 

4.  Enclose a self-addressed  stamped envelope for their reply. Mail as soon as possible. 

200 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Weeds 

Weeds are really any plants that are growing out of place. Their beginnings may include 
tomato or other vegetable seeds that survived composting, manures containing weed seeds, and 
runners  from  mint  plants  or dill  seeds  that'll  take over  the beds.  For control  1 recommend 
pulling out  weeds  and  not using herbicides.  Herbicides  will  wipe out your vegetables  along 
with  the  weeds, besides possibly being poisonous to us humans. You may also mulch your 
growing beds, as well as avoiding manures with weed seeds. 

Further  Reading 

If you want to do your own disease identification in greater depth, I recommend the Plant 
Disease Handbook by Cynthia Westcott, published by Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. It's a 
large, extensive  book that  is easy to understand once you grasp its basic vocabulary. She has 
listed every plant disease you could ever imagine, and then some. 

EPILOGUE: 
THE FUTURE 

future.  . . that 

The 
twilight  zone  which  has  no 
memory . . . always  approaching  but  never  arriving. 
Being  a  former  science  fiction  nut,  I  can't  help  but 
speculate a bit. If any of you are a time-traveling visitor 
from the future,  I invite you to get in touch with me and 
correct my speculations. 

In  the  near  future,  I  see  more  community-type 
solar greenhouses, much like the one I have been direct(cid:173)
ing.  I  believe  every  neighborhood  can  use  something 
similar to the Cheyenne, Wyoming, project. Commun(cid:173)
ity  greenhouses  can  be adapted  easily  to the needs of 
different  neighborhoods,  and  even  to  the  different 
cultures,  ages  and  abilities  of  the  people  involved. 
Many  universities offer  degrees and study programs in 
horticultural therapy, and the solar greenhouse offers an 
ideal environment for year-round gardening therapy for 
those  with  varying  disabilities—besides  providing 
food, heat and employment. 

202 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Profile  of a Community Solar Greenhouse: The Cheyenne  Experience 

The Cheyenne Community Solar Greenhouse planted its first crop in January, 
1978. It is sponsored by Community Action of Laramie County, Inc. (CALC) and 
received initial funds  from  the Community Services Administration under a Com(cid:173)
munity  Food  and  Nutrition  Program  grant.  The  Cheyenne  Greenhouse  is a pro(cid:173)
totype,  the  first  of  its  kind  in  the country.  Most  of  the  greenhouse  construction 
occurred in  1977 and was supervised by two carpenter-foremen.  A large part of the 
labor  was  volunteered  by senior citizens, local  skilled workers, and  handicapped 
workers. Many of the construction materials were donated, recycled or obtained at 
lower costs. It was truly a community  effort. 

The  Cheyenne  Greenhouse  is  a  three-sectioned,  5,000  square  foot,  100% 
passively  heated  structure.  Solar  heat  is  collected  and  stored  in  more  than  200 
55-gallon drums containing water and painted black. The glazings are fiberglass on 
the exterior and polyethylene on the interior (both are greenhouse grade). The north, 
east  and  west  walls, as  well  as the roof,  are heavily  insulated.  The north  wall is 
slightly earth bermed. The passive system performs so well that the greenhouse has 
never had to rely on back-up heating—even during record cold winters. Cheyenne 
ranks fourth  highest in the nation for yearly average wind speed. 

One  section  of  the  greenhouse  is  commercial.  Bedding  plants,  vegetable 
seedlings, cut flowers, potted plants and growing accessories are sold to the public 
out of a small store area. Volunteers provide most of the labor. All profits supple(cid:173)
ment  the greenhouse operating budget, covering 20% - 30% of the total operating 
budget. 

The project  initially served low income senior citizens who volunteered their 
labor to do daily greenhouse maintenance. In return for their efforts, they took home 
fresh  produce. The greenhouse serves more than  100 senior citizens either directly 
(as a labor  force) or indirectly  (receiving  fresh  produce through low income  food 
programs). 

Currently,  the Community  Greenhouse  has been expanded  to involve youth 
offenders  working off court fines, and handicapped people who receive job training 
and  horticultural  therapy.  There  is  an  excellent  social  interaction  between  all 
involved, which is uncommon in a society where young and old rarely mix. 

Being  the  nation's  first  large  scale  solar  greenhouse,  it's  been  necessary  to 
develop several new horticultural techniques for the different  environments created 
within the large solar greenhouse. Because the safety of pesticides is questionable in 
a greenhouse that is in constant use by community people, the staff has developed a 
poisonless system of pest control. The use of new cultural techniques and the release 
of  many different  beneficial  insects have produced excellent results in controlling 
the populations of harmful  insects. 

The  Community Greenhouse  is a solar demonstration site that thousands of 
people visit yearly to actually see, feel and learn the simple concepts of passive solar 
energy. The school system, churches and local clubs regularly visit the greenhouse 
for tours and talks on its many programs. 

Epilogue:  The Future 

203 

Surrounding  the  greenhouse  are  twenty-four  10'  x 30'  community  gardens 
where  low  income people  without  land can  grow  their own  foods.  Other outside 
gardens, which are managed cooperatively, also surround the greenhouse. In  1980 
the  greenhouse  and  outside  gardens  together  produced  more than  20,000  lbs. of 
fresh  produce. 

Recently  we  began  to  move  into  new  areas.  A  beekeeping  demonstration 
project was initiated to train low income people in honey production. The beehives 
are at the greenhouse site and the bees provide pollination for the outdoor commun(cid:173)
ity  gardens.  A cold  frame  season  extender  project,  using  low-cost  conventional 
structures  and  easy-to-build  geodesic  domes,  is  demonstrating  ways  to  add  5 
months to Cheyenne's short, cold growing season. The greenhouse also sponsors an 
annual  farmers'  market  at  a local  park  where  regional  gardeners  sell  their  fresh 
produce directly  to the community. The market has been very successful,  with as 
many as 3,000 participants in one morning of sales. 

Now being planned is the nation's first community root cellar where individual 
gardeners and the greenhouse can store their excess produce for later distribution to 
food  programs.  (Root crops  are the  best  producers  in Cheyenne's  short growing 
season). A root cellar requires no outside energy to function  and is an ideal way to 
store many crops. 

CALC and the Cheyenne Community Solar Greenhouse believe the commun(cid:173)

ity solar greenhouse concept can be successfully  applied to many other communities 
with  similar,  excellent  results. They  have  a prepared  slide show  and  audio tape 
presentation to help other communities plan such a project. 

As  food  prices  rise  and  people  become  more  interested  in home  food  production  for 
economic and quality reasons, the solar greenhouse will become the keystone of a family  food 
operation.  Along  with  it  will  come  some  nice  lifestyle  changes,  as any  present  greenhouse 
owner can vouch  for. 

The yield of crops grown in the solar greenhouse could be greatly increased if there were a 
concerted  effort  to breed plants  that are better adapted to the solar greenhouse  environment. 
Overall  yields  can  potentially  increase  by  30-40 percent.  The  problem  is to convince  seed 
companies  and  government  and  university  breeding  programs  that  this  is  a  worthwhile 
investment. 

Another  way  to  increase  solar  greenhouse  yields  is  to  utilize  permaculture  crops  as 
outlined in Crops. This also requires a concerted effort, as well as getting people to eat new and 
different  foods.  In the near future—and  we're now beginning to see it—the solar greenhouse 
will greatly  affect  our outside environment  as people  in large numbers propagate  vegetables 
and  flowers  and even trees for their outside gardens.  Plants that are already well established 
when they're transplanted outside, produce higher yields in a shorter period of time. 

As people develop closer relationships with their greenhouse ecology, a logical step may 
be to attach homes onto large greenhouses rather than to attach a small greenhouse to a single 
home.  Living  space  will  then  begin  to spill  into the greenhouse,  with possible  greenhouse 
kitchens,  living  rooms  and  bedrooms.  To  choose  to  live  in  a  home  attached  to  a  large 
greenhouse, the inhabitants would have to commit themselves to change. More than one home 

204 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

might be attached to a large greenhouse, with gardening done either communally or on separate 
plots.  Areas could  be set aside  for permaculture, wild gardens, annual gardens, fish produc(cid:173)
tion,  hot  tubs,  and  livestock.  By  somehow  incorporating  livestock  grazing  inside  a  large 
greenhouse,  the  livestock  would  have  a much better  feed-to-food  conversion  ratio, because 
they would  not be burning as many calories to keep warm in winter—and they'd also provide 
added CO2 for plants. 

The culture of fish in water tanks already has been practiced successfully  by a number of 
individuals and groups. The management of fish production is as complex as vegetables, if not 
more so. Fish have detailed biological requirements which must be met. The fish generally feed 
on  algae, as well as nutrients added to the water.  In turn, they provide an efficient  source of 
protein (fish  meat) in the greenhouse. For more information  on fish culture, see references at 
the end of this section. 

Another  possible  idea  for  future  greenhouses  is algae  production  for human consump(cid:173)

tion—a  very direct  food  conversion.  As mentioned  in the permaculture  section of Crops, a 
suitable algae for greenhouse  production would  have to be either developed or found.  There 
may be a problem with toxic algae species contaminating edible types, but the overall culture 
and  management  may  be  simpler  than fish culture.  It could  become  an excellent  source of 
protein  for  people,  or  fertilizer  for  plants.  At  the  1981  Great  Lakes  Solar  Greenhouse 
Conference  in Kalamazoo, Michigan,  I chaired a discussion  group on the topic of  Futuristic 
Concepts. During that discussion a wild idea evolved of utilizing edible, phosphorescent algae 
that  commonly  live (and glow) in the oceans, not only as a greenhouse food  source, but as a 
supplementary  light source. They would be cultured  in clear tanks, where they could light up 
the greenhouse (or at least portions of it) all night long, absolutely free. This idea would take a 
lot of research and possibly selective algae breeding—which would be quite complex and time 
consuming. I know it sounds kind of crazy, but who knows? 

The  future  will  also provide us with some interesting new glazing materials. They will 
have amazing  abilities to handle and manage both light and heat. They may be permeable to 
certain gases such as CO2 or water vapor, and possibly they will be of very high strength. Such 
a  tough,  versatile  glazing  could greatly  alter both  the horticulture of  greenhouse plants and 
overall  greenhouse  design.  Large  areas  could  then  be covered  with  much  less structure.  A 
"greenhouse"  could  even  someday cover many  acres of farm  or city, creating a controlled 
environment  for large scale agriculture or urban pursuits. And soon we will probably begin to 
see  new  phase-change  materials  which  are  relatively  cheap,  take  up  much  less  space than 
thermal mass and very efficiently  store the sun's heat. 

Hopefully  in the near future both large and small solar greenhouses will be available in low 
cost,  kit versions.  It may mean  less of the beautiful  custom designs, but it may enable more 
people to afford  greenhouses or to afford  larger greenhouses onto which they can attach their 
homes. The larger ones will probably be of either geodesic or quonset designs. They'll include 
some north wall insulation, double glazing, foundation insulation, thermal storage and possibly 
night insulation. Besides the advantage of lower cost, they'll go up in days rather than in weeks 
or months. 

As we  work  more  with the concept  of  biological,  solar  heated  shelters,  many of  these 
concepts will someday  be put into use in space. Orbiting communities in space is now an idea 
that's taken seriously by many people. A self-contained food producing system will be a key to 
the idea becoming a reality. It will be exciting to watch it evolve. Hopefully we will preserve a 
respect for biology, nature and human happiness throughout the evolution. 

Epilogue:  The Future 

205 

In the future,  it's important to ensure that the benefits of solar greenhouse food and heat 
production  be  available  to  all  classes  of  society.  The  changes  brought  so  far  have  been 
wonderful.  The solar greenhouse is here to stay, and will continue to provide for our physical 
needs, as well as add to our mental well being and creativity. It will constantly help us renew 
our connection to the earth, the heavens and to our own family and friends. 

References for the  Future 

Seaweed  in Agriculture and Horticulture  prepared  by W. A. Stephenson.  Published by 
Bargyla and Gylver Rateaver, Puma Valley, CA 92061. 
Fish Farming in Your Solar Greenhouse by William Head and Joe Splane. Published by 
Amity Foundation, P.O. Box 7066, Eugene, OR 97401. 
Co Evolution Quarterly, P. O. Box 428, Sausalito, CA 94965. This journal will keep you 
stimulated and up to date about tomorrow as well as today. 
We Grow Things, an audio slide show. This is an oral and visual history of the Cheyenne 
Community  Solar Greenhouse.  It makes a great organizing tool for  interested groups. 
Available  from  Community  Action of Laramie county,  1603 Central Ave., Cheyenne, 
WY 82001. 
Seedpeople  Associates,  a  consulting  cooperative  of  specialists  in  the  many  fields  of 
community  based  agriculture  including: community  greenhouses  and  outside  gardens, 
greenhouse design and operation,  biological pest controls, horticultural therapy, perma-
culture, turtle management, small scale commercial agriculture, lectures and workshops. 
Contact Seedpeople,  Shane Smith, c/o John Muir Publications, Box 613, Santa Fe, NM 
87501. 

The Journal of the New Alchemists by the New Alchemy Institute, P.O. Box 432, Woods 
Hole, MA 02543. 
Tomorrow is Our Permanent Address by John Todd and Nancy Jack Todd, published by 
Harper and Row,  1980. 

Appendix A:  Seed Catalogs 

207 

Appendix A 

Seed Catalogs 

Abundant Life Seed Foundation 
P.O. Box 772 
Port Townsend, WA 98368 

A non-profit  group that sells primarily to the north Pacific coast 
area. Beautiful  catalog—their seeds are adapted to the winter 
solar greenhouse. 

Bruinsma Seed Co. 
6346 Avon Beldon Rd. 
North Ridgeville, OH 44039 

This address is the distributor for a European seed company that is 
much  like Rijk  Zwaan.  Their  selection  is smaller,  but  they  carry 
some good varieties for greenhouses. The price is a bit expensive 
however. 

Burpee Seed Co. 
Warminster,  PA  18991 

Cameron  Seeds 
4141 Springhill Road 
Bozeman,MT59715 

Carobil Farms 
Church Rd.,Rt.  1 
Brunswick,  ME 04011 

Casa Yerba 
StarRt2, Box 21 
Days Creek, OR 97429 

William Dam Seeds Limited 
Highway  #8 
P.O. West Flamboro 
Ontario, LOR 2K0 Canada 

Dean Foster Nurseries 
Hartford,  MI 49057 

J.A.  Demonchaux Co. 
827 N. Kansas 
Topeka,  KS 66608 

Epicure Seeds 
Box 69 
Avon,  NY  14414 

Exotica Seed Co. 
1742 Laurel Canyon Rd. 
Los Angeles, CA 90046 

Wide selection of vegetables. A few greenhouse crops. Owned by ITT. 

They have tried to offer seeds that are adapted to the solar 
greenhouse, cold  frames,  and short season areas. Sometimes I get 
the feeling that they haven't tried some of the things they are 
offering.  In the near future,  with more experience I see them 
becoming an important source of seeds. Catalog is S1.00. 

Specializing in popular, rare and scented geraniums. 

Herbs, unusual and rare seeds. 

Untreated vegetable, flower and herb seed. Interesting 
European strains. 

Specializing in strawberries. They have some day-neutral 
varieties for the greenhouse. 

Selection of French vegetables. 

Selection of European vegetable seeds. 

Sub-tropical and tropical plants. 

Continued.. 

. 

208 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

Appendix A (Cont'd) 

H. G.  Hastings Co. 
P.O.  Box 4274 
Atlanta, GA 30302 

Herbst Brothers Seedsmen 
1000 N. Main St. 
Brewster, NY  10509 

Horticultural  Enterprises 
P.O. Box 34082 
Dallas, TX 75234 

J.  L. Hudson  Seedsman 
P.O.  Box  1058 
Redwood City, CA 94064 

Hurvous Tropical Seeds 
P.O.  Box  10387 
Honolulu, Oahu,  HI 96816 

Le Jardin Du Gourmet 
Box 51 
West Danville, VT 05873 

Johnny's Selected Seeds 
Albion, ME 04910 

Kilgore Seed Co. 
1400 W. First St. 
Sanford, FL 32771 

KitazawaSeedCo. 
356 W.Taylor St. 
San Jose, CA 95110 

Lowdens Better Plants and Seeds 
Box 10 
Ancaster, Ontario L9G 3L3 
Canada 

Mountain  Seed & Nursery 
Route  1, Box 271 
Moscow, ID 83843 

Nichols Garden  Nursery 
1190 N. Pacific Hwy 
Albany. OR 97321 

Good for bolt resistant greens. 

Excellent choice of disease tolerant varieties (see 
tomatoes). Also European cucumbers. 

Best selection of different  peppers and chilis. Also 
Mexican vegetables and herbs. 

Rare and unusual seeds; vegetables, imported varieties, 
medicinal and dye herbs. 

Tropical seeds. 

Imported vegetable seeds, shallots, herbs. 

"Organically" grown seeds, short season varieties for the north. 

Vegetables, herbs, botanical pesticides, nice information on 
planting by the moon. 

Wide selection of oriental vegetables. 

Northern adaptive hardy tomatoes and raspberries. 

Varieties for short season areas. 

This is one of my favorite catalogs. They have excellent 
choices for the greenhouse as well as oriental, gourmet and odd 
vegetables. Their herb selection is one of the best. Read it 
cover to cover. 

Continued... 

Appendix A:  Seed Catalogs 

209 

Appendix A (Cont'd) 

Porter & Son Seedsmen 
1510 E.Washington  St. 
Stephenville,TX7640l 

Redwood City Seed Co. 
P.O. Box 361 
Redwood City, CA 94064 

Seed Savers Exchange 
Kent Whealy 
RFD2 
Princeton,  MO 64673 

Stark Bros. Nurseries 
Louisiana, MO 63353 

Stokes Seeds Inc. 
Box 548 
Buffalo,  NY  14240 

Thompson & Morgan 
P.O. Box  100 
Farmingdale,  NJ 07727 

Otis Twilley Seed Co. 
P.O. Box 65 
Trevose, PA  19047 

Good heat tolerant tomatoes and disease resistant melons. 

Tropicals. 

This is a catalog where anyone can trade, look for, or sell old heir(cid:173)
loom, unusual, rare or local seed varieties. It is also full of informa(cid:173)
tion and news concerning seeds. They have already saved many 
varieties headed for extinction. Send $5.00 donation to get catalog. 

Popular temperate zone fruit.  They have fig trees. 

One of the best for the solar greenhouse. Wide choice of every(cid:173)
thing. Many varieties are specifically  for greenhouse culture. Good 
sections on tomato, cucumber, lettuce and flowers. 

Somewhat expensive but interesting selection. Many European 
varieties. Take the claims with a grain of salt. Has many good 
vegetable varieties that can"t be found anywhere else. 

Good selection for greenhouse. Many disease tolerant varieties. 

K.  Van Bourgondien & Sons 
245 Farmingdale  Rd. 
Babylon, NY  11702 

Specializes in bulbs and ornamentals, also some interesting, 
tropicals. 

Rijk  Zwaan 
Zaadteelt en Zaadhandel  B.V. 
De Lier, Holland 

These folks are far ahead of us in growing food under glass. They 
have a number of different  crops developed for under-glass 
production. 

210 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

Appendix B 

Garden Planning and Planting Guide 
»i  ; g c i au  i c» 

I UU  11 i ll  V a i UC  Ul  OCH  : c i cu 

1^1 u ii 

Nutritional  group 

Vegetable 

Vitamin content 

A 

(I.U.) 

C 

(mg.) 

Food  energy 

(calories) 

Group I 
High in Vitamins A and C 

Group II 
High in Vitamin A 

Group III 
High in Vitamin C 

Group IV 
Other Green  Vegetables 

i 

i

ii 

Parsley (raw) 
Spinach 
Collards 
Kale 
Tumip Greens 
Mustard Greens 
Cantaloupes 
Broccoli 

Carrots (raw) 
Carrots (cooked) 
Sweet potatoes 
Swiss Chard 
Winter Squash 
Green Onions 

Peppers (mature green) 
Brussels Sprouts 
Cauliflower 
Kohlrabi 
Cabbage 
Chinese Cabbage 
Asparagus 
Rutabagas 
Radishes (raw) 
Tomatoes (ripe, raw) 
Tomatoes (ripe, cooked) 

Green Beans 
Celery 
Lettuce  (leaf) 
Lettuce (head) 
Okra 
Peas (garden) 

8,500 
8,100 
7,800 
7,400 
6,300 
5,800 
3,400 
2,500 

11.000 
10,500 
8,100 
5,400 
4,200 
2,000 

420 
520 
60 
20 
130 
150 
900 
550 
322 
900 
1,000 

540 
240 
1,900 
330 
490 
540 

172 
28 
76 
62 
69 
48 
33 
90 

8 
6 
22 
16 
13 
32 

128 
87 
55 
43 
33 
25 
26 
26 
26 
23 
24 

12 
9 
18 
6 
20 
20 

44 
23 
33 
28 
20 
23 
30 
26 

42 
31 
141 
18 
63 
36 

22 
36 
22 
24 
20 
14 
20 
35 
17 
22 
26 

25 
17 
18 
13 
29 

"  1 

Appendix B: Nutrition Values 

211 

Appendix B <confd> 

Garden Planning and Planting Guide 
1 1 U U U I UI  um  v  m uc  «ii  o c it  ; t i cu  vi  : g c i au  i cs 

•- 

Vitamin content 

— 

| 

1 

Nutritional group 
Nutritional group 

Vegetable 
Vegetable 

Group V 
Starchy  Vegetables 

Group VI 
Other Vegetables 

(plant from this group 
for variety  in flavor, 
color, texture, etc.) 

Lima Beans 
Sweet Corn (yellow) 
Onions (dry) 
Peas (field, southern) 
Potatoes (baked in skin) 

Beets 
Cucumbers 
Eggplants 
Pumpkins 
Rhubarb 
Summer Squash 
Tumips (roots) 

A 

(I.U.) 

280 
400 
40 
350 
Trace 

20 
250 
10 
1,600 
80 
440 
Trace 

C 

(mg.) 

Food energy 

(calories) 

17 
9 
10 
17 
20 

6 
11 
3 
9 
6 
11 
22 

111 
91 
38 
108 
93 

32 
15 
19 
26 
141 
15 

23  1 

Figures  are for  amounts of vitamins and calories per  100-gram sample for cooked vegetables (unless normally 
eaten  raw). Vitamin A is expressed  in International Units (1. U.) per  100-gram sample; Vitamin C is expressed in 
milligrams per  100-gram sample; and Food Energy is expressed in Bilogram calories per  100-gram sample. 

100 grams is equal to about 'A cup. 
Active adults require daily about 5,0001. U. of vitamin A for men and 4,000 for women; 45 mg. of vitamin C (men 

and women); and 2,700 calories for men and 2,000 for women. 

Vitamin C values are generally higher if the vegetable is eaten raw. An example is cabbage: 33 mg. cooked; 47 

mg. raw. 

From USDA Yearbook of Agriculture  1977. 

214 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

Appendix D 

Average Percentage of Possible Sunshine 

LOCATION 

A L A.  B I R M I N G H AM 

M O N T G O M E RY 

A L A S K A,  ANCHORAGE 

F A I R B A N KS 
JUNEAU 

N O ME 

A R IZ  PHOENIX 

Y U MA 

A R K.  L I T T LE  ROCK 
C A L I F.   EUREKA 

FRESNO 
LOS  ANGELES 
RED  BLUFF 
S A C R A M E N TO 
SAN  DIEGO 

S AN  FRANCISCO 

C O LO  DENVER 

G R A ND  JUNCTION 

C O NN  HARTFORD 
DC  W A S H I N G T ON 

F L A.  A P A L A C H I C O LA 

J A C K S O N V I L LE 
K EY  WEST 
M I A MI  B E A CH 
T A M PA 

GA.  A T L A N TA 
H A W A I I.   H I LO 
H O N O L U LU 
L I H UE 

I D A HO  BOISE 

P O C A T E L LO 

I LL  C A I RO 
C H I C A GO 
SPRINGFIELD 

I N D.   E V A N S V I L LE 

FT.  W A Y NE 
I N D I A N A P O L IS 

I O WA  DES  MOINES 

D U B U Q UE 
SIOUX  CITY 

K A N S.   CONCORDIA 

D O D GE  C I TY 
W I C H I TA 

K Y.  L O U I S V I L LE 
LA  NEW  ORLEANS 

SHREVEPORT 

M A I N E,   EASTPORT 
MASS.  BOSTON 
M I C H.   ALPENA 

DETROIT 

G R A ND  RAPIDS 
M A R Q U E T TE 
S  STE.  M A R IE 
M I N N.   D U L U TH 
M I N N E A P O L IS 

MISS.  VICKSBURG 
M O.   KANSAS  CITY 

ST.  LOUIS 
SPRINGFIELD 
M O NT  H A V RE 

HELENA 
K A L I S P E LL 

NEBR  L I N C O LN 

NORTH  PLATTE 

NEV.  E LY 

L AS  VEGAS 
RENO 
W I N N E M U C CA 
N  H . C O N C O RD 
N.J.  A T L A N T IC  CITY 

r 
r 

9 
9 

 
 

M
M

 
 
.
.

G
G
U
U
A
A

 
 

62  G
62  G
69 
66 
45 
39 
35 
45 
28 
30 

-
-

 
 
.
.

T
T
C
C
O
O

UJ 
UJ 

 
 

2
2
J
J

 
 
.
.

V
V
O
O
N
N

 
 

 
 

66  3
66  3
69 
35 
31 
25 

S
S
71  M 
32 
33 
28 
38 
18  21 

< 
< 

56 
56 
61 
56 
61 
39 

48 
83 
91 
57 
50 

72 
70 
65 
67 
68 

49 
49 
53 
46 
50 
32 

46 
79 
87 
53 
44 

63 
69 
60 
57 
67 

63 
57 
65 
67 
62  M 
55 
56 
53 
56 

62 
59 
75 
72 
67 

62 
66 
78 
73 
71 

57 
53 
41 
42 
60 
64 
41 
48 
4H  59 

47 
53 
49 
51 
49 

44 
47 
56 
52 
58 

60 
66 
63 
47 
50 

54 
51 
56 
43 
42 

37 
40 
44 
55 
54 

50 
57 
49 
54 
58 

58 
59 
53 
54 
55 

51 
49 
56 
52 
58 

58 
52 
57 
52 
48 

48 
47 
50 
60 
55 

57 
59 
56 
57 
61 

 
 
.
.

N
N
A
A
J
J

 
 
i
i
f
f

51 
39 
34 
30 

44 
76 
83 
44 
40 

46 
70 
50 
44 
68 

53 
67 
58 
46 
46 

59 
58 
68 
66 
63 

48 
48 
62 
48 
40 

37 
46 
44 
47 
42 

38 
41 
56 
48 
55 

60 
67 
61 
41 
49 

48 
45 
47 
29 
34 

26 
31 
28 
47 
49 

46 
55 
48 
48 
49 

46 
28 
57 
63 
61 

>• < 
>• < 

66 
66 
73 
50 
55 
34 

E 
E 

< 
< 

63 
63 
69 
58 
68 
37 

51 
53 
KM  93 
97 
94 
67 
62 
53 
54 

89 
68 
79 
82 
60 

Z 
Z 
5 
5 
67 
67 
72 
51 
53 
35 

48 
94 
98 
72 
56 

94 
69 
86 
90 
60 

83 
67 
75 
76 
66 

69 
63 
67 
54 
57 

71 
71 
78 
73 
74 

65 
34 
62 
46 
67 

64 
65 
56 
58 
61 

55 
55 
59 
58 
59 

60 
52 
56 
56 
52 

54 
52 
54 
58 
57 

32 
84 
92 
71 
51 

97 
80 
95 
96 
67 

64 
62 
69 
65 
61 

62 
44 
67 
58 
89 

82 
82 
73 
76 
78 

74 
74 
75 
73 
75 

79 
78 
80 
72 
58 

79 
55 
64 
70 
69 

75 
69 
79 

68 
70 
61 
68 
71 
76 
57  00  62 
61  M 
64 

77 
70 
71 
63 
76 
70 
68 
62 
66 
75 
68  a 
41 
31 
64 
66 
60 
51 
68 
75 

66 
71 
63 
64 
67 

62 
62 
62 
60 
63 

72 
77 
69 
69 
73 

69 
68 
66 
63 
67 

69 
51 
59 
59 
58 

78 
53 
62 
64 
65 

60 
53 
54 
58 
6(1  64 

72 
66 
63 
56 
63 
59 
60  M 
72 

63  a  78 

73 
70 
68 
69 

69 
76 
72 
77 

63 
60 
69 
72 
79 

77 
77 
76 
78 
79 

59 
58 
63 
64 
67 

85 
77 
76 
51 
62 

64  H 
64 
60 
64 
59 
60 
53 
63 

60 
55 
58 
411  49 
57 
59 
60 
60 
63  64  62 
64 
65 

68 

77 
64 

78 
74 
59 
69 
52  60  M 
48 
55 
51 
58 

53 
57 

it 
75 
70 
53 
59 

84 
90 

86 
91 
82 
89 
83  BO  90 
58 
56 
65 
66 

57 
67 

26 
84 
91 
73 
46 

97 
81 
94 
95 
70 

63 
68 
72 
60 
62 

63 
63 
71 
67 
64 

63 
38 
70 
59 
86 

81 
79 
70 
72 
76 

76 
78 
77 
69 
60 

80 
57 
63 
64 
66 

67 
57 
58 
63 
69 

72 
73 
68 
72 
75 

74 
73 
71 
74 
81 

34 
89 
93 
71 
52 

35 
88 
93 
74 
48 

93 
87 
80'  76 
77 
89 
82 
92 
70 
70 

70 
71 
77 
57 
hi 

62 
58 
65 
62 
64 

65 
42 
70 
67 
81 

78 
75 
65 
73 
73 

72 
76 
73 
'.8 
64 

79 
54 
61 
52 
61 

58 
47 
45 
53 
60 

74 
70 
67 
71 
64 

63 
61 
67 
72 
81 

92 
86 
86 
55 
65 

70 
71 
74 
55 
61 

74 
58 
65 
62 
67 

67 
41 
68 
58 
66 

66 
73 
61 
64 
67 

58 
64 
64 
55 
65 

70 
75 
69 
64 
70 

77 
50 
58 
44 
54 

50 
38 
36 
47 
54 

71 
67 
65 
65 
57 

57 
50 
fit 
70 
73 

84 
76 
75 
50 
54 

64 
69 
70 
68 
70  64 
67 
61 
67 
72 

62 
63 
6H  68 
64 
52 
57 

57 
63 

64  m  73 

65 
68 

64 
66 

73 
74 

68 
64 

58 
67 
59 
39 

67 
64 
71 
70 
69 
67 
59 
51 
60  46  59 

S AN  A N T O N IO 

U T A H.   S A LT  L A KE  CITY 
VT  B U R L I N G T ON 
V A.  NORFOLK 
R I C H M O ND 

 
 
^
^

 
 
.
.

C
C
E
E
D
D

 
 

£
£
48 
29 
29 
18 

30 
77 
83 
47 
39 

47 
72 
50 
44 
71 

54 
65 
58 
4*, 
47 

53 
53 
66 
65 
61 

47 
36 
60 
49 
37 

36 
46 
41 
45 
42 

38 
39 
48 
40 
50 

z 
z 
z < 
z < 

59 
59 
64 
45 
44 
30 

41 
85 
91 
62 
49 

78 
73 
75 
77 
68 

66 
67 
69 
56 
58 

65 
62 
71 
67 
68 

60 
39 
65 
54 
66 

64 
65 
59 
60 
64 

57 
59 
62 
57 
63 

LI  JUUCiUiUJ 

L O C A T I ON 

N.  M E X.  A L B U Q U E R Q UE 

ROSWELL 

N Y.  A L B A NY 

B1NGHAMTON 
B U F F A LO 

C A N T ON 
N EW  Y O RK 
SYRACUSE 

N.C.  A S H E V I L LE 

R A L E I GH 

N  D A K.  B I S M A R CK 

DEVILS  L A KE 
FARGO 
W I L L I S T ON 

O H I O,   C I N C I N A T TI 

C L E V E L A ND 
C O L U M B US 

O K LA  O K L A H O MA  CITY 
OREG.  BAKER 
P O R T L A ND 

ROSEBURG 

PA.  HARRISBURG 
P H I L A D E L P H IA 
PITTSBURG 

R.l.  B L O CK  I S L A ND 

S.C.  CHARLESTON 

C O L U M B IA 

S.  D A K.  HURON 

R A P ID  CITY 

T E NN  K N O X V I L LE 

MEMPHIS 
N A S H V I L LE 
T E X.  A B I L E NE 

A M A R 1 L LO 
A U S T IN 

B R O W N S V I L LE 
D EL  RIO 
EL  PASO 
FT.  WORTH 
G A L V E S T ON 

36 
84 
90 
58 
42 

73 
79 
64 
65 
76 

62 
67 
67 
46 
54 

66 
61 
69 
65 
67 

60 
34 
63 
51 
46 

48 
56 
47 
53 
52 

41 
48 
53 
44 
53 

W A S H.   NORTH  H E AD 

SEATTLE 
SPOKANE 
T A T O O SH  I S L A ND 
W A L LA  W A L LA 

Y A K I MA 

W  V A.  ELKINS 

PARKERSBURG 
WIS.  GREEN  BAY 

M A D I S ON 

M I L W A U K EE 

W YO  C H E Y E N NE 

L A N D ER 
SHERIDAN 
Y E L L O W S T O NE  PARK 

P R.  S AN  J U AN 
P R.  S AN  J U AN 

60 

69 
65 
37  40  50 
57 
48 
24 
51 
53 
35 

48 
22 
29 

31 
24 
21 
36 
40 

60 
59 
54 
58 
48 

48 
28 
59 
62 
67 

83 
68 
62 
43 
58 

22 
24 
22 
40 
44.) 

45 
52 
44 
48 
46 

43 
20 
55 
58 
62 

75 
56 
53 
43 
52 

49 
47 
47 
55 
56 

64 
65 
61 
63 
62 

60 
53 
64 
68 
72 

82 
76 
74 
52 
60 

The  average  monthly  percentage of  sunshine 
available  in  cities  throughout  he  United  States 
available  in  cities  throughout  he  United  States 

 
*
8

 
.

N
A
J

 
.

B
E
F

 

R
A
M

 
.

R
P
A

 

Y
A
M

 
.

Z 
L
U
5  J

o
n
v

 

 

P
E
S

  1 

< 

76 
74 
53 
44 
53 

49 
59 
50 
58 
61 

59 
58 
59 
63 
57 

50 
55 
68 
60 
48 

51 
57 
57 
51 
56 

66 
63 
63 
64 
57 

64 
59 
73 
76 
63 

61 
63 
80 
68 
63 

62 
69 
46 
62 
61 

48 
45 
46 
48 
39 

25 
35 
57 
37 
23 

18 
43 
49 
30 
44 

57 
51 
49 
54 
41 

45 
42 
66 
70 
49 

44 
52 
73 
58 
49 

49 
49 
24 
51 
50 

 
.

T
C
O

80 
74 
54 
43 
51 

 
.

V
O
N

79 
74 
39 
29 
31 

C
E
D

70 
69 
38 
26 
28 

81 
74 
58 
47 
60 

45 
54 
6-1  61 
47 
56 
64 
62 
64 
63 

30 
31 
53  N 
26 
29 
48 
59 
62 
52 

72 
75 
53 
41 
49 

50 
57 
45 
56 
59 

56 
59 
56 
60 
52 

76 
77 
53 
44 
51 

48 
59 
50 
61 
64 

57 
60 
58 
63 
56 

52 
45 
49 
54 
63  M 
61 
56 
41 
49 

70  72 
72 
69 
43 
51 
39 
31 
32 
41 

37 
49 
31 
48 
50 

52 
53 
47 
51 
41 

29 
36 
57 
41 
27 

24 
43 
45 
32 
45 

58 
53 
55 
58 
42 

44 
42 
64 
71 
46 

44 
53 
74 
56 
50 

48 
48 
34 
50 
49 

28 
27 
26 
26 
24 

34 
33 
30 
44 
44 

44 
65 
66 
56 
39 
64 
64 

47 
56 
38 
53 
56 

58 
00 
55 
59 
46 

36 
44 
60 
49 
34 

32 
52 
56 
39 
54 

60 
57 
62 
62 
49 

51 
47 
68 
71 
50 

40 
55 
57 
45 
47 

65 
62 
60 
63 
53 

57 
54 
73 
75 
57 

49 
51 
61 
55 
81 
77 
65 
57 
so  55 

51 
53 
43 
57 
55 

37 
34 
41 
36 
35 

49 
37 
36 
51 
49 

48 
66 
70 
61 
51 
69 
69 

56 
61 
48 
60 
59 

42 
42 
53 
39 
51 

62 
42 
42 
55 
52 

53 
64 
71 
62 
55 
71 
71 

51 
57 
58 
50 
56 

72 
68 
62 
62 
59 

64 
60 
60 
75 
60 

57 
63 
85 
66 
61 

58 
68 
47 
63 
63 

48 
48 
63 
45 
63 

70 
47 
49 
56 
53 

56 
61 
66 
61 
57 
66 
66 

79 
76 
57 
50 
59 

54 
62 
58 
64 
67 

58 
59 
62 
66 
62 

61 
63 
65 
63 
52 

57 
61 
61 
57 
58 

73 
69 
65 
61 
64 

68 
65 
73 
75 
62 

65 
60 
87 
67 
69 

60 
73 
53 
67 
67 

48 
53 
64 
47 
67 

72 
55 
56 
58 
58 

60 
59 
65 
61 
56 
59 
59 

84 
80 
62 
56 
67 

61 
65 
64 
63 
65 

61 
62 
63 
66 
69 

67 
68 
74 
67 
55 

59 
65 
62 
62 
60 

70 
68 
68 
66 
66 

74 
69 
86 
82 
72 

73 
66 
87 
75 
76 

69 
78 
59 
66 
66 

48 
48 
68 
46 
72 

74 
55 
60 
64 
64 

65 
68 
74 
67 
63 
62 
62 

76 
76 
63 
54 
70 

63 
66 
67 
59 
62 

73 
71 
73 
78 
72 

71 
71 
78 
83 
70 

79 
68 
64 
64 
62 

66 
63 
76 
73 
64 

73 
69 
83 
81 
76 

78 
75 
78 
78 
72 

74 
82 
62 
66 
65 

50 
62 
82 
48 
86 

86 
56 
63 
70 
70 

73 
70 
76 
76 
73 
65 
65 

75 
75 
61 
51 
67 

61 
64 
63 
59 
62 

69 
67 
69 
75 
68 

68 
68 
78 
81 
65 

77 
63 
61 
61 
62 

66 
65 
72 
73 
59 

74 
68 
85 
81 
79 

78 
80 
78 
78 
71 

75 
82 
59 
66 
62 

46 
56 
79 
44 
84 

86 
53 
60 
65 
66 

67 
68 
75 
74 
71 
67 
67 

62 
59 
60 
65 
68 

59 
49 
56 
44 
57 
39 
60 
48 
to  46 

54 

32 
62 
66  60  44 
64 
74 
46 
74 
28 
55 

68 
62 
42 

68 
62 
62 
62 
60 

67 
64 
66 
69 
64 

70 
69 
73 
79 
70 

67 
69 
80 
74 
70 

42 
56 
61 
54 
59 

68 
68 
61 
66 
64 

69 
65 
71 
76 
70 

70 
66 
82 
70 
74 

67 
69 
84 
73 
51 
43 
63  M 
64 
63 

48 
53 
68 
47 
72 

41 
36 
53 
38 
59 

74 
61 
55  SI 
53 
60 
58 
52 
56 
60 

62 
69 
72 
67 
65 
61 
61 

56 
60 
67 
ffl 
57 
63 
63 

28 
47 
53 
39 
50 

68 
64 
52 
58 
53 

58 
55 
72 
76 
57 

54 
58 
80 
63 
62 

55 
56 
25 
60 
58 

31 
28 
28 
26 
33 

38 
41 
37 
40 
41 

44 
65 
61 
53 
45 
63 
63 

41 
45 
58 
40 

27 
24 
22 
23 
20  OS 

29 
33 
29 
40 
38 

39 
63 
62 
52 
38 
65 
65 

65 
48 
48 
55 
56 

57 
66 
69 
64 
56 
65 

1 

1 

Index 

215 

Cabbage looper  186 
Calcium  154 
Calendula  127; schedule for 

propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  146 

Cantaloupe, germinating, 

planting and transplanting 
80; as summer crop 116; 
light and temperature 57; 
pollination 90; schedule for 
propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  146; scheduling 97, 
98; soil requirements  116; 
spacing and trellising 60 

Carbon dioxide, depletion and 

deficiency  26; enhance(cid:173)
ment methods 26-27; plant 
requirements  17, 18; 
sources 26 

Carnation  127; schedule  for 
propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  145 

Carrots, germinating, plant(cid:173)

ing and transplanting 80; as 
winter crop  103-104; light 
and temperature 57; sche(cid:173)
duling 97, 98; spacing and 
trellising 60 
Carrot group 64 
Catfacing  195 
Catnip, as tea  132; as white fly 
repellent  132; schedule for 
propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  145 

Cauliflower,  as winter crop 

104; light and temperature 
58; schedule for propagat(cid:173)
ing spring transplants  146; 
scheduling 97, 98; spacing 
and trellising 60 

Celery, germinating, planting 

and transplanting  80; as 
winter crop  104; light and 
temperature 58; scheduling 
97, 98; spacing and trellis(cid:173)
ing 60 

Index 

Beet group 64 
Begonia  127 
Beneficial  insects,  benefits 
176; to acquire  175-176; 
reading material 185; 
sources  184; insect  friends 
177-185; use in Integrated 
Pest Management  175; to 
release  176 

Biologic Pest Control 
174-185, see IPM 

Blood  meal,  as fertilizer  157-

158 

Blossom end rot, tomato dis(cid:173)

order  195 

Bolting (going to seed) 66, 69 
Bone meal, as fertilizer  157 
Borage  132 
Boron  155 
Botanical pesticides  170-173 
Brachnid wasp, part of IPM 

182 

Breadfruit  138 
Broccoli, as winter crop 102; 
light and temperature 57; 
schedule for propagating 
spring transplants  146; 
scheduling 97, 98; spacing 
and trellising 60 

Brussels sprouts, as winter 
crop  102; light and temp(cid:173)
erature 57; scheduling 97, 
98; spacing and trellising 
60 

Bush crop varieties 70. 71 

-c-

Cabbage, germinating, plant(cid:173)

ing and transplanting 80; as 
winter crop  103; light and 
temperature 57; schedule 
for propagating spring 
transplants  146; scheduling 
97, 98; spacing and trellis(cid:173)
ing 60 

Cabbage family,  and heat 31 

Centipede  187 

- A-

Aeration  150 
Aisles 50-51 
Alliums (onion group) 63 
Allyssum  127, schedule for 
propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  146 
Aloe Vera  131 
Anise  131, schedule for pro(cid:173)

pagating spring transplants 
146 

Aphids  185, 103 
Aphid lion as part of IPM 178 
Artichoke, globe  139 
Avocado  139 

- B-

Bacillus thuringiensis, use as 

microbial pesticide 171, 
spraying  procedure  172-
173 

Bacteria, symptoms and con(cid:173)

trol  194 

Bacterial innoculant  111 
Baits and traps, as pest control 

169 

Baking soda, for disease con(cid:173)

trol  193 
Banana  139 
Basil  131 
Beans, diseases (prevention) 
115; germinating, planting 
and transplanting 80; 
growing as winter crop 
107, growing as summer 
crop  114-116; light and 
temperature 57; pollination 
88; scheduling 97, 98; for 
shading  115; soil  115; 
spacing and trellising 60 
Beets, germinating, planting 

and transplanting 80; as 
winter crop  102; light and 
temperature 57; scheduling 
97, 98; spacing and trellis(cid:173)
ing 60 

216 

The Bountiful Solar Greenhouse 

Chameleons  183 
Chamomile  132; schedule for 

propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  146 

Chard—Swiss chard  104-105 
Chaya  137-138 
Chicory 58 
Chinese cabbage, germinat(cid:173)

ing, planting and trans(cid:173)
planting 80; as winter crop 
105; light and  temperature 
58; scheduling 97, 98 

Chives,  as  winter  crop  105-
106,  132; spacing and trel-
lising 60 

Chrysanthemum  127; edible, 

as winter crop  106-107 

Cilantro  132-133 
Citrus  139-140 
Cloning (cuttings), benefits 

76, 83; how to 83-84 

Coffee  140 
Cold tolerance,  selecting 

crops for 70 

Cole crop (crucifer,  cabbage 

group) 63 

Collards, germinating, plant(cid:173)

ing and transplanting 80; as 
winter crop  106; light and 
temperature 58; scheduling 
97, 98; spacing and trellis-
ing60 

Companion planting, see IPM 

62-63 

Compost  158 
Containers for spring trans(cid:173)

plants  143-144 

Container food production 49-

50 

Control of insects  168-177 
Cooling 34-37, earth tunnel 
37, burlap swamp cooler 
36 

Copper  155 
Coriander  132-133; schedule 

for propagating  spring 
transplants  146 

Corn salad, as winter crop 

106; light and  temperature 
58; scheduling 97, 98 

Cress—curly cress, as winter 

crop  106 

Crops, basic groups 63-64; 

general  guidelines  159-
160; greenhouse seasons 
55; harvesting 61-62; lay(cid:173)
out 55-56, 60-63; light and 
temperature 57-59; matur(cid:173)
ity 64; nutrition  informa(cid:173)
tion 210-211; planting 
methods 80; quick matur(cid:173)
ing for spring and fall 
planting 94-95; require(cid:173)
ments 80; rotation 64; 
spacing and trellising 60; 
that need winter (winter-
phyllic) 73; warm season 
23; winter 57-59 

Crops and Varieties, selecting 

69-73; for cold  tolerance 
70; crops that need winter 
73; for disease resistance 
71-72; greenhouse varie(cid:173)
ties 72-73; for heat toler(cid:173)
ance 69-70; for insect pest 
resistance 72; for plant 
shape and size 70-71; for 
quick maturity 70 

Crop rotation, benefits, need 

for record keeping 64 
Crop scheduling, charts 

96-98; growing seasons 
92-94; importance of 92 

Cool season crops 92-95; 

crops best grown in winter 
92-94; growing in summer 
94; starting on time 95 

Cryptolaemus  mentrouzieri as 

part of IPM  180 

Cucumber, germinating, 

planting and transplanting 
80; greenhouse  varieties 
72-73; growing as summer 
crop  116-118; light and 
temperature 58; pollination 
90; schedule for propagat(cid:173)
ing spring transplants  146; 
scheduling 97, 98; soil re(cid:173)
quirements  117; spacing 
and trellising 60 
Cucumber group 64 

- D-

Damping off (seedling dis(cid:173)

eases)  198-199 

Diatomaceous earth,  use as 

dust pesticide  173 

Dill  133, schedule for propa(cid:173)
gating spring transplants 
146 

Diseases  166-167; 189-199 
Disease resistance and tol(cid:173)

erance, selecting crops for 
71-72 

Drainage 46, 47,  151 
Dusts, for disease control 193; 

as pesticide  173 
- E-

Early blight, tomato disorder 

Earth tunnels 37 
Eating pests as pest control 

measure  174 

Efficient  food  production  66-

196 

69 

Eggplant, germinating, plant(cid:173)

ing and transplanting 80; as 
summer crop  119; light and 
temperature 58; pollination 
89; schedule for propagat(cid:173)
ing spring transplants  145; 
scheduling 97, 98; soil 
119; spacing and trellising 
60 

Encarsia formosa as part of 

IPM  181-182 

Endive scheduling 97, 98; 
light and temperature 58 

Environmental  facts, general 

56 

Environmental  management, 
to control disease problems 
192 

Environmental  pest controls 
169-174; baits and traps 
169; dusts  173; eating pests 
174; freeze out  173-174; 
spraying procedures  172-
173; sprays (botanicals) 
170-171; sprays (home(cid:173)
made pesticides)  169-170; 

winter  crop  133; light  and 
temperature 58; scheduling 
97,  98; spacing and trellis-
ing60 

Geranium  128,  schedule  for 

propagating  spring  trans(cid:173)
plants  145 

Germination  78-80 
Glazing, 

affecting 

plant 
growth 22; roof  16,  17, 19, 
20; types 21; vertical  18 

Grapes  141 
Greenhouse, as season exten(cid:173)
der 95-96; cooling 34-37; 
floors  50-51; freeze  up 31-
32; growing spring trans(cid:173)
plants for outside  143-146; 
history 26-27; interior lay(cid:173)
out design 43; seasons 55; 
selecting crop varieties 72-
73; solar versus outside 
garden  150; solar versus 
standard 66 

Green lacewing flies (aphid 

lion) use as part of IPM 178 

Green worm, how to recog(cid:173)

nize and control  186 

Grey mold, tomato disorder 

195 

Grey wall, tomato disorder 

196 

Ground cherry  119 
Ground growing beds 45-46 
Growing  beds,  filling  47-48; 
ground  45-46;  rafter  50; 
raised  45-47;  raised-raised 
46 

Growing seasons 92-94 
Gypsum  158 

- H-

Hand lens, use in pest and dis(cid:173)

ease control  166; 175 

Hardening off  144 
Harvesting 61-62 
tolerance, 
Heat 

selecting 

crops  for  69-70;  supple(cid:173)
mentary  31,94 

Herbs, growing  129-136; pro(cid:173)

cessing  methods 
130; 
schedule  for  propagating 

Index 

217 

spring transplants  145-146; 
special  growing  considera(cid:173)
tions  130; uses  129-130 

Homemade  pesticides; spray(cid:173)

ing  procedure  172-173; 
types  169-170 

Hover  fly,  use as part of IPM 

179 

Humidity (relative) 29-31,35-

36 

Husk tomato  119 
Hybrid seeds (Fj) 76-78 
Hydroponics  160-161 

- I-

Impatiens, schedule for pro(cid:173)

pagating spring transplants 
146; Inorganic soil mate(cid:173)
rials  158-159 

Insect control, control meth(cid:173)
ods  168-177; crop selec(cid:173)
tion for resistance  168; en(cid:173)
vironmental  controls  169-
174; preventative measures 
168 

Insect pest resistance, select(cid:173)

ing crops for 72 

Insulation,  under floor 47-48 
Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM), beneficial  insects 
175-183; dangers and pre(cid:173)
cautions  of  spraying  172-
173; definition  and com(cid:173)
position  174-175 

Integrated planting 62-64 
Interior layout design 43-53 
IPM see Integrated  Pest Man(cid:173)

agement 

Iron  155 

J-

Jerusalem  artichoke,  as  sum(cid:173)

mer crop  119 

Joke  164 

- K-

Kale  germinating,  planting 
and  transplanting  80;  as 
winter  crop  107; light  and 

sprays (microbials) 171; 
sprays (synthetic) 171; 
sprays (others)  172 

Environmentally  caused  dis(cid:173)

eases  189-191 
- F-

Fall and spring planting, quick 

maturing crops for 94-95 
Fennel  133; schedule  for pro(cid:173)
pagating spring  transplants 
146 

Fertilizer  152-159;  options 

159 

Figs  140 
Fill, depth of 48, recipe for 

raised bed 47-48; recipe for 
container 50 

Fireflies  (lightning  bugs), use 

aspartoflPM  178-179 

Fish emulsion  157 
Floors 50-51 
Flowers  126-129; cut  129; for 

insect  and  disease  preven(cid:173)
tion  126-127;  hardy  ones 
for winter greenhouse  127-
129;  nutrient  requirements 
127;  physiology  88;  poi(cid:173)
sonous  129 

Flowering response 22; 86-88 
Foot-candles (fc)  19-21 
Forcing 73 
Freeze out,  use as pest control 

measure  173-174 

Fruit  cracking,  tomato  dis(cid:173)

order  195 

Fruiting crops 94 
Fungus gnat  186 
Fungi,  symptoms  and  control 

Fusiarium, 

tomato  disorder 

Gall midge, use as part of IPM 

Garlic,  germinating,  planting 
and  transplanting  80;  as 

196 

- G-

194 

182 

218 

The Bountiful  Solar  Greenhouse 

temperature 58; scheduling 
97,  98; spacing and trellis-
ing60 

Kohlrabi,  germinating,  plant(cid:173)

ing and transplanting 80; as 
winter  crop  107-108;  light 
and temperature  58; sched(cid:173)
uling  97,  98;  spacing  and 
trellising 60 

- L-

Ladybug (ladybird beetle), 
use as part of IPM  177 

Leafhopper  186 
Leafminer  186 
Leaf mold, as fertilizer  157; 
tomato disorder  195-196 
Leaf rot, vegetable disease 

197 

Leaf spot, vegetable disease, 

198 

Leeks 58 
Legume group 64 
Leisure space 51-52, 96 
Lemon balm  133; schedule for 

propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  145 

Lettuce, germinating, plant(cid:173)
ing and transplanting 80; 
greenhouse varieties 72; as 
winter crop  108-109; light 
and temperature 58; sched(cid:173)
uling 97, 98; soil require(cid:173)
ments  108; spacing and 
trellising 60 

Light, competition for 20; 

lack of 20-21; measuring 
19-20, 25; reflection 25-
26; requirements 20-22; 
symptoms of low light con(cid:173)
ditions 21; ultraviolet 21 

Lighting,  supplemental 23-25 
Lightning bugs (fireflies),  use 

as part of IPM  178-179 

Limestone  159 
Lizards, use as part of IPM 

183 

Luffa—vegetable  sponge, as 

summer crop  119 

- M-  

- N-

Magnesium  154 
Malathion, dangers 171; 

spraying procedures  172-
173; as synthetic pesticide 
171 

Manganese  155 
Mango  138 
Manure  156 
Marigolds  128; as disease pre(cid:173)

ventative  126; schedule for 
propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  146 
Marijuana  134 
Maturity  response 22 
Maximizing food yield 66-69 
Mealybugs  186-187 
Melons pollination 91,  116 
Methoxychlor, dangers 171; 
spraying procedures  172-
173; as synthetic pesticide 
171 

Microbial life  151 
Microbial pesticides 171; 

spraying procedures  172-
173 

Micro-nutrients  155 
Mildew (powdery and 

downy), vegetable disease 
197 

Milk, spray for disease control 

192 

Millipede  187 
Mint  135. schedule for pro(cid:173)

pagating spring transplants 
145 

Mites (two spot and red spi(cid:173)

der)  187 

Moisture holding ability  151 
Molybdenum  155 
Mushrooms as summer crop 

120 

Naranjilla  138 
Nasturtiums; as food  128, as 

"trap crop"  126-127 

Nematodes  188 
New Zealand spinach, as 
winter crop  114; sched(cid:173)
uling 97, 98 

Nicotine, sources  170; spray(cid:173)

ing procedure  172-173; use 
as botanical pesticide  170 

Nitrogen  154 
Nutrients  152-155 
Nutrition  values of crops 210-

211 

-o-

Okra; germinating, planting 
and transplanting 80; as 
summer crop  120; light and 
temperature 58; scheduling 
97,98 

Onions, germinating, planting 

and transplanting  80; as 
winter crop  110; light and 
temperature 58; photoperi-
odism 22; scheduling 97, 
98; spacing and trellising 
60 

Oregano  135; schedule for 
propagating  spring trans(cid:173)
plants  145 

Organic  soil  ingredients  156-

158 

Organic matter  150-151,  156-

158 

Organism caused diseases 

Ornamental crops, photoperi-

191-199 

odism 22 
Oxygen  17 

Muskmelon as summer crop 

116 

Mustard, germinating, plant(cid:173)

ing and transplanting 80; as 
winter crop  110; light and 
temperature 58; scheduling 
97,98 

- P-

Pansy  128; schedule for pro(cid:173)

pagating spring transplants 
145 

Papaya  138 

Parsley, germinating, plant(cid:173)

ing and transplanting 80; as 
winter crop  110-111; light 
and temperature 59; sched(cid:173)
uling 97, 98; spacing and 
trellising 60 

Parsnip, light and temperature 

59 

Peas, germinating, planting 
and transplanting 80; as 
winter crop  111-112; light 
and temperature 59; sched(cid:173)
uling 97, 98; spacing and 
trellising 60 

Peat Moss, application, 

amounts, functions,  grades 
156 

Peppers, germinating, plant(cid:173)

ing and transplanting 80; as 
summer crop  120-121; 
light and temperature 59; 
pollination 89; scheduling 
97, 98; spacing and trellis(cid:173)
ing 60 

Perennials  114,  132, 133, 

135,  136-141 

Perlite  158 
Permaculture  136-142; bene(cid:173)
fits  137; definition  137; 
familiar perennial crops 
137,  139-14l;information 
sources on crops  142; un(cid:173)
common  perennial crops 
137-138 

Pests  185-188 
Pests and diseases, causes 
166-167; comparison of 
outside garden and green(cid:173)
house control methods 
167; use of hand lens 166; 
ways to control  insects 
168-183 

Ph  151 
Phase-change thermal storage 

45 

Phosphorus  153, 154 
Photoperiodism, and  flower(cid:173)
ing/fruiting  response 22 
Photosynthesis  18,  19, 20 
Pillbug  188 
Pineapple  141 
Pit greenhouses 44 

Plant, crowding 20, 60; dis(cid:173)

eases  189-199; food  153; 
selecting for shape and size 
70-71 

Planting, layouts 60-64, 

methods 80-81; require(cid:173)
ments 80 

Poison sprays  170-173 
Pollipation 86-91; artificial 

fruit  set 91; environmental 
requirements 88; flower 
physiology 88; flowering 
response 86-88; trouble(cid:173)
shooting problems 91; 
what crops and how to 88-
91 

Pol Ion storage 90 
Potassium  154 
Potato  112 
Praying mantis, as part of IPM 

177-178 

Predator  mite—Amblyseius 

califomicus, as part of IPM 
180 

Predator  mite—Phytoseiulus 
persimilis, as part of IPM 
180 

Preventative pest control  168 
Propagation  (plants),  efficient 
methods  74-76; seeds 76-
81 

Pruning  118 
Pumpkin, schedule for propa(cid:173)
gating spring transplants 
146 

Pyrethrum,  sources 171; 

spraying  procedure  172-
173; as botanical  pesticide 
170 

- Q-

Quick plant maturity, select(cid:173)

ing crops for 70, 94 

- R-

Radish, germinating, planting 

and transplanting 80; as 
winter crop  113; light and 
temperature 59; scheduling 
97, 98; spacing and trellis(cid:173)
ing 60 

Index 

219 

Raised growing beds 45-48 
Raised-raised growing beds 

46 

Recordkeeping, benefits 101; 

transplanting  145 

Resistant crop varieties, to 
control disease problems 
192 

Respiration  19 
Rock phosphate  158 
Rooting hormones and com(cid:173)

pounds 84 

Root rot, vegetable disease, 

197 

Rosemary  135 
Rotenone, sources  171; spray(cid:173)
ing procedure  172-173; as 
botanical pesticide  170 
Rubbing alcohol, spraying 
procedures  172-173; as 
pest spray  172 

Rutabaga,  light and tempera(cid:173)
ture 59; scheduling 97, 98 
Ryania,  sources  171; spraying 
procedure  172-173; use as 
botanical pesticide  170 

-s-

Sabadilla, sources  171; spray(cid:173)
ing procedure  172-173; as 
botanical pesticide  170 
Safety precautions 52-53, 

120,  129,  167,  170, 171, 
172-173,  193 

Sage  135; schedule for pro(cid:173)

pagating spring transplants 
145 

Salsify  (vegetable oyster)  113 
Salt content 47,  152 
Sand, 

functions  and  green 

house requirements  158 
Sawdust, use as soil condi(cid:173)

tioner  157 

Seasons 55, 92 
Scheduling charts 97, 98 
Seeds, companies owned by 

multinationals 78; catalogs 
69, 202-209; hybrids(Fi) 
76-78; number per ounce 
(vegetables, herbs, orna(cid:173)
mentals) 77;planting meth-

220 

The Bountiful  Solar Greenhouse 

ods 81: problems with 
older seeds76, propagation 
techniques 76; recipe for 
seedling soil mix 79; re(cid:173)
quirements for germination 
78-79; sources of tropical 
seeds 142 

Seedlings, soil mix 79; space 

to grow 49; thinning out 
81; transplanting  82-83, 
144; containers and soil 
143-144 

Sevin, dangers  171; spraying 
procedure  172-173; as syn(cid:173)
thetic pesticide  171 
Sewage sludge  156-157 
Shading  18-19,44; to cool 36-

37 

Shasta daisy, schedule for 
propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  145 
Skylights  19 
Slugs,  187 
Snails.  187 
Snakes, as part of IPM  183 
Snapdragons  129; schedule 

for propagating  spring 
transplants  145 

Soil, adding inorganic ingre(cid:173)
dients  158-159; adding or(cid:173)
ganic ingredients  156-158; 
as heat source 48; basic re(cid:173)
quirements  150-152; 
characteristics 47; compo(cid:173)
sition and depth 48; fertil(cid:173)
ity  159; for spring trans(cid:173)
plants  143-144; nutrients 
47,  150,  152-155; prob(cid:173)
lems 47,  153-155; special 
greenhouse  requirements 
150; sterilization  193-194; 
temperatures 33-34: testing 
47,153 

Solar food dryer 52-53 
Solar sauna 52 
Sooty mold, vegetable dis(cid:173)

ease,  198 

Sowbugs,  188 
Spiders,  as  part  of  IPM  179-

180 

Spinach, germinating, plant(cid:173)

ing and transplanting 80; as 
winter crop  113; light and 
temperature 59; scheduling 
97, 98; spacing and trellis-
ing60 

Spirulina  138 
Sprayers  172-173 
Spraying, to control  diseases 
192-193; equipment and 
procedures  172-173 

Sprays for disease control 

Spravs  for  pest  control  169-

192-193 

173 

Spring and Fall planting 94-95 
Spring transplants for outside 

143-146 

Squash, germinating, planting 

and transplanting 80; as 
summer crop  121-122; 
light and temperature 59; 
pollination 89-90; sched(cid:173)
uling 97, 98; schedule for 
propagating  spring trans(cid:173)
plants  146; spacing and 
trellising 60 

Straw bale culture  161-162 
Strawberries, and photoperi-

odism 22 

Strawberry tomato.  119 
Sub-tropical  plants 59 
Sugar 19 
Sulfur  154; spraying proce(cid:173)
dures  172-173; as pest 
spray  172 
Sun angles 44 
Sun choke,  119 
Sunshine, average percentage 
for selected  locations 214 
Summer, uses of greenhouse 

95-96 

Summer savory  135; schedule 

for propagating  spring 
transplants  146 

Superphosphate  158 
Supplementary heat 31, 94 
Support for heavy fruits 60 
Sweet potato 59 
Swiss chard,  germinating, 

planting and transplanting 
80; light and temperature 

59; scheduling 97, 98; 
spacing and trellising 60 

Symphylids,  187 
Synthetic pesticides, common 
products  171; dangers 171; 
spraying procedures  172-
173 

Syrphid Fly, as part of IPM 

179 

- T-

Tamarind  138 
Tansy, schedule for propa(cid:173)

gating spring transplants 
145 

Tarragon  136; schedule for 
propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  145 

Tea  141 
Temperature 31-37 
Thermal mass 45,46, 95 
Thrips  188 
Thyme  136; schedule  for 

propagating spring trans(cid:173)
plants  145 

Tilth 48 
Toads, as part of IPM  183 
Tobacco Mosaic Virus, to(cid:173)
mato disorder  196-197 
Tomato, germinating, plant(cid:173)
ing and transplanting 80; 
greenhouse varieties 72; as 
summer crop  123-125; 
light and temperature 59; 
pollination 89; scheduling 
97, 98; schedule for pro(cid:173)
pagating spring  transplants 
145; selection for heat tol(cid:173)
erance 69; soil require(cid:173)
ments  123; spacing and 
trellising 60 

Tomato disorders  195-197 
Tomato group 64 
Transplanting 82-83,  143-146 
Transplant shock, how to re(cid:173)

duce  144 

Trees and bushes 84 
Trellising 60, 61,70-71,  116, 

126 

Tropical plants, basic growing 

advice  138-141; light and 
temperature 59 
Tropical seeds  142 
Turnip, germinating, planting 

and transplanting  80; as 
winter crop  114; light and 
temperature 59; scheduling 
97, 98; spacing and trellis-
ing60 

- V-

Vegetable diseases, damping 

off  198-199; further  read(cid:173)
ing  199; mildews (powdery 
and downy)  197; leaf rot 
197; leaf spot  198; root rot 
197; sooty mold  198; un(cid:173)
known—how to  identify 
199 

Ventilation  30-31 

Vermiculite  158 
Vine crop varieties 70-71 
Vinegar  192-193 
Viruses  194 
Verticillium, tomato disorder, 

196 

-w-

Water 29-30, 37-41 
Watercress  114 
Watermelon,  germinating, 

planting and transplanting 
80; as summer crop  126; 
light and temperature 59; 
schedule for propagating 
spring transplants  146; 
scheduling 97, 98; spacing 
and trellising 60 

Weather information,  32-33; 
list  of  radio  stations  212-
213 

Index 

221 

Weeds 200 
Wheelbarrow 45 
Wheelchair access 51 
White curtain 26, 44 
White flies  188 
White paint  25-26,44 
Winter crops  102-114; start(cid:173)

ing 95 

Winterphyllic crops 73 
Wood ash  157 
Wood preservatives 30; in 

construction of raised beds 
46 

Workspace 51-52, 96 

-z-

Zebra finch,  use as part of 

IPM  182-183 

Zinc  155 
Zinnia, schedule for propagat(cid:173)
ing spring transplants  146 

Zucchini  121-122,  146 

