What’s Wrong 

With My 
Houseplant?

What’s 
Wrong 
With My 
Houseplant?

SAVE YOUR INDOOR PLANTS WITH 100% ORGANIC SOLUTIONS

David Deardorff and Kathryn Wadsworth

TIMBER PRESS
Portland, Oregon

Copyright © 2016 by David Deardorff and Kathryn 
Wadsworth. All rights reserved.
Published in 2016 by Timber Press, Inc.

The Haseltine Building
133 S.W. Second Avenue, Suite 450
Portland, Oregon 97204-3527
timberpress.com

The information in this book, including as it relates  
to toxic plants, is accurate and complete to the best  
of our knowledge. All recommendations are made 
without guarantee on the part of the authors or 
Timber Press. The authors and publisher disclaim  
any liability in connection with the use of this 
information. In particular, individuals vary in the 
physiological reactions to remedies and plants that 
are touched or consumed.

Printed in China

Jacket design by Kristi Pfeffer

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Deardorff, David C., author.
  What’s wrong with my houseplant? : save your 
indoor plants with 100% organic solutions/David 
Deardoff, Kathryn Wadsworth.—First edition.
       pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-60469-633-2 (hardcover)—ISBN 978-1-
60469-590-8 (pbk.) 1. House plants. 2. Organic gar-
dening. I. Wadsworth, Kathryn B., author. II. Title. 
  SB419.D417 2016
  635.9’65—dc23
                                                            2015013389

A catalog record of this book is also available from the 
British Library.

For all our brothers and sisters: 
Judy, Meg Elaine, Jeanne, Daniel, 
Randy, Rick, John, Sarah, and 
Lauren, with love and gratitude

Contents

INTRODUCTION: Prepare for Success     9

PLANT PORTRAITS     31
Palms and Palm-like Plants     33
Trees and Shrubs     53
Herbaceous Perennials     78
Vines and Vine-like Plants     123
Ferns and Fern-like Plants     140

Temporary Houseplants     152
Orchids and Bromeliads     165
Cacti and Succulents     200
Culinary Herbs     240     

ORGANIC SOLUTIONS TO COMMON PROBLEMS     245

Recommended Resources     276
Useful Conversions     277
Acknowledgments     279

Photo Credits     281
Index     283

introduction 

Prepare 
for Success

Houseplants  are  a  relatively  recent  phenomenon.  For 

most of human history we did not have glass windows, and 
the  insides  of  our  homes  were  too  dark  for  plants.  When 
glass was first manufactured, only the very wealthy could 
afford it, but 150 years ago inexpensive pane glass became available for the 
first time, allowing ordinary homes to have large glass windows. That was 
during the Victorian era, the Age of Exploration, when botanical wonders 
from all over the world were brought back to England and Europe. Exotic 
palm trees and ferns from tropical climes were all the rage in Victorian 
parlors. During the 1960s, interest in growing houseplants peaked again, 
and making macramé plant hangers for hanging baskets became a national 
fad. Today, houseplants are once again popular and affordable, a result of 
newer  production  technologies,  like  tissue  culture,  combined  with  low-
cost labor in Asia, and efficient distribution systems.

      9

It’s hard to resist gorgeous orchids in full bloom, now avail-
able at moderate prices in supermarkets, big box stores, 
and garden centers. Not so long ago these plants were rare 
and costly, enjoyed only by a privileged few.

Split-leaf philodendron makes a perfect houseplant. 
Besides loving the low light and warm nighttime tempera-
tures of most homes, it is one of the plants known to rid 
indoor air of pollutants.

Why grow plants indoors? Houseplants sat-
isfy the atavistic need many of us have for con-
tact with green growing things, a need that is 
apparently encoded in our genes. Flowers beau-
tify our personal spaces, brightening the home 
and lightening the heart. Flowering houseplants, 
like orchids and African violets, can decrease 
stress, a therapeutic value that has only recently 
been recognized and studied. Simply arrang-
ing a collection of houseplants can be a cre-
ative outlet. Some people like to grow a variety 
of bromeliads on a large, artistic branch or piece 
of driftwood which they call a bromeliad tree. 
Even the act of caring for our plant companions 
is therapeutic.

More impressive still, indoor plants improve 
air quality. Chemicals that have an adverse effect 
on human health commonly outgas from ply-
wood, carpets, upholstery, and cleaning prod-
ucts. Research at the University of Georgia 
and elsewhere shows that certain houseplants 
reduce our exposure to these chemicals and 

10      Introduction

filter pollutants from the air, providing clean 
air for us to breathe. A two-year study under-
taken by NASA and the Associated Landscape 
Contractors of America identified several dif-
ferent houseplants that were able to remove the 
organic chemicals benzene, trichloroethylene, 
and formaldehyde from indoor air. All the philo-
dendrons and many other plants in this book 
(see sidebar) are valued members of the house-
hold for their proven ability to remove chemicals 
from indoor air.

Cacti and succulents that come from the 
tropical deserts of the world also make good 
houseplants. Their native habitat has full sun 

Tropical broadleaf evergreens adapted to 

low light and warm nights generally make the 
best houseplants. They are pre-adapted to grow 
well in our warm, dark homes because they 
evolved in similar habitats, such as the floor 
of tropical rainforests. As permanent mem-
bers of the household these plants succeed with 
minimum fuss.

A to Z of Air-filtering Plants
arrowhead plant / bird’s nest philodendron / blushing philodendron / caladium / calla lily / 
Chinese evergreen / corn plant / dragon tree / dumb cane / flamingo flower / heartleaf philo-
dendron / peace lily / pothos / selloum / snake plant / spider plant / split-leaf philodendron / 
wandering Jew / wax plant / weeping fig / Zanzibar gem

and warm nights, and many require bright 
light indoors.

Culinary herbs commonly grown on kitchen 

LIGHT

Plants eat light! They harvest solar energy and 
convert it to chemical energy. They turn sun-
light into sugar and they “burn” the sugar in 
order to grow, flower, and thrive. In the com-
plete absence of light all plants die sooner or 
later. The amount of time they can live with-
out light depends on how much sugar, starch, or 
complex carbohydrates they have manufactured 
and stored in their tissues. If they cannot manu-
facture food they have to metabolize stored food 
until the stores run out. Without light, plants 
starve to death.

All houseplants originally came to us from 

native habitats where they had evolved and 
adapted to local environmental conditions for 
millions of years. Houseplants whose native 
habitat is the shady floor of a rainforest, for 
example, thrive under low light conditions. But 
keep in mind that even in shady natural habi-
tats, plants are not really in permanent shade. 
They still receive a significant amount of ambi-
ent light from the sky (aka skylight: blue light 
that radiates from the sky). Conversely, plants 
whose native habitat is the brilliant sun of a des-
ert require the maximum amount of light your 
home can provide.

The intensity and duration of light, and a 
plant’s distance from the light source are the 
most important environmental parameters to 
consider as you prepare for success with any 
houseplant. Houses designed for humans are 
dark compared to houses built for plants—such 

Prepare for Success      11

windowsills make acceptable houseplants. 
These temperate zone plants come from the 
Mediterranean, which makes them generally 
more temperamental than tropicals. Few tem-
perate plants are able to tolerate warm night-
time temperatures.

And finally, plants that function as “living 

bouquets,” such as spring bulbs, florist azaleas, 
and Persian violets, can reside in our homes only 
temporarily. When their flowers fade, the plants 
go back outside or are discarded.

What is not a houseplant? Perennial plants 
from temperate zones that require cool night-
time temperatures are physiologically incapable 
of growing well inside our homes. Warm tem-
peratures at night kill them. Perfect examples of 
this category include miniature roses and dwarf 
apple trees.

To flourish, houseplants need the right 

amount of light, the right temperature, the cor-
rect amount of water and humidity, and appro-
priate potting media and fertilizer. Like all 
other plants, they respond to the changing sea-
sons of the year. The number of hours of day-
light changes with the seasons, along with the 
temperature and humidity; these environmen-
tal cues signal the plant to respond with active 
vegetative growth and flowering, or dormancy 
and rest. Adapting your care to an individ-
ual plant’s needs and to seasonal changes will 
assure success.

as a greenhouse filled with bright light. When 
we bring a companion plant into our homes we 
need to be very cognizant of the intensity of 
light that particular plant needs and how long 
it needs it. In the plant portraits section of this 
book each plant’s light requirement, whether 
high, medium, or low, is listed.

As you place your plants in the right light, 

bear in mind that they need to be acclimated to 
their new home. Acclimatize a recently acquired 
plant to full sun slowly over a period of a cou-
ple of weeks. Give it two hours a day for four 
days, then four hours a day for four days, then 
six hours for four days, and so forth. By the time 
your plant tolerates eight hours a day of full 
intense sun it will be acclimated well enough to 
tolerate full sun all day without burning.

Light attributes in your home. The first thing 
you’ll need to do is figure out which window 
faces which direction. In the morning, when 
you’re having your coffee, which window gives 
you the best view of the sunrise? That window 
faces east. As you face that east window, know 
that south is on your right and north is on your 
left. West is behind you.

The second thing you’ll need to figure out 

is how far away from the window your plant is 
going to live. If the leaves of your plant are 2 feet 
away from the window then your plant is only 
getting one-fourth of the light it would receive 
if it were right next to the window. This phe-
nomenon is called the inverse square law, and 
you can use this simple mathematical formula 
to help your plants get the light they need. Who 
knew there’d be math when all you want to do is 
grow a plant? But really, it’s simple. All you need 
is a tape measure and a calculator (or a piece of 
paper and pencil if you’re old school).

According to this law, the intensity of light 

decreases as the square of the distance from the 
source of the light. So, if the plant is 2 feet away, 

12      Introduction

then 2 squared (2 × 2) = 4, and your plant is only 
getting one-fourth of the light available. Four 
feet away = one-sixteenth the light (4 × 4 = 16), 
and so forth. As you can see, the further your 
plant is from a light source, the less energy it 
receives. The same rule applies to artificial light, 
by the way.

High light. Full sun all day, south-facing win-
dow. The brilliant, intense sunlight of a cloud-
less summer day at noon as it pours through a 
south window is the brightest possible light for 
a houseplant. Imagine a houseplant sitting in 
its pot on the sill of a south window. The plant 
has received direct sunlight all morning and will 
receive it all afternoon as well. The intensity and 
duration of light is at its maximum. The num-
ber of hours of light in a south window changes 

These houseplants get full sun all day in a south-facing 
window. They’re also in the laundry room, where they get 
plenty of humidity.

from summer, when the days are long, to win-
ter, when the days are short, but it is always 
intense, direct, full sunlight. A barrel cactus or 
agave thrives under these conditions, while an 
African violet would die. In fact, the majority of 
good houseplants will not do well in the intense 
unfiltered light of a south window but those that 
require high light will do very well indeed.

High light. Bright indirect light, south-facing 
window. Imagine drawing a sheer, lacy, or gauzy 
white curtain over a south window. The curtain 
hangs between the plant and the window; your 
plant is now receiving very bright, but filtered 
light. Though the plant is no longer exposed to 
direct sun, it’s still in a high light situation. You 
can further modify the light intensity by your 
choice of curtains. The more “see through” the 
curtain the brighter the light, and the heavier 
the curtain the less light.

Medium light. Full sun half a day, east- and 
west-facing windows. In contrast to the light 
of a south window, it is impossible for an east or 
west window to receive a full day of sunshine. 
They receive only a half-day of intense, direct 
sunshine; the rest of the day they receive only 
skylight. East or west windows give plants a 
medium light regime.

An east window will be high light intensity in 
the morning when the sun is rising and the air is 
cool. East windows will be low light intensity all 
afternoon. Most houseplants will perform quite 
well in an east window with cool morning light.

A west window will be high light intensity 

all afternoon when the sun is setting and the air 
temperature is hot. West windows will be low 
light intensity all morning long. Heat lovers like 
many cacti and succulents will actually do fine 
in a west window because they prefer those hot 
afternoons.

Medium light. Dappled light. Venetian blinds 
on a south, east, or west window that gets full, 
direct, intense sunlight simulate the kind of dap-
pled light a plant receives from an overhanging 
tree. A plant on the sill of a window with Vene-
tian blinds receives alternating bands of intense 
hot sun and cool shade that move across the 
leaves as the sun moves across the sky. You con-
trol how much light the plant gets by opening or 
closing the blinds to make the bars of light and 
shade narrow or wide. Thus, the plant gets half 
direct, intense sun and half cooling shade, both 
of which move across the plant’s surface.

Medium light. Filtered light. Drawing a sheer 
or gauzy curtain over a south-, east-, or west-
facing window creates filtered light.

Low light. Shade all day, north-facing win-
dows. Windows that face north never receive 
any direct sunshine. The only light they receive 
is the ambient blue light that radiates from the 
sky. North windows are a low light regime, espe-
cially in winter when the sun is low in the sky and 
the days are short. The majority of houseplants 
will not do well in a north window; cast-iron 
plant and a few others do okay in a north win-
dow. If a north window is all you have to work 
with, you might consider growing houseplants 
in artificial light rather than natural daylight.

Low light. Ambient light all day from sky-
lights in the ceiling. Many homes have sky-
lights in the ceilings of various rooms in the 
house. They bring the ambient blue light of the 
sky into your home all day long. Plants that pre-
fer low light levels will do especially well in the 
light provided by these skylights. However, sky-
lights also allow a patch of direct, intense sun-
shine to move across your room from morning 
to night. If your plant is in a location that will 
be spotlighted by a patch of brilliant, intense 

Prepare for Success      13

(top left) This graceful parlor 
palm thrives in the medium 
light of an east-facing window.

(top right) A position to the side 
of a north-facing window will 
never give this palm the light 
it prefers. All palms featured 
in this book require medium to 
high light as houseplants.

(left) This palm’s owner keeps 
a careful eye on the sun that 
enters through the skylight 
above, so that the plant’s 
leaves do not burn.

14      Introduction

sunlight, you might need to move it out of that 
patch for a couple hours each day. The path 
that patch of sunshine takes across your room 
changes with the seasons. Observe the patch’s 
path so that your plant does not get sunburn.

Artificial light. With artificial light you can for-
get about your windows and skylights and grow 
houseplants anywhere. Well, almost anywhere, 
and not all houseplants.

A very large array of light fixtures suitable 
for houseplants is available today. They range 
from simple desk lamps with containers for 
houseplants at the base to complex systems of 
multi-stacked shelves with lighting above each 
shelf. With these light systems in place, any dark 
corner can be brightened up with houseplants.

No matter what system you use, choose a 
light source that gives off the proper wave-
lengths of light for your plant. Different kinds 
of bulbs emit different wavelengths of light, and 
plants use different wavelengths of light for dif-
ferent purposes. You need blue and red light 
if all you want is good foliage growth, but you 
need red and far red light if you want your plant 
to make flowers. Look at the packaging the bulb 
comes in to determine its light quality.

Standard cool-white daylight fluorescent 

tubes emit light in the blue and red range and 
are very suitable for vegetative growth. They 
do a very good job for foliage plants. The spe-
cial fluorescent bulbs designed to promote plant 
growth and flowering, called grow lights, are 
expensive but are designed to emit the right 
quality of light (blue, red, and far red). They also 
avoid the heat load generated by incandescent, 
high-intensity discharge lamps, high pressure 
sodium, and metal halide lights. LED lights are a 
low-heat artificial light source, as well as being 
energy efficient.

A final consideration is the size of the plant 
you want to grow. Tall plants, like palms, other 

trees, and large shrubs, are very difficult (often 
impossible) to get close enough to your light 
source for the light to do much good due to the 
inverse square law discussed earlier.

Your best option for growing houseplants 

under artificial lights in your home is to concen-
trate on low-growing plants that can be posi-
tioned close to the bulbs. African violets, lady’s 
slippers, and moth orchids are some of the very 
best choices for this purpose.

TEMPERATURE

Success with a particular houseplant depends 
on knowing the daily temperature regime (day-
time high and nighttime low) that plant needs 
to flourish under your care. Fortunately, plants 
are fairly forgiving and will adjust to day or 
night temperatures within a range of about ten 
degrees Fahrenhreit. The plant portrait of each 
houseplant specifies the appropriate tempera-
ture range, daytime and nighttime, for best suc-
cess with that plant.

Night temperatures are critical for house-

plants because plants cannot manufacture food 
(sugar) through photosynthesis when the sun 
is not shining. In order to maintain metabo-
lism and growth at night the plant has to burn 
some of the food it made during the day. For 
plants, metabolizing food is called respiration. 
Respiration is the exact opposite process from 
photosynthesis and it is critically linked to tem-
perature. As the temperature goes up metabo-
lism goes up. As the nighttime temperature goes 
higher a plant will reach a point where it has 
burned up all the food it made during the day. At 
even higher temperatures it will burn up all its 
reserve food supply. Pretty soon the plant will 
be dead. This is why those irresistibly cute little 
miniature roses in 4-inch pots die within a cou-
ple weeks when you bring them home from the 

Prepare for Success      15

store. The warm nighttime temperature of our 
homes kills them. They are not only happy but 
exquisite if you plant them outdoors in the gar-
den where nights are cold. They, like almost all 
temperate zone plants, are not houseplants.

High temperature. Plants that grow best in 
really warm temperatures generally do well with 
a daytime range of 75 to 85°F and a nighttime 
range of 65 to 75°F.

Moderate temperature. Plants that prefer 
moderate temperatures perform well with a 
daytime range of 70 to 80°F and a nighttime 
range of 60 to 70°F.

Low temperature. Plants that need low tem-
peratures tolerate a daytime range of 65 to 75°F 
and a nighttime range of 55 to 65°F.

WATER

The goal of any watering practice or system is to 
keep the soil moist—neither soggy nor dry. Root 
rot as a result of overwatering is the number one 
killer of all plants in containers whether indoors 
or out. This fact, more than any other, tells us 
that appropriate watering is not as easy as it 
seems, and most people are too generous.

Not all plants are created equal with respect 
to their water needs. Some plants, bananas for 
example, really need a lot of water. Other plants, 
such as many cacti, would die swiftly if they 
were watered as much as a banana plant.

Never water your houseplants with cold 

water straight from the cold water faucet. Cold 
water is shocking to these tropical beauties. 
Always use cool, tepid (not cold, not hot) water. 
One technique is to fill a pitcher or jug with 
water and let it sit overnight to warm up to room 
temperature. Another is to turn on the hot water 

16      Introduction

just enough to warm the cold water slightly and 
take the chill off.

How to tell when to water. Determine when 
you need to water your plants with a simple fin-
ger test. The dry potting medium at the surface 
of the pot will be at room temperature. Stick your 
finger down into the potting medium, and you 
will eventually feel cool, moist soil with the tip 
of your finger. Use your finger to measure how 
thick the dry medium is at the surface of the pot.
If you don’t trust your finger, or you just don’t 
like to get it dirty, there are a number of devices 
available to determine when a plant needs to 
be watered. Some are battery-operated probes 
that you insert into the potting medium. These 
have an indicator needle on a gauge or a digi-
tal readout, either of which will help you deter-
mine the thickness of the dry potting medium. 
Other kinds of devices are little porous clay 
objects (some are shaped like little earthworms) 
that you insert into the potting medium. These 
turn dark when they are wet and light when 
they are dry.

The plant portraits will give you specific 

guidelines on water needs for each plant.

Ample water. Plants that prefer ample water 
need to be watered when the top of the potting 
medium is dry to a depth of 0.5 inch.

Moderate water. Plants that prefer moderate 
water need to be watered when the top of the 
potting medium is dry to a depth of 1 inch.

Low water. Plants that prefer low water need to 
be watered when the top of the potting medium 
is dry to a depth of 2 inches.

Frequency of watering. How frequently you 
need to water depends on plant requirements, 
on how porous your pots are, and other factors. 

Unglazed clay (terracotta) pots are porous. 
Water evaporates through the walls of these pots 
very well so they dry out pretty quickly. In gar-
den jargon these pots are said to breathe. Plastic 
pots, or glazed ceramic, glass, or metal pots do 
not breathe. Their walls are impervious to water 
so the potting medium stays moist much longer 
than in unglazed clay pots.

Ambient air temperature, humidity, and 
daylength also play a role with regard to fre-
quency of watering. A houseplant’s need for 
water goes up when the temperature goes 
up, or when it bursts into active growth, or 
begins to flower. On hot, dry summer days you 
need to water houseplants more frequently 
than on cool, moist winter days—even though 
the plants are inside the house and protected 
from temperature extremes.

Another factor to consider with regard 

to watering your houseplants is the pot-
ting medium itself. A general-purpose potting 
medium is designed to absorb and retain suffi-
cient moisture, to allow free water to drain away 
adequately, and also to provide ample air for 
good root growth. Some potting media, African 
violet mixes for example, are designed to retain 
a little more moisture than a general-purpose 
potting medium. Other potting media, such as 
a cactus mix or orchid bark, are designed not to 
retain much water; they are said to drain well.

Provide drainage. As a general rule, never let 
a houseplant sit with the bottom of its pot in a 
puddle of water in its saucer for more than an 
hour or so. If the potting medium is moist (not 
soaking wet, not bone dry) then you’re doing a 
good job. Water your plants until you see water 
begin to come out the drainage holes in the bot-
tom of the pot, then stop watering. If the pot is 
propped up on pot feet or pebbles so that the 
bottom of the pot does not sit in a pool of water, 
you can let the water stand in the saucer. This 

standing water will help increase humidity. If 
your pot is not propped up on pot feet or peb-
bles, check back within 30 minutes to an hour. 
If there is any water left in the saucer, remove 
the saucer and discard the water. Put your plant 
back in the saucer and you’re good to go until 
the next time you need to water.

Watering cans. A good watering can for 
most houseplants is small and has a very nar-
row spout. A bad watering can for houseplants 
is the big, 2- or 3-gallon, clunky one that you 
use outdoors in the garden, the one with the 
3-inch-wide nozzle that has a couple dozen 
holes in it. Leave the clunky one in the garden 
and get a special one for your houseplants. It 
needs to be small and lightweight, with a nar-
row spout to control where the water goes. Stick 
the narrow nozzle of your little watering can 
down to the surface of the potting medium and 
pour the water on the medium, not the foliage. 
This is particularly important for African vio-
lets because their leaves are damaged if you drip 
water on them.

HUMIDITY

Water moves through a plant’s body through a 
process called transpiration. The roots absorb 
water from the soil, then move it upward 
through the stem and out into the leaves. Water, 
as a vapor, moves out of the leaf into the air 
through special pores called stomates. Losing 
water through its leaves is a vital and necessary 
process for your plant. Just as your heart beats 
to pump blood to every cell in your body, so 
transpiration bathes every cell in a plant’s body 
in nutrients carried by water.

If humidity is high a plant loses water more 
slowly from its leaves. If humidity is low a plant 
loses water rapidly from its leaves. Two other 

Prepare for Success      17

Depending on your climate, dry or humid, 

you may need to mist your indoor plants about 
once a week, as we did when we lived in Santa 
Fe, New Mexico. In the Pacific Northwest, 
where we live now, many of our plants do not 
need misting, even in the dry summer months.

POTTING MEDIA

When you purchase a bag of “potting soil” from 
your local garden center what you’re actually 
getting is not soil. It’s an artificial mixture of 
ingredients specifically designed to meet the 
needs of plants in containers and usually con-
tains no actual soil at all. Garden soil, plain old 
dirt to some, does not promote good growth of 
container plants because it becomes more and 
more dense and airless over time. Garden soil 
is perfectly adequate—in the garden—where it 
benefits from the activities of worms, insects, 
fungi, and bacteria. But a pot is a special envi-
ronment, not a garden, and any plant in a pot 
has special needs that cannot be met by ordinary 
garden soil alone.

Roots in a pot, like roots in a garden, must 

have access to oxygen or they die. Roots of most 
plants (other than orchids) are not green and are 
not capable of making food through photosyn-
thesis. In order to stay alive and grow, roots have 
to metabolize the sugar manufactured by the 
leaves. This process, called respiration in plants, 
burns sugar to release energy and consumes 
oxygen in order to do so. Whenever the air (oxy-
gen) in the medium surrounding the root system 
of your houseplant is depleted, whether due to 
long-term saturation by water or tight density of 
the medium, it is stressful and life-threatening 
to your plant.

The combination of primary ingredients in 
artificial “potting soil” includes inorganic min-
eral items like perlite and vermiculite that create 

Think of an orchid’s natural habitat: on a sultry day  
it perches on a limb high in the canopy of a tropical  
rainforest. Mist your orchids daily to mimic this 
high-humidity home.

factors influence this process. First is the avail-
ability of water. If your potting medium is ade-
quately moist then the plant is able to mine the 
soil with its roots for the water it needs. Con-
versely, if water is not available because you for-
got to water and the medium is dry, then your 
plant can get into trouble quickly. The second 
factor is ambient air temperature. As the air 
temperature goes up humidity goes down; as the 
temperature goes down humidity goes up. Plac-
ing your plant too close to a hot air register or 
other heat source will suck the water right out 
of the leaves very quickly.

18      Introduction

air spaces in the medium and some sharp horti-
cultural sand to promote drainage. It also con-
tains organic material like bark fines to hold 
and retain moisture. Such a mix never becomes 
as dense and airless as garden soil in a pot. 
As the organic fraction of the medium breaks 
down and decomposes over time, however, the 
medium will tend to hold more moisture than is 
good for the plant. Then it’s time to re-pot with 
fresh medium.

Potting mixes were invented in a time when 

seemingly inexhaustible quantities of sphagnum  
peat moss were available as a primary ingredient. 
Unfortunately those days are over and the sphag-
num peat moss deposits have mostly been mined 
out. More responsible potting soil producers 
are now using the renewable and sustainable 
resource of bark fines obtained from tree farm 
timber harvesting, or coconut coir from coconut 
plantations instead of peat moss for the moisture- 
retaining organic component of their mixes.

Organic potting media. Aside from the pri-
mary ingredients just mentioned, most really 
good general-purpose organic potting soils con-
tain other ingredients such as nutrients derived 
from organic fertilizers (manures, compost, 
worm castings), spores of mycorrhizal fungi, 
and CFUs (colony-forming units) of beneficial 
bacteria. The organic fertilizers in these mixes 
release their nutrients slowly and do not burn 
plant roots. Non-organic potting soils, which 
often have processed, water-soluble fertiliz-
ers included in the mix, are not recommended. 
For one thing, non-organic processed fertiliz-
ers are more concentrated than organic fertil-
izers and you run the risk of burning the roots 
of your plants. For another, these non-organic 
commercially prepared potting soils take a 
one-size-fits-all approach, and they’re primar-
ily made for annuals such as petunias, tomatoes, 
and the like, not for houseplants.

Special commercially prepared potting media 

are widely available for plants with special 
needs. Most of these are not organic, but you can 
make your own organic mix easily. Three kinds 
of houseplants benefit from special media that 
you can buy or make yourself.

Cactus and succulents. Mix 1 part sharp 
horticultural sand, 1 part perlite, and 1 part 
general-purpose organic potting medium. This 
well-drained mix works very well for cactus and 
succulents of all kinds.

African violets. Commercially prepared Afri-
can violet potting media are often too dense and 
hold too much moisture for really good African 
violet growth. You can make your own by adding 
1 part commercial African violet mix to 1 part 
general-purpose organic potting medium.

Orchids. Most orchids commonly grown as 
houseplants are potted in chunks of straight 
Douglas fir bark, or other kinds of tree bark with 
no bark fines or other moisture-holding compo-
nents. Many orchids grow perfectly well in bark 
with nothing else added but weak fertilizers. 
They will die if potted in potting soil.

Orchid bark comes in three grades: coarse, 

medium, and fine. Coarse and medium bark are 
appropriate for most adult orchids. Use fine 
orchid bark for seedlings, miniatures, and other 
small plants. Bark media are extremely well 
drained, with very large pore spaces, and abun-
dant oxygen around the roots.

Two kinds of orchids, however, cymbidiums 
and lady’s slippers, do not fare well in straight 
orchid bark. You can mix 1 part fine orchid bark 
with 1 part general-purpose organic potting 
medium to make a well-drained medium appro-
priate for these semi-terrestrial orchids.

Prepare for Success      19

order to grow new leaves, roots, stems, and so 
forth. High nitrogen promotes the lush growth 
of green leaves, so that any houseplant grown 
primarily for its attractive foliage, as opposed to 
flowers, needs a high-nitrogen fertilizer. Phos-
phorus (the middle number) is necessary for 
flowering and strong roots. Plants need phos-
phorus in order to initiate, develop, and main-
tain their flowers. This is why the percent of 
phosphorus is high in fertilizers designed for 
flowering bulbs. Any flowering houseplant 
grown primarily for its beautiful flowers, as 
opposed to its foliage, needs a fertilizer with a 
relatively high phosphorus component. Potas-
sium (the last number) promotes strong stems 
and provides stress protection for plants. Your 
plant is better able to withstand extremes (too 
much or too little) of essential environmental 
variables such as light, temperature, and water if 
it’s getting adequate potassium.

The secondary essential mineral nutrients 
are calcium, magnesium, and sulfur. They are 
not needed in quantities as large as the macro-
nutrients, but they are still essential for healthy 
plants. Six micronutrients, needed in minute 
quantities, are boron, copper, iron, manganese, 
molybdenum, and zinc.

Plants require all 12 of the mineral nutri-
ents just named in order to stay healthy. In 
addition to the 12, they also need the carbon, 
hydrogen, and oxygen they obtain from car-
bon dioxide and water in order to manufacture 
sugar. A good, high-quality, organic potting soil 
that contains organic fertilizer should supply all 
12 of the essential mineral nutrients that your 
houseplant needs.

FERTILIZER

Commercial fertilizer packages often describe 
their contents as “plant food.” This is a mis-
nomer. Fertilizer contains mineral nutrients 
such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium 
that plants require for growth, but any plant’s 
actual food, what they actually eat, is the sugar 
they make from sunlight and carbon dioxide. 
When you breathe on your plants you are truly 
feeding them. They absorb the carbon dioxide 
from your breath, combine it with solar energy 
through photosynthesis, and manufacture sugar 
from it. When they metabolize the sugar it pro-
vides them with the fuel they need to grow new 
leaves, roots, stems, and flowers.

Plants need more than just sunlight, carbon 
dioxide, and water; they also require 12 essen-
tial mineral nutrients. In nature, plants obtain 
these nutrients from animal droppings, dead 
animals, and dead plant material. Houseplants 
have to obtain them from their more limited 
environment: if the organic potting medium you 
use has organic fertilizer and compost incorpo-
rated into it, your plant will get the nutrients it 
needs. The overwhelming majority of house-
plants are not fussy about nutrients, but if the 
potting medium contains no fertilizer then you 
may need to add organic fertilizer. You may also 
need to add fertilizer later, after the plant has 
grown. Look to its portrait to determine a plant’s 
fertilizer needs.

All fertilizers have three numbers on the 
front of the package (e.g., 6-12-4 or 10-10-10), 
which stand for the percentages of nitrogen 
(N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K), in that 
order. These three essential nutrients are called 
primary or macronutrients because plants need 
them in relatively large quantities compared to 
the other nine.

Nitrogen (the first number) is vital for veg-
etative growth. A plant has to have nitrogen in 

20      Introduction

Nutrition Guidelines

Nutrient

Needed for . . .

Nitrogen

Vegetative growth, protein synthe-
sis for new tissue.

Phosphorus

Flower and fruit production.

Potassium

Strong stems and stress protec-
tion.

Calcium

Essential for numerous metabolic 
and physiological processes.

Magnesium

Essential for growth and is a com-
ponent of chlorophyll.

Sulfur

Boron

Copper

Vital for plant growth, especially 
roots and seed production.

Necessary component of cell 
walls and membrane function.

Necessary for photosynthesis and 
plant growth.

Iron

Necessary for photosynthesis.

Manganese

Important for carbohydrate and 
nitrogen metabolism.

Molybdenum

Important for nitrogen 
metabolism.

Zinc

Important for growth hormones 
and enzyme systems.

CONTAINERS

Your houseplants will come to you in a plethora 
of pot sizes. Smaller pots are measured by diam-
eter in inches. For example, a 4-inch pot will be 
approximately that in diameter. Manufactur-
ers differ enormously and some 4-inch pots are 
larger, 4.75 inches across, and some are smaller, 
3.5 inches across. Some will be squat and others 
will be tall.

Larger pots are generally measured by vol-

ume. A 1-gallon pot is generally 8 inches in diam-
eter by 7 inches tall. A 2-gallon pot is roughly  
10 × 8 inches, a 3-gallon is about 11 × 9.5 inches, 
and a 5-gallon pot is approximately 14 × 10 
inches. There literally are hundreds of variations 
in the sizes of the inexpensive, thin-walled plas-
tic pots used by nurseries for plant production.
Most of the time when you purchase a house-
plant it comes in a 4-inch or 1-gallon pot. Palm 
trees, citrus trees, and shrubs like hibiscus may 
be in a 2-gallon pot or even a 5-gallon pot. In 
any case, your plant will most likely arrive in 
an inexpensive, thin-walled, black or green 
plastic container.

Anything that holds a volume of potting 
medium and that has a drainage hole can be 
used for a houseplant container. If you want to 
grow your plant in an old boot, for example, you 
can do it; you just have to drill a hole in the boot 
to make sure you have adequate drainage. Wood 
boxes, tin cans, glass jars, terracotta, fine por-
celain, brass, fiberglass, plastic—all these can be 
used as containers for houseplants. Whatever 
you use make sure there is at least one drainage 
hole. If there isn’t then you’ll either have to drill 
one or use the container as a cachepot, which is 
a decorative shell for the “real” pot.

A half-inch carbide bit and a 3/4-horse-
power electric drill are handy for drilling 
holes in ceramic containers, but be cautious 
because your fancy and expensive porcelain or 

Prepare for Success      21

There are many sizes and shapes of pots, as well as 
materials from which they are made. Choose one that 
suits your taste and the plant’s needs when you bring 
home your new plant.

These lovely ceramic pots all share one excellent attri-
bute: they are wider at the top than at the bottom. 
Re-potting is much easier on you and the plant when 
the pot has this shape.

hand-thrown ceramic container is easily bro-
ken during the drilling process. You might be 
happier if you have the holes drilled profession-
ally rather than attempting it yourself. It takes 
a lot of strength to bear down on the drill on a 
hard ceramic surface and the noise is absolutely 
deafening. Be sure to wear ear protection, gog-
gles to protect your eyes, and gloves to protect 
your hands.

Pot shapes. One of the loveliest container 
shapes is where a wide-bodied pot swoops in to 
a narrow neck at its top. These are truly beau-
tiful pots; however, they are possibly the worst 
choice you could make for a houseplant. The 
problem is that you must pull your plant out of 
its pot periodically. If the neck is narrower than 
the body then you either have to cut off the roots 
to get the plant out, or you have to break your 
pot. Much better choices are pots with straight 
sides or ones that flare out wide with a neck that 
is wider than the body. These shapes make it 
easy to remove your plant without damaging it 
or the pot.

Cachepots. If you just cannot stand the look 
of the ugly pot your plant is in, but your plant 
is not ready to up-pot into the gorgeous shiny 
new porcelain, brass, or hand-thrown con-
tainer you purchased that perfectly comple-
ments your decor, then just plop the ugly pot 
into your pretty pot and call it done until your 
plant is ready to up-pot. The pretty pot that con-
ceals the ugly pot is called a cachepot. If your 
cachepot is very large, too large for your plant 
even when your plant is ready for moving up, 
then up-pot your plant (when it’s ready) to a 
larger but equally cheap and ugly pot and put 
it back in the decorative cachepot until your 
plant’s big enough to handle the volume of soil 
in your cachepot.

If your beautiful cachepot does not have a 
drainage hole, you’ll need to put 1 to 2 inches 
of clean pebbles in the bottom of the cache-
pot. Set your ugly pot on top of the pebbles so 
that the bottom of the ugly pot never has to 
sit in a pool of water. Water your plant care-
fully and never allow the water that drains out 
of the ugly pot to rise above the pebbles in the 

22      Introduction

POTTING YOUR PLANT

Most people want to replace their houseplant’s 
original pot with something more attractive. 
After all, your companion plant should fit into 
your decor in a container that complements 
your home and those cheap, thin-walled plas-
tic pots that come from the nursery don’t quite 
reach the mark.

Up-potting. When you first get your plant, 
examine it to see if it would profit from being 
moved into a larger container (up-potting). 
Check by pulling the plant out of its pot and 
looking at the root ball. This will not harm the 
plant if you treat it gently.

If there are only a few roots visible on the 
sides of the root ball and the potting medium 
starts to fall apart when you poke it with your 
finger just push the plant back into its container 
and wait a year or so before up-potting. If you 
pull your plant out of its cheap plastic container 
and the root ball is covered by a healthy network 
of white roots strongly holding together the 
mass of potting medium in a compact ball, then 
you can go ahead and up-pot your plant into a 
larger container.

Another factor to consider is the rate at 
which plants grow. Some houseplants grow 
slowly by nature and some grow fast, but both 
will eventually need to be up-potted. When 
you’re certain your plant is ready for a new, 
larger pot, use a tape measure to determine 
the diameter of the old original pot. It’s impor-
tant to know the size of the container when-
ever it comes time to move your plant up to a 
larger pot.

The new pot should be no more than 2 to 
4 inches larger than the current pot. Why? 
Because a small plant with a small root system is 
physically incapable of mining a large volume of 
soil for moisture with the result that the potting 

Prepare for Success      23

This dumb cane still grows in one of those ugly plastic pots 
from the garden center. Until its owner has time to up-pot 
it, it resides in a cachepot.

bottom of your cachepot. If you accidentally put 
in too much water then be sure to drain away 
the excess water so that your plant does not suf-
fer from being waterlogged. Another technique 
for watering is to remove your plant from the 
cachepot, take it to the kitchen sink or into the 
shower, water it, let it drain, then put it back in 
the cachepot.

medium stays too wet too long and the roots rot. 
You have to move a plant up in increments until 
you get your plant into the size of pot you want 
it to live in for a very long time.

For a slow-growing plant the new pot 

should be 2 inches larger in diameter. For a 
fast-growing plant the new pot should be 4 
inches larger. In other words, when you up-pot a 
slow-growing plant in a 4-inch pot, move it into 
a 6-inch pot. This will give you 1 inch of fresh 
potting medium packed around all sides of the 
root ball. When you up-pot a fast-growing plant 
in a 4-inch pot, put it into an 8-inch pot. This 
will give you 2 inches of fresh potting medium 
packed around all sides of the root ball. A really 
vigorous plant growing rapidly will quickly fill 
2 inches of fresh potting medium with healthy 
roots, but a slow-growing plant cannot do so.
Keep in mind that some houseplants are 
destined to always be small, even when fully 
mature. An African violet comes to mind as a 
kind of plant that can never become large, like 
a tree. It will always be small even when fully 
mature and can live quite happily in a 4-inch 
pot. A rubber tree in a 4-inch pot, by contrast, 
will quickly outgrow the pot and need to be 
up-potted to a bigger container. Since the rub-
ber tree is a forest giant in the wild, it can eas-
ily reach the ceiling in your home if you give it a 
large enough pot.

Re-potting. If your houseplant has reached 
the perfect size for your space (i.e., you do 
not want it to get much larger than it is), you 
don’t want to move it into a larger pot. To 
restrict (or maintain) a plant’s size you re-pot 
it and put it back into the same container, or a 
same-size container.

Pull the plant out of its container and exam-
ine the roots. You’ll probably see a tangled mass 
of solid roots and you won’t be able to see any 
potting medium. Using a clean, sterile, sharp 
knife, slice off 1 inch of the root ball on all sides 
and across the bottom. Pack the bottom of the 
pot with 1 inch of fresh potting medium and put 
your plant back in its pot, then pack the sides 
of the pot with 1 inch of fresh potting medium. 
In two to three years your plant will once again 
need to be re-potted and you’ll just repeat 
this process.

PROPAGATION

Division, cuttings, and layering are tried and 
true methods of asexual propagation that make 
exact copies of your parent plant. Each plant 
portrait in this book tells you which propa-
gation technique(s) can be used for that par-
ticular plant. You should be aware, however, 
that many cultivars are protected by plant pat-
ents. You may legally propagate as many pat-
ented plants as you desire, but for your own 
use only. It is illegal for you to sell them. Only 
the patent holder or licensee has the right to 
sell these plants.

African violets stay 
small even when fully 
mature. Most varieties 
will never be more than 
about 6 inches tall and 
wide, so happily remain 
in 4-inch pots.

Sterilize your tools. Propagation techniques 
involve cutting or wounding your plant with a 
knife or pruners. Whatever tool you use, be sure 
it is clean, sharp, and above all sterile before you 
start cutting your plant. The reason you have to 
sterilize your tools is because a large number 

24      Introduction

of virus diseases and bacterial diseases infect 
plants, and the viruses and bacteria that cause 
them are routinely spread from plant to plant 
by pruners and knives. If you use a pruner on a 
plant that is infected with a virus, and then use 
the same pruner on a healthy plant without ster-
ilizing it between plants, you’ll probably infect 
your healthy plant.

Orchid collections worldwide are infected 

with cymbidium mosaic virus and ringspot 
virus, for example. Orchid fanciers routinely 
sterilize their pruners with a blow torch to 
kill any virus particles clinging to the blades. 
African violet fanciers sterilize their tools by 
soaking them in rubbing alcohol. Another tech-
nique is to soak your tools in a 10% bleach solu-
tion (1 part household bleach to 9 parts water). 
Bleach corrodes your tools badly but is very 
effective at killing pathogens. Still another tech-
nique is to use single-edge razor blades that can 
be discarded after use, or wrapped in alumi-
num foil and boiled in water for 20 minutes for 
re-use.

Divisions. Simple division is the easiest of all 
methods for making identical copies of your 
houseplants. You simply cut your plant into 
two or more pieces. That said, whenever you 
cut pieces off your plant you must reduce water 
loss or your divisions will desiccate and die. 
You accomplish this by removing one-third to 
one-half of the leaves from each division. Either 
cut off the leaves at the bottom of the stems, or 
cut leaves in half.

There are five types of divisions: rhizomes, 

tubers, stolons, pups, and keikis. For all divisions 
pot them in the same potting medium you used 
for the original plant. Keep humidity high and 
reduce water loss by putting a glass jar or plas-
tic bag over each division until it is once again 
in active growth. Open up or remove this cover 
for an hour or so every day to let in air. Keep the 

divisions in a warm location in low light. Water 
cautiously till they’re well rooted in their new 
location and actively making new leaves. When 
they are fully established, remove the cover and 
acclimatize them to their permanent location in 
the proper light and temperature conditions for 
that particular plant.

RHIZOMES. Some houseplants (many orchids, 

ferns, snake plant, cast-iron plant) have a rhi-
zome, a specialized horizontal underground 
stem that sends up new shoots at regular inter-
vals. Using a clean, sterilized, sharp knife or 
pruners you can cut this rhizome into two or 
more pieces, making sure each piece has its own 
roots, stems, and leaves. Gently pull the parent 
plant apart to disentangle the roots as you go.

TUBERS. Calla lily, caladium, and gloxinia have 

underground tubers. Use a clean, sterilized, 
sharp knife to cut the tuber into two or more 
pieces during the plant’s dormant period.

STOLONS. A few plants, such as spider plant 

and creeping saxifrage, have specialized above- 
ground stems called runners or stolons that 
make plantlets (just like a strawberry plant). 
Using a clean, sterilized, sharp knife or pruners 
you can cut this runner into two or more pieces, 
making sure each piece has its own roots, stems, 
and leaves.

PUPS. Other houseplants (all bromeliads, 

many succulents, some cacti, a few palms) pro-
duce new shoots, or pups, around the base of 
the old mother plant. When these pups have 
enough roots they can be removed from their 
mother plant and planted in their own pots. Sep-
arate a pup from the parent plant with a clean, 
sterilized, sharp knife or pruners. Make sure to 
include a decent amount of roots.

KEIKIS. Moth orchids often produce a keiki 
(Hawaiian for “child”) on their old flowering 
stems. These little plants develop leaves and 
roots while still attached to the old inflores-
cence. When they look large enough to survive 

Prepare for Success      25

on their own you can separate them from the 
mother plant with a clean, sterilized, sharp knife 
or pruners. Make sure to get all the roots.

Cuttings. Another easy method for propaga-
tion of houseplants is from cut pieces of stems 
or leaves. Most houseplants have stems that will 
sprout roots under the right conditions, how-
ever, palms are a notable exception and will be 
killed if you cut their tops off. Only a few plants 
are able to regenerate new plants from their 
leaves. Again, each plant portrait will tell you 
which propagation technique(s) can be used for 
that particular plant.

There are three types of cuttings: stem tip 

cuttings, stem cuttings, and leaf cuttings. For all 
cuttings pot them in the same potting medium 
you used for the original plant. Keep humidity 
high and reduce water loss by putting a glass jar 
or plastic bag over each cutting until it is once 
again in active growth. Open up or remove this 
cover for an hour or so every day to let in air. Keep 
the cuttings in a warm location in low light. 

Water cautiously till they’re well rooted in their 
new location and actively making new leaves.

Stem tip cuttings. Make a basic stem tip cutting 
by removing the top 6 to 8 inches from the tips 
of the stems. Always make your cut just below a 
node (the place where a leaf is, or was, attached 
to the stem) because the new root system will 
grow out of that node. Always use a clean, ster-
ilized, sharp knife or pruners. Trim off all but 
the top two leaves of these cuttings and cut the 
remaining leaves in half in order to reduce water 
loss and prevent your cutting from suffering des-
iccation and death. Dip the bottom end of the 
cuttings in rooting hormones and plant them 
in moist sand. Alternatively, put cuttings in a 
jar of water. Many stems, but not all, will grow 
roots. Through the glass you can watch the roots 
develop. For both methods, when the leaves 
begin active growth again, pot them up.

Stem cuttings. Some plants will grow new roots 
and shoots from short, leafless pieces of stem. 

Every time you har-
vest herbs from the 
garden or bring them 
home from the super-
market, put their stems 
in water. When they 
sprout enough roots, 
plant them in small pots 
that can be kept on the 
kitchen windowsill.

26      Introduction

If one of these plants has gotten too tall, cut off 
the leafy top and treat it like a stem tip cutting. 
You’ll be left with a bare stick or cane growing 
out of your pot. The bare cane will grow a new 
leafy top, but, if you’d like your plant to be even 
shorter, you can cut 6- to 8-inch-long sections 
from that cane and root them using the follow-
ing directions. The stump you leave behind will 
grow a new top. Again, do not try this with a 
palm; you’ll kill it.

Use a clean, sterilized, sharp knife or prun-

ers to cut the topless cane off at the new height 
you want your original plant to become. Use a 
marker to mark the bottom of the cane you just 
lopped off (the opposite end from the leaves) 
so you can tell which is the bottom (toward 
the ground) and which is the top (toward the 
leaves). If your section of stem is long enough, 
cut it into 6- to 8-inch-long pieces, again mark-
ing the bottom end of each piece. The plant 
knows up from down. Roots will grow only from 
the bottom end and shoots will grow only from 
the top end, so be sure to plant it top end up 
and bottom end down. Let the pieces air dry for 
three days or so. Plant them in moist sand and 
the stems will grow new roots and shoots. When 
they are well rooted, pot them up in the same 
potting medium as the original plant.

TI. An alternative technique specifically for 

ti is to cut the stem into 2-inch-long pieces and 
plant the pieces on their sides in moist sand or 
in a 50/50 mix of perlite and vermiculite. Each 
piece will grow into a new plant. In the mean-
time, the stump of your original plant will have 
sprouted new shoots and be rejuvenated.

Leaf cuttings. A few plants are easily propa-
gated by rooting their leaves. You can put several 
leaf cuttings in one pot or container filled with 
moist sand or a 50/50 mix of perlite and vermic-
ulite. Keep humidity high and reduce water loss 
by putting a glass jar or plastic bag over each 

pot. Open up or remove this cover for an hour or 
so every day to let in air. Keep the leaf cuttings 
in a warm location in low light. It will take sev-
eral weeks for roots to form. A gentle tug on a 
leaf cutting will reveal whether it has rooted or 
not. In a couple of months they will have made 
new little plantlets. At this point you can pot 
them up in individual pots using the same pot-
ting medium you used for the original plant. 
Four types of plants propagate especially well 
from leaf cuttings.

SNAKE PLANT. Cut a leaf off the parent plant 
using a clean, sterilized, sharp knife or prun-
ers. Use a marker to mark the bottom of the leaf, 
the end closest to the potting soil. Now cut the 
leaf into 4-inch-long pieces, marking the bot-
tom of each piece. The leaf remembers up from 
down, and if you plant a chunk of leaf upside 
down it will just die. Let your pieces of leaf air 
dry for a day or two, then plant them bottom end 
down in damp sand or a 50/50 mix of perlite 
and vermiculite.

AFRICAN VIOLETS, STREPTOCARPUS, GLOXINIA. 
Fill a pot with a 50/50 mix of perlite and vermic-
ulite; water just till water seeps out the drain-
age holes. Cut middle-sized leaves from African 
violets (or their gesneriad cousins, streptocar-
pus and gloxinia) with a 1- to 2-inch stub of the 
petiole (leaf stalk) attached. Use a clean, ster-
ilized, sharp knife or pruners. Insert the cut 
end of the petiole into rooting hormone and 
then into the damp mix of perlite and vermic-
ulite you already prepared. You can put sev-
eral leaf cuttings in one pot. The leaves will 
have rooted in 2 to 4 weeks and will begin to 
make baby plantlets shortly thereafter. When 
the baby plantlet’s leaves are about 1 inch long, 
pot them up.

BEGONIAS. Begonias grown for their foliage 

and/or their flowers can be propagated exactly 
as for African violets, except the stub of the peti-
ole needs to be shorter, 0.5 inch to 1 inch long.

Prepare for Success      27

JADE PLANT AND OTHER SUCCULENTS. Most 

succulents other than cacti root very well from 
their leaves. Remove leaves using a clean, steril-
ized, sharp knife or pruners and dip the cut ends 
in rooting hormone. Let them air dry for 3 days. 
Fill a pot with a 50/50 mix of perlite and ver-
miculite, and water just till water seeps out the 
drainage holes. Lay the dry leaves on the sur-
face of the potting mix. Don’t stick them into the 
medium; just lay them on top. Do not put succu-
lents in a plastic bag or under a glass jar; they’ll 
just rot. Keep the potting mix damp by water-
ing around the leaves, but not on the leaves. Use 
a very small watering can with a pencil-thin 
spout. Keep the leaves dry. In about a month 
you’ll see little roots sprouting from the end of 
the leaf along with a baby plantlet.

Layering. Layering is a technique that causes 
a stem to make roots while the stem is still 
attached to the mother plant. There are two 
ways to layer plants. Simple layering is quick 
and easy, air layering is time-consuming, tricky, 
and difficult.

Simple layering. Plants with long, flexible 
stems (like pothos and arrowhead plant) are 
particularly easy to propagate using simple lay-
ering. Plants with flexible specialized stems 
called stolons (like spider plant and creeping 
saxifrage) are also easily handled with this tech-
nique. All you need to do is select a container for 
your newly propagated plant to grow in and fill 
it with the potting medium appropriate for the 
plant in question. Moisten the potting medium 
with water, let it drain, and set the container 
close enough to your mother plant to allow you 
to pick up a healthy stem or stolon and lay it on 
the surface of the container.

STOLONS. If you’re working with a stolon, 

there will be little plantlets at its nodes. Adjust 
the position of your pot and stolon to place one 

28      Introduction

Pothos has long, flexible stems and is the perfect candidate 
for simple layering to propagate new plants.

of these little plantlets in the center of your con-
tainer. Use a U-shaped staple or piece of wire to 
pin the stolon to the potting medium with the 
little roots pushed down into the soil. The roots 
will be stimulated by the moist potting medium 
and will begin to grow. In a few weeks, when 
the little plant is well rooted and actively grow-
ing new leaves, you can cut the stolon and sever 
the connection between the little plant and the 
mother plant.

VINES. To propagate a vine, such as pothos, 

adjust the position of your pot to place the 
fourth leaf from the tip of the stem in the cen-
ter of your container. The place where the leaf 
attaches to the stem is a node. There will usually 
be one or two fat little roots sticking out of the 
node on the side of the stem opposite the leaf. 
Push these little roots down into the soil. Use a 
U-shaped staple or piece of wire to pin the stem 
to the potting medium with the leaf pointing up. 
Cut the leaf off with a clean, sterilized, sharp 
knife or pruners and discard it.

You now have a length of stem with three 

leaves on it on the side of the node away from 
the mother plant. The stem is still connected to 
the mother plant. The roots at the node pinned 
to the potting medium will be stimulated by the 
moist medium and will begin to grow.

In a few weeks, the dormant bud at the node 
where the leaf you removed was attached to the 
stem will have grown out into a new stem and 
will be well rooted. At this point you cut the 
stem between the little plantlet and the mother 
plant to sever the tie between them. Now you 
have a new little plant with two growing stems, 
the original three-leaf stem tip plus the new 
stem that sprouted from the node.

Air layering. This is the most time-consuming 
and trickiest method of propagation for house-
plants but is, nevertheless, a valuable tool for 
plants such as rubber tree and fiddle-leaf fig 
that are difficult or impossible to root using eas-
ier methods. As in simple layering, what you’re 
attempting to do is to make a stem grow roots 
while it’s still attached to the mother plant. But, 
unlike vines or stolons, these plants have rigid, 
non-flexible stems so it’s very difficult to bend 
such a stem down to attach it to a container of 
potting medium without breaking it. The solu-
tion is to bring the potting medium up to the 
plant. Here are the 12 steps to successfully prop-
agate plants by air layering:

1. Select a point 8 to 12 inches down from the 

 
tip of a healthy young stem and, using a clean, 
sterilized, sharp knife cut one-third of the way 
into the stem at an upward angle just below a 
node (the place where a leaf was attached to 
the stem). Do not cut more than one-third of 
the way through the stem, and support the stem 
above the wound so that it doesn’t break off.
2. Remove a leaf or two if they are in your way.
 
3. When you wound them, rubber tree or 
 
fiddle-leaf fig will bleed milky white sap that 
dries to rubber. Wipe away the sap with a 
damp cloth.
  4. Prop the wound open by inserting a tooth-
pick sideways into the cut.
 

5. Put rooting hormones in the wound and 

wrap the wound with a couple handfuls of 
moistened, stringy, sphagnum moss.
  6. While holding the moss in place, wrap the 
ball of moss in a cylinder of two layers of plastic.
7. Tape the top and bottom shut with electri-
 
cal tape but leave the top of the package loose 
enough to add water to the inside.
  8. Pour enough water inside every few days 
to keep the sphagnum moss moist.
  9. In a month or two you’ll see new roots 
forming inside the plastic, but sometimes it can 
take six to eight months for roots to form, so 
be patient.
  10. When the new roots are about 2 inches 
long, remove the plastic wrapping, cut the stem 
off the parent plant just below the new little root 
ball. Do not remove the sphagnum moss from 
the root ball.
  11. Pot up your new plant.
  12. Keep it in a warm, shady location until it’s 
adjusted to its new life independent from the 
original plant.

Seed. Some houseplants are easy to propagate 
from seed. This method takes a long time (years) 
to grow a decent-sized woody plant like a citrus 
tree, but it is much faster for herbaceous peren-
nials like geraniums. Also, because seeds are the 
result of sexual reproduction, each seedling, like 
your own child, is a unique individual and differ-
ent from its mother plant. If you want to make 
an identical copy of your plants then you need to 
propagate them asexually by division, cuttings, 
or layering.

Specialty seed companies offer seeds of many 

houseplants with clear instructions printed on 
the package or in their catalogs regarding the 
appropriate sowing medium, sowing depth, soil 
temperature, watering, and the light regime 
each kind of seed needs in order to germinate 
successfully.

Prepare for Success      29

30      Introduction

  
Plant Portraits

Prepare for Success      31

Palms and 
Palm-like Plants

Areca palm

Areca palms (Dypsis lutescens) are relatively 
fast-growing, multi-trunked, clumping true 
palms with many slender stems that sweep out 
and away from the center of the plant, creat-
ing an atmosphere of tropical abundance. The 
stems are smooth, yellow-green, and ringed 
by leaf scars, which gives them a bamboo-like 
appearance. The leaves are pinnately compound 
(feather-like), divided into 80 to 100 narrow, 
pointed leaflets, on both sides of the midrib. The 
midrib of the leaf curls in a graceful arch, and 
the leaflets are bright green, contrasting nicely 
with the golden yellow leaf stalks. These are 
popular houseplants, because they’re pretty and 
inexpensive, but unfortunately, arecas really 
aren’t the best palms to grow inside your home. 
They need a lot of light, they do not like fertil-
izer salt build-up in their potting medium, and 
they are sensitive to overwatering, all of which 
combine to make them relatively short-lived 
when grown indoors. Those that succeed get 8 
feet tall and wide.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. This palm really needs a lot of light. 
Full sun from a south window is best. It tolerates 
really bright indirect light but does best with 
direct sun. It is very difficult to grow under arti-
ficial lights.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your areca palm twice a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 

never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, well- 
drained, general-purpose potting soil that incor-
porates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Areca palms are fussy about nutri-
ents. Their leaves turn yellow if they don’t get 
what they need. Choose an organic fertilizer, in 
either a powder or liquid formulation, where the 
first number (nitrogen) is higher than the other 
two. Make sure that the fertilizer also incorpo-
rates kelp meal (seaweed), which provides mag-
nesium, iron, and other nutrients. Apply once in 
early spring and again in June.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. These palms can 
handle the larger size because they are fast 
growers. Up-pot again every two to three years 
until the plant is as big as you want it to get. A 

Areca palm (aka golden cane palm, cane palm, 
Madagascar palm, yellow palm, butterfly palm).

Areca palm      33

large areca palm needs a large, heavy pot to pre-
vent it from toppling over.
PROPAGATION. Areca palm is easy to propagate 
from seed.

COMMON PROBLEMS 
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257), mealy-
bugs (page 262), and leaf spot fungus (page 269).

Banana

Lush, large, and beautiful, the various species of 
banana plants, including hardy banana (Musa 
basjoo) and Ensete ventricosum, instantly cre-
ate a tropical ambiance in any home. These are 
big, bold, rock stars—plants that stand out in any 
crowd. These plants are so charismatic, their 
mere presence can transport you to a South Sea 
island. Bananas are sometimes called banana 
trees, but they’re really giant herbs, not trees 
at all, because they lack woody stems. Their 
trunk-like “stems” are actually pseudostems, 
made up of the tightly wrapped bases of leaves. 
Musa acuminata, M. balbisiana, and the hybrids 
between them produce edible fruits; cultivars of 
the Dwarf Cavendish group usually reach 6 to 8 
feet tall, but the smallest of them, ‘Super Dwarf 
Cavendish’, gets only 2 to 4 feet tall and wide, 
making it the perfect size for many situations 
inside the home.

The foliage is the most attractive part of any 

banana plant. The big, wide, green leaves are 
simple, entire, and very beautiful. ‘Super Dwarf 
Cavendish’ has leaves perhaps 2 feet long and 
8 inches wide, much smaller than standard but 
just as gorgeous. Some cultivars have foliage 
with purple-red blotches or stripes, and other 
cultivars have variegated leaves with sophis-
ticated patches of pure white, pale green, and 
dark green. Banana leaves are easily shredded 
by the wind, so if your plant spends its summers 

34      Palms and Palm-like Plants

Banana plant (aka plantain, fiber banana, Japanese 
banana, ensete).

outdoors protect it from the wind. The flowers 
are tiny, neither large nor colorful. They form on 
stalks that emerge from the center of the crown 
of foliage as soon as a pseudostem is old enough 
to bloom—at about 18 months. The first flowers 
to form are male, later flowers are female and 
develop into the familiar ripe fruits we all know 
and love. Bananas don’t need to be pollinated to 
make fruit. As soon as the fruit ripens, the pseu-
dostem dies, and the perennial rhizome in the 
soil sends up new shoots called pups.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Banana likes a lot of light, espe-
cially if you’d like it to fruit for you. It does best 
in a south window in full sun. It survives and 
is lovely in medium light from an east or west 
window, but with only a half-day of light it is 
unlikely to make fruit.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F. This tropical plant likes it hot, 
especially if you hope to get some fruit from it. 
To grow banana as a non-fruiting ornamental 
foliage plant, just provide moderate tempera-
tures: daytime 70 to 80°F, nighttime 60 to 70°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 0.5 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your banana plant daily with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting medium 
that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer, 
in either a powder or liquid formulation. Apply 
dry fertilizer every month year-round. Apply liq-
uid fertilizer at half-strength every two weeks.
POTTING. Given enough light, heat, water, and 
nutrients your banana grows rapidly and needs 
to be up-potted to a larger container before 
the first year is up. Shift it to a container with a 
diameter 4 inches larger than the current pot. 
Up-pot again every year until the plant is as big 
as you want it to get.
PROPAGATION. Bananas are easy to propagate by 
potting up the pups whenever you are re-potting 

the main plant. Don’t be alarmed when the 
pseudostem dies after it flowers. The rhizome 
always makes new pups for you, and your plant 
does not die.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaf edges (page 257), scale 
insects (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Chinese fan palm

Chinese fan palm (Livistona chinensis) is well 
known for its outdoor hardiness (to zone 8), 
but more and more it is used in interiorscaping, 
especially in shopping malls and other public 
buildings. It does well in pots, and as a house-
plant, it grows very slowly to an eventual 8 feet. 
It has a single, large, straight trunk, which can 
be as much as 18 inches in diameter. Its bright 
evergreen leaves are palmate (fan-shaped) and 
up to 6 feet long. Individual leaflets have long, 
tapered, ribbon-like tips that droop at the ends, 
giving this palm an attractive, shimmery, weep-
ing look. Leaf stalks (petioles) are armed with 
stout, sharp thorns, so find a location where 
passersby cannot bump into it.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Chinese fan palm does best where it 
gets the full light of a south window. It also does 
well in medium light from a west window with 
half a day of full sun, especially when it is young, 
because it likes the heat of the afternoon sun and 
because young plants are more tolerant of par-
tial shade.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the 

Chinese fan palm      35

Chinese fan palm (aka Chinese fountain palm, fountain palm).

potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 
2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Mist your Chinese fan palm twice a 
week with a spray bottle of water on a mist set-
ting, or use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a 
saucer or tray of water, making sure the bottom 
of the pot never sits directly in the water by rais-
ing the pot up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 

a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once in early spring and again in June.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. This plant grows 
very slowly so avoid putting it in too large a pot.
PROPAGATION. Chinese fan palm is easy to propa-
gate from seed.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), spider 
mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

36      Palms and Palm-like Plants

Corn plant

Corn plant (Dracaena fragrans) is ubiquitous 
in the interiorscaping of hospitals, hotels, and 
other public buildings because it’s big, bold, and 
beautiful. It’s extremely easy to grow well, and it 
tolerates a wide range of light, temperature, and 
water conditions. Its forgiving, low-maintenance 
nature and ability to rid indoor air of pollutants 
make it extremely popular in the home as well. 
Indoors, corn plant is usually slow-growing and 
handsome, with two or three slender trunks 
and a swirling rosette of evergreen foliage at 
the top. You’ll rarely see it more than 8 feet tall 
as a houseplant. The leaves are usually 18 to 24 
inches long, strap-shaped, and glossy. The wild 
form of the plant has leaves that are uniformly 
bright green, but numerous cultivars are avail-
able with leaves striped in chartreuse or white. 
Corn plant rarely flowers as a houseplant, but 
if it ever does you may not notice the flowers at 
first because they’re not very showy. The flowers 
are borne in long, branched clusters of under-
whelming, 1-inch-wide blossoms with skinny 
petals. The best thing about the flowers, by far, is 
the fragrance—a strong, lovely perfume.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Corn plant performs at its very 
best with a half-day of full sun from an east 
or west window. It endures the high light of 
full sun from a south window or the low light 
(permanent shade) of a north window; how-
ever, it cannot reach its full potential under 
those conditions.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.

Corn plant (aka cornstalk dracaena, dracaena).

HUMIDITY. Corn plant prospers with slightly 
higher humidity than the average home offers. 
Mist your corn plant several times a week with 
a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 

Corn plant      37

number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once in early spring and again in June.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. This plant grows 
slowly so avoid putting it in too large a pot.
PROPAGATION. Corn plant is easy to propagate 
from stem cuttings and stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Dragon tree

Dragon tree (Dracaena reflexa var. angustifolia) 
is one of the most popular of all houseplants. It’s 
beautiful, inexpensive, and widely available, and 
many people believe it somehow brings good 
fortune. This easy-to-grow, low-maintenance, 
shrubby plant looks like a Dr. Seuss tree with 
crooked stems topped by a troll’s hairdo of long, 
stiff, narrow leaves. The stems are thin but 
strong. The leaves are 1 to 2 inches wide and 12 
to 24 inches long, or even longer, and taper to a 

Dragon tree (aka Madagascar dragon tree, red-edge dra-
caena, marginata, money plant, money tree, pleomele, 
song of India, rainbow plant).

Dragon tree, variegated form.

38      Palms and Palm-like Plants

narrow point at the tip. All the ribbon-like leaves 
occur in a clump at the top of each stem. They 
curve gracefully out and away from the cen-
ter of the plant and eventually droop down. As 
a houseplant, the plant grows slowly to about 6 
feet tall.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. A half-day of sun from an east 
window is optimum because hot, intense  
sunlight burns the leaves, especially of culti-
vars with variegated foliage like ‘Tricolor’ and 
‘Colorama’.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Dragon tree tolerates dry air very well, 
but it grows better with slightly higher humidity 
if the air in your house is significantly drier than 
average. Mist your dragon tree twice a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once in early spring and again in June.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. This plant grows 
slowly so avoid putting it in too large a pot.

PROPAGATION. Dragon tree is easy to propagate 
from stem cuttings and stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), spider 
mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Dumb cane

Dumb cane (Dieffenbachia amoena, D. seguine, 
and hybrids between these and other species) is 
among the most popular houseplants, because, 
like many aroids, it has beautiful foliage and is 
readily available, inexpensive, and easy to grow. 
It’s a shrubby plant that typically gets 6 feet tall 
in the older cultivars. Many modern cultivars, 
selected for their short stature, grow only to 1 
foot. Dumb cane’s soft but sturdy stems tend to 
grow straight up and support numerous leaves 
arranged in a spiral. The stems are reminiscent 
of corn stalks: they are pithy inside, not hard 
and woody like a tree. The large leaves, 12 to 18 
inches long and 6 to 9 inches wide, are patterned 
and flecked with areas of white, light green, and 
darker green. Some cultivars have leaves that are 
mostly white with dark green edges, some have 
white streaks on dark green leaves, and others 
have random flecks of different colors scattered 
across the surface of the leaves.

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be sited in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and if 
leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the soft 
tissues of lips, throat, and tongue (hence the 
common name, as in “deaf, dumb, and blind”), 
causing painful swelling, drooling, and vomit-
ing. If you suspect a person or pet has ingested 
parts of this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits 
serious symptoms such as difficulty breathing, 
call your local emergency hotline, poison control 
center, or vet.

Dumb cane      39

Dumb cane (aka mother-in-law plant).

40      Palms and Palm-like Plants

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Dumb cane does best in an east or 
west window filtered by gauzy curtains. It toler-
ates the low light of a north window.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your dumb cane twice a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. This plant grows 
slowly so avoid putting it in too large a pot.
PROPAGATION. Dumb cane is easy to propagate 
from stem cuttings and stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and leaf spot fungus (page 269).

European fan palm 

European fan palm (Chamaerops humilis) grows 
slowly as a houseplant, to about 4 feet tall. 
The plant is typically clump-forming, develop-
ing suckers from the base of the main trunk, an 
unusual trait among true palms. The cluster of 
stems eventually curves gracefully out and away 
from the center—each stem completely clothed 
in old, persistent leaf bases that form a spiny, 
basketweave network of brown and black fibers. 
As implied by the common name, the leaves are 
fan-shaped (palmate) rather than feather-like 
(pinnate). The stiff leaves are small by palm 
standards (about 24 inches wide on 15-inch-long 
petioles) and vary in color from bright green to 
silvery blue. The leaf petioles (stalks) have sharp 
spines on the edges so handle carefully and with 
gloves. The plant sheds the oldest leaves from 
the bottom of the crown as it grows taller, devel-
oping the typical palm silhouette of a leafless 
trunk with a crown of foliage at the top. This 
tough little palm is one of two (the other is Chi-
nese fan palm) that are hardy enough to grow 
outdoors in zone 8. As a houseplant, it really 
appreciates a summer vacation outdoors on 
the deck or patio. If it has been getting full sun 
indoors you can move it into full sun outdoors, 
otherwise give it filtered sunlight. At the end of 
summer be sure to examine it thoroughly for 
scale and other insect pests and clean it prior to 
bringing it back indoors. 

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. A half-day of full sun from an east 
window is perfect for this plant. It also does well 
with high light filtered through a sheer curtain. 
It can also take high light from a south window 

European fan palm       41

but needs to be acclimated carefully to those 
conditions or the leaves burn.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. European fan palm needs 
cool nights from 50 to 60°F in winter.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 
inch. Water less in winter, waiting till the top of 
the potting medium is dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. This plant is very tolerant of the dry 
air in the average home.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in 
either a powder or liquid formulation, where 
the first number (nitrogen) is higher than the 
other two. Apply dry fertilizer once in early 
spring and again in June. Apply liquid fertil-
izer at half-strength every two weeks in spring 
and summer. Stop feeding your plant in fall 
and winter.
POTTING. After two to three years, when your 
plant has grown enough to need up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Select a deep pot 
rather than a shallow one. Up-pot again every 
two to three years until the plant is as big as you 
want it to get. The deep roots are a bit fragile, so 
handle them carefully when up-potting. And be 
sure to protect yourself from this palm’s spiny 
stems and leaves by wearing gloves.
PROPAGATION. European fan palm is easy to 
propagate from seed. You can also carefully 
remove a sucker from the base of the plant’s 
trunk and plant it in its own pot. Give it filtered 
light until it is well rooted and established.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for scale insects (page 262).

42      Palms and Palm-like Plants

European fan palm (aka Mediterranean fan palm).

Kentia palm

Both species, Howea forsteriana and H. belmor-
eana, are large, single-trunked, slow-growing 
palms cultivated everywhere as large house-
plants. Kentias were especially fashionable in 
the Victorian era and remain among the most 
popular indoor palms in the world. Today they 
are often a prominent feature of large open lob-
bies and atriums of public buildings, shopping 
malls, and private homes. Indoors in containers, 

they’ll be 8 to 10 feet tall and 5 to 6 feet wide—
pretty impressively big by normal houseplant 
standards. The slender trunk of these trees is 
smooth, green, and ringed with whitish leaf 
scars. The large, dark green leaves are pinnately 
compound (feather-like), 3 feet long and 1 foot 
wide. New leaves at the top of the crown are 
upright but the lowermost leaves are held hori-
zontally, making the crown of the tree very wide. 
The 60 or more individual leaflets of each leaf 
are long, pointed, and droop gracefully, point-
ing down toward the ground on both sides 
of the midrib.

Usually, when you purchase a kentia palm, 

it looks like the plant has multiple trunks, 
but it does not. Nurserymen put two to five 
single-trunked plants in each pot because it 
gives the product a lusher, full appearance 
and makes it more attractive to customers. 
Should you decide to separate these plants, do 
it carefully because the roots are brittle and 
easily damaged.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Kentia palms do not like full 
sun—the leaves burn and develop black patches 
where the sun has killed the tissue. Sheer, gauzy 
curtains to diffuse the light on a south, east, or 
west window work well. These palms tolerate 
shade but don’t thrive in it.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F. Kentia palms like cool nights 
but don’t let the nighttime temperature drop 
below 50°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 
inch. Water less often in winter but never let the 
plant go completely dry.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 

Kentia palm      43

Kentia palm (aka sentry palm, thatch palm, paradise palm, 
curly palm, Belmore sentry palm).

with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer 
or tray of water, making sure the bottom of the 
pot never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a 
humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply dry fertilizer once a month. Apply liquid 
fertilizer at half-strength every two weeks in 
spring and summer. Stop feeding your plant in 
fall and winter.
POTTING. Even large kentia palms do very well  
in small pots. After two or more years, when your 
plant has grown enough to need up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot again every 
three years until the plant is as big as you want it 
to get. Its roots are fragile so handle with care.
PROPAGATION. Kentia palms are only propagated 
from seeds, which are hard to get. It is impos-
sible to grow new plants from cuttings and, as 
with many palms, if you cut off the growing tip 
you’ll kill the tree.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), scale 
insects (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Lady palm

The beautiful lady palm (Rhapis excelsa) enjoys 
great popularity in Europe and America. Its 
elegance adds a distinctly Asian note to your 
interiorscape. Like a classic movie star, it toler-
ates neglect and poor light with panache and 

44      Palms and Palm-like Plants

Lady palm (aka broadleaf lady palm).

goes right on being attractive. Widely used as 
an interiorscaping subject, this slow-growing 
palm is a common sight in offices, malls, and 
other public buildings, and its easy, forgiving 
nature makes it a choice houseplant for large 
rooms. The plant is a small, clump-forming, 
multi-stemmed palm to 6 feet tall and wide  
with slender, 1-inch-thick stems completely 
wrapped in brown fibers. With age the fibers 
enclosing the trunks drop off to reveal the 
jointed, bamboo-like trunks. Each palmate 
(fan-shaped), dark green, glossy leaf has numer-
ous leaflets radiating out like the fingers of your 
widespread hand. Some cultivars have varie-
gated leaves. The slender leaf-stalks arise from  
a fibrous, net-like, brown sheath that envelops 
the trunks.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. In spring and summer, while  
the plant is in active growth, it does best in fil-
tered or dappled bright light as from a south, 
east, or west window. But it cannot tolerate 
full sun unless the light is filtered by Venetian 
blinds or gauzy curtains. In winter, when the 
plant is not growing as much, it gets along  
with low light.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F. In winter, make sure the night-
time temperature does not go below 55°F and 
keep your lady palm away from cold drafts and 
heat vents.
MODERATE WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. In winter, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 

use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer 
or tray of water, making sure the bottom of the 
pot never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a 
humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son. Stop feeding your plant in fall and winter.
POTTING. Lady palms like to be slightly root-
bound. Wait two to three years to shift it to a 
larger container. Choose a pot with a diameter 4 
inches larger than the current pot. Up-pot again 
every three or four years until your lady palm is 
as big as you want it to get.
PROPAGATION. Lady palm develops new upright 
stems from its rhizome, making it easy to propa-
gate by division.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), scale 
insects (page 262), and leaf spot fungus (page 
269).

Parlor palm

Parlor palms (Chamaedorea elegans and C. seifri-
zii) are deservedly the most popular and widely 
grown indoor palms in the world. These beau-
tiful, elegant little true palms are well adapted 
to indoor culture as houseplants. They were 
extremely popular during the Victorian era and 
remain so today. Indoors, both grow very slowly 
to about 4 feet tall. Chamaedorea elegans has 
a single trunk, which is green, slender (1 inch 
thick), and cane-like, with rings (leaf scars) that 

Parlor palm      45

Parlor palm (aka neanthe bella palm, bamboo palm, reed palm).

46      Palms and Palm-like Plants

make it appear jointed like bamboo. Chamae-
dorea seifrizii is a clumping species that forms 
multiple trunks from underground runners. The 
leaves of these palms are pinnately compound 
(feather-like), 1 to 2 feet long, with many narrow 
leaflets on both sides of the midrib. Foliage color 
is usually a mid- to dark green. When the plants 
are more than three years old they may flower 
and make seeds. These seeds are usually not fer-
tile so just cut off the flower stalks when they 
start to turn brown. Most of the time, when you 
acquire a parlor palm it is C. elegans, or a hybrid 
between C. elegans and C. seifrizii. Regardless 
of the label, the cultural requirements of any of 
these parlor palms are basically the same. The 
single biggest difference is that some are single- 
trunked and some are multi-trunked.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright but indirect light such as 
from an east or west window with sheer cur-
tains to filter and soften the light is perfect for 
parlor palms. They tolerate low light in that they 
don’t just give up the ghost and die in the dark; 
however, they will not be as strong and healthy 
in shade as they would be with more light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer 
or tray of water, making sure the bottom of the 
pot never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a 
humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 

organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply at half-strength once a month through the 
growing season. Stop feeding your plant in fall 
and winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot again every 
two to three years until the plant is as big as you 
want it to get.
PROPAGATION. Single-trunked parlor palms 
(Chamaedorea elegans) are easy to propagate 
from seed. This is how professional growers 
propagate them because they cannot be divided 
or grown from cuttings. Growers usually put two 
or three seedlings into a pot to make the product 
look more attractive. Parlor palms that are natu-
rally multi-trunked (C. seifrizii) can be divided 
by cutting the rhizome to make two or more 
plants, each with its own stem, leaves, and roots.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), spider 
mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Pony-tail palm

Many people know and love pony-tail palm 
(Beaucarnea recurvata), another plant that looks 
like it came straight from a story by Dr. Seuss. 
Grown worldwide as an ornamental, it also suc-
ceeds quite well indoors in a large pot, grow-
ing to 8 feet in 20 years. The base of the trunk 
is enormously swollen. This bulbous base is a 
water storage feature of this drought-tolerant 
desert dweller. This makes a large plant, say 4 
feet tall or so, extremely heavy. You’ll probably 
want eventually to put this one’s pot on wheels. 

Pony-tail palm      47

The 3-foot-long leaves are very long, thin, flex-
ible, and ribbon-like. They dangle like a bright 
green mop from the top of the tree’s trunk. It 
does look a bit like hair, from a distance, and the 
name pony-tail is rather descriptive.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Full sun from a south window is the 
best light regime, with medium light from a west 
window next best. Pony-tail palm is a semi- 
succulent, drought-tolerant, desert-adapted 
plant so give it as much bright light as possible.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches. 
Pony-tail palm wants dryish soil. Wet, soggy soil 
kills it. Water it infrequently in winter.
HUMIDITY. Pony-tail palm prefers low humidity 
so you don’t need to mist it.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use a good organic, fast-
draining potting soil designed for cactus and 
succulents that includes mycorrhizal fungi and 
other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Feed your plant once a month through the grow-
ing season. Stop feeding it in fall and winter.
POTTING. The large swollen base of pony-tail 
palm gets big fairly rapidly. When your plant’s 
base has grown to within 2 inches of the edge 
of the pot it needs up-potting. Shift it to a con-
tainer with a diameter 4 inches larger than the 
current pot. Up-pot again every two to three 
years until the plant is as big as you want it to 
get. Pots that are wide and shallow work well for 
this plant.
PROPAGATION. Pony-tail palm is primarily 

48      Palms and Palm-like Plants

Pony-tail palm (aka beaucarnea, elephant’s foot, bottle 
palm, nolina).

propagated by seed available from special-
ist suppliers. It is unlikely ever to bloom and 
make seeds for you when grown indoors in a 
container.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), spider 
mites (page 263), and stem rot (page 275).

Pygmy date palm

Pygmy date palm (Phoenix roebelenii) is grown 
everywhere as an ornamental in the interi-
orscaping of public buildings and as a house-
plant in private homes, where it reaches only 
about 3 feet in height. The plant’s stout little 
stems are encased in fibrous brown leaf bases in 
an attractive basketweave pattern. The leaves 
are 2 to 4 feet long and pinnately compound 

(feather-like), with narrow leaflets to 6 inches 
long and 0.5 inch wide on both sides of the mid-
rib. At the bottom quarter of each leaf stalk these 
little leaflets become stout, needle-sharp spines. 
Wear gloves when trimming off the lower leaves 
of this plant. It actually produces 0.5-inch-long 
dates when grown outdoors, nothing as big as 
real dates from its cousin, P. dactylifera, but 
dates nonetheless—tiny and quite yummy in 
date nut bread.

Pygmy date palm (aka miniature date palm).

Pygmy date palm      49

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Pygmy date palm prefers bright light 
and even tolerates full sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 
inch. Water less often in fall and winter.
HUMIDITY. Pygmy date palm seems not to mind 
dry air and does not need to be misted.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Pygmy date palm is fussy about 
micronutrients. Choose a balanced organic fer-
tilizer that supplies magnesium and manganese, 
in addition to nitrogen, phosphorus, and potas-
sium (N-P-K). Apply fertilizer once a month 
through the growing season. Stop feeding your 
plant in fall and winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot again every 
two years until the plant is as big as you want it 
to get. Pygmy date palm does well when slightly 
rootbound. When you need to re-pot this plant 
remember the sharp spines on the leaves and be 
sure to wear gloves.
PROPAGATION. Pygmy date palm is easy to propa-
gate from seed.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellow patches on leaves (page 258), 
scale insects (page 262), and leaf spot fungus 
(page 269).

50      Palms and Palm-like Plants

Ti

Graceful and elegant, ti (Cordyline fruticosa) is 
beloved for its beautiful evergreen foliage in a 
wide variety of colors. A shrub, the plant has 
thin, strong, woody stems that, when grown 
as a houseplant, reach 4 to 5 feet tall. The 
strap-shaped 2-foot-long and 4-inch-wide leaves 
have pointed tips and grow in a spiral around 
the upper third of the stems. Ti sheds its old-
est leaves as it grows, becoming a slender stalk 
with a tuft of foliage at the top. The foliage can 
be uniformly green, or variegated with red, pink, 
purple, and/or white patches. Flowers are small 
and rarely seen when the plant is grown as a 
houseplant. Fruits are red berries. The starchy 
rhizomes of this asparagus relative are sweet 
when cooked and, when fermented, are the 
main ingredient of okolehao, a Hawaiian liquor.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Give ti full sun for a half-day for 
best success, ideally in an east or west window, 
or a south window with sheer curtains to filter 
the light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your ti daily with a spray bot-
tle of water on a mist setting, or use a handheld 
mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 
making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles. Consider putting a humidifier in 
the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 

Ti (aka Hawaiian ti, cabbage palm, good luck tree, palm lily).

organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Look for one that also contains kelp meal or sea-
weed extracts, which add micronutrients. Apply 
dry fertilizer once a month. Apply liquid fertil-
izer at half-strength every two weeks. Stop fer-
tilizing ti in winter.

POTTING. When ti needs up-potting, shift it to a 
container with a diameter 4 inches larger than 
the current pot. Ti is happy in a smallish pot so 
you do not need to up-pot very often.
PROPAGATION. Ti is easy to propagate from stem 
tip cuttings and stem cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), spider 
mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Ti      51

Trees and Shrubs

52      Trees and Shrubs

Citrus

All citrus plants are species in or hybrids derived 
from the genera Citrus and Fortunella. Most are 
ancient accidental hybrids, which were discov-
ered growing wild by humans a very long time 
ago—so long ago that no one remembers exactly 
where they came from. Botanists are certain, 
however, that lemon is a natural hybrid between 
pummelo (C. maxima) and citron (C. medica). A 
more recently discovered natural hybrid is the 
Meyer lemon, a cross between lemon and the 
sweet orange, which itself is an ancient natu-
ral hybrid between pummelo and mandarin (C. 
reticulata). All citrus are renowned for the pow-
erful and sensuous fragrance of their flowers 
as well as for their delicious, vitamin-rich fruit, 
and all have beautiful evergreen foliage. Trees 
bloom sporadically throughout the year but tend 
to flower more profusely in springtime. Flow-
ers are star-shaped, five-petaled, and white, 
about 1.5 inches across, and often have a pur-
plish blush in the bud. They are borne in small 
clusters along the branches. The fruits are rich 
in vitamin C, and zest from the rind is laden 
with savory aromatic oils that find wide appli-
cation in cuisine, alcoholic beverages, and even 
cleaning solutions.

The most successful citrus to grow as 

houseplants—lemon, Meyer lemon, lime, and 
kumquat—are small in stature. But sweet orange, 
one of the larger trees, may also be grown 
indoors. All reliably bloom and set fruit when 
given appropriate environmental conditions in 
your home. In the average home it is difficult to 
provide the abundant sunlight and warmth an 
orange tree needs to produce sweet fruit. Limes 
and lemons have sour fruits, need less sunlight 
and warmth, and fruit regularly in your home 
given a south window. The plants are self-fertile, 
and many of the flowers set fruit. In fact they 
regularly produce too many of them. If that 

Citrus      53

(top) Lime (aka Tahitian lime).

(bottom) Meyer lemon.

happens, nip the tiny fruitlets off your plant 
and allow only a few to mature. Otherwise the 
tree exhausts itself and becomes weakened as it 
attempts to mature a heavy crop.

Many citrus species are spiny, some strongly 

so. If yours is one of the more thorny types be 
sure to place it in a location in your home where 
it cannot snag passersby.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. All citrus want as much sunlight as 
you can give them. A south window is best for 
maximum sunlight all year long. If you do not 
have a south window then the medium light 
of an east or west window suffices, but with 
only a half-day of light, your tree will produce 
fewer fruits.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F. A summer vacation outdoors is 
a convenient way to provide cooler nights and 
abundant daylight for your trees, but be cer-
tain to bring them back indoors before the first 
frost of autumn. You can put them out again in 
the spring after all danger of frost has passed. 
Flower buds and fruits are damaged below 32°F 
but the plants are not killed. Plants are killed 
outright at or below 25°F. 
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch. Citrus are very sensitive to water-
logged soils and can develop root rot and die 
if the medium is too wet for too long. Be cer-
tain your container is propped up on pot feet or 
pebbles so that the pot never sits in water in the 
pot’s saucer.
HUMIDITY. Depending on the dryness of your 
home, mist your plants occasionally (perhaps 
once a week) with a spray bottle of water.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use a good-quality, organic 

54      Trees and Shrubs

potting soil that is light, airy, and water-retentive. 
Excellent choices are those that include mycor-
rhizal fungi and other beneficial microbes in 
the mix.
FERTILIZER. Any organic fertilizer especially 
designed for use with citrus works well for your 
lemons and limes. Those that are blended with 
humic acid are the best choices. Citrus need a lot 
of nitrogen so make sure the nutrients are 7-3-3 
or something close to that. Follow the recom-
mendations on the package and feed your citrus 
in spring and in fall.
POTTING. When your citrus needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellow patches on leaves (page 258), 
aphids (page 260), and root rot (page 272).

Coontie

Coontie (Zamia pumila) is a small, tough, very 
slow growing woody cycad. Because these plants 
thrive in sun or shade, have high drought toler-
ance, moderate salt tolerance, and are cold hardy 
to zone 9, coonties are widely used in outdoor 
landscaping. All these virtues combine to make 
them excellent houseplants as well, less than 2 
feet tall and wide indoors in containers. Coon-
ties are frequent bonsai subjects because they 
can remain the same size for years.

Cycads are ancient gymnosperms—conifers, 

like ginkgos and pine trees. Like all cycads, coon-
tie is dioecious, meaning there are male plants 
and there are female plants. In their cones, male 
plants produce only pollen, and female plants 
produce only seeds, which are bright orange. 
Coontie has thick, short, fleshy, tuberous stems 
that multiply underground to form large clumps. 
Leaves are dark green, stiff, glossy, fine-textured, 

Coontie (aka Florida arrowroot, comfort root, Seminole bread).

evergreen, and fern-like. Each leaf is pinnately 
compound (feather-like) and up to 2 feet long. 
Individual plants are variable in leaflet shape; 
some plants have wide and flat leaflets and some 
have narrow ones. Several leaves are borne clus-
tered at the tops of the short stems. New foliage 
is covered with short, rusty-brown hairs.

 Leaves, seeds and stems of coontie are 

poisonous, causing severe liver failure in peo-
ple and pets. The seeds are the most toxic part 
of coontie, but all parts are poisonous, and the 
plant should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. 
If you suspect a person or pet has ingested parts 
of this plant, call your local emergency hotline, 
poison control center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Coontie does best with full sun, 

filtered by sheer curtains, from a south, east, or 
west window. It tolerates low or high light, but it 
grows better with medium filtered light.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Coontie does not generally suffer from 
dry air and does not need to be misted.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other 
two. Apply dry fertilizer once in early spring 
and again in June. Apply liquid fertilizer at 
half-strength every two weeks in spring and 
summer. Stop feeding in fall and winter.
POTTING. When coontie needs up-potting, shift 

Coontie      55

it to a container with a diameter 2 inches larger 
than the current pot. Up-pot again every two to 
three years until it is as big as you want it to get. 
Plants grow very slowly and do not mind being 
somewhat rootbound.
PROPAGATION. Coontie is easy to propagate from 
seed and from pups.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for scale insects (page 262) and root rot 
(page 272).

Croton

A well-grown croton (Codiaeum variegatum) is 
a brilliant focal point in any room. It’s an ever-
green, or rather ever-colorful, shrub, and many 
of the hundreds of croton cultivars are choice 
houseplants. They are well worth the effort to 
keep them bright and happy. As a houseplant 
croton can reach 5 to 6 feet tall under ideal con-
ditions, but usually it is much smaller, to about 
3 feet. Stems are slender, woody, and much 
branched, making a compact, rounded mound of 

Croton (aka garden croton, variegated croton).

56      Trees and Shrubs

a shrub. The gorgeous foliage is the main reason 
for growing croton. The leaves are large, usu-
ally about 6 inches long and 3 to 4 inches wide, 
but really, all bets are off with croton leaves. It 
seems as though they can be any size, shape, or 
color. They can be 8 inches long and 1 inch wide, 
or twisted and curled, lobed like an oak leaf, or 
not lobed at all. As to color, they can be green, 
white, purple, orange, yellow, red, pink, or any 
imaginable blend of those colors. Colors occur in 
round spots, irregular blotches, or follow along 
the veins of the leaf. The colors change with the 
age of the leaf and with the amount of sunlight 
it gets. Bright filtered light gives you the most 
vibrant colors.

Croton, like some other houseplants, resents 
being moved. Sometimes, when you bring your 
gorgeous plant home from the garden center, 
it has a hissy fit and throws all its leaves on the 
ground. If that happens, once you get over your 
shock and disappointment, just give it TLC and 
it soon rewards you with a fresh batch of bril-
liant foliage. The new leaves are likely to be 
completely different from what you purchased, 
but as they age they color up properly, given 
enough light.

 This plant is toxic to people and pets  

and should be kept in an out-of-the-way  
place. The bark, roots, leaves, and sap contain  
5-deoxyingenol, a chemical that causes burning 
of the mouth and eczema in sensitive individu-
als; however, croton is not listed by the ASPCA as 
toxic to cats or dogs. If you suspect a person or 
pet has ingested parts of this plant, call your local 
emergency hotline, poison control center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Croton wants bright, filtered, 
dappled light, as from sheer curtains on a south, 

east, or west window. It does not like full sun, 
and the leaves burn and turn black, especially in 
yellow portions of the foliage, if it is in full direct 
sun for too long. The vibrant colors of the foliage 
fade if it isn’t getting enough light so do not keep 
it in low light.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F. Croton 
defoliates if the nighttime temperature drops 
below 55°F so try to keep the temperature above 
60°F and avoid cold drafts.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. You can also set the pot 
on top of a tray filled with gravel and water. Just 
be sure the pot is raised up above the surface 
level of the water.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other 
two. Apply dry fertilizer once in early spring 
and again in June. Apply liquid fertilizer at 
half-strength every two weeks in spring and 
summer. Stop feeding in fall and winter.
POTTING. When croton needs up-potting, shift 
it to a container with a diameter 4 inches larger 
than the current pot. Up-pot again every two to 
three years until the plant is as big as you want 
it to get.
PROPAGATION. Croton is easy to propagate from 
stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves changing color (page 249), spi-
der mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Croton      57

False aralia

False aralia (Schefflera elegantissima) is tall, 
upright, and bushy, with very attractive seven- 
to 11-fingered evergreen palmately compound 
leaves. The beautiful leaflets are nearly black, 
knobby, and spidery thin—so thin that false ara-
lia is considered a see-through plant, whose lacy 
foliage is never so dense as to block the light. 
Indoors in a pot, false aralia is a tree or large 
shrub with woody stems to 5 feet tall, rarely 7 
to 10 feet tall. It grows slowly and eventually 
drops the oldest leaves near its base, revealing 
the trunk. The coppery-red new foliage matures 
to a dark black-green. False aralia produces two 
kinds of leaves, juvenile and adult. Juvenile 
leaves have small, narrow leaflets to 3 inches 
long and 0.5 inch wide and are found on young 
plants or on branches near the base of mature 
plants. Adult leaves are large, with leaflets 9 to 
12 inches long and 3 inches wide. Leaflets are 
coarsely toothed and knobby, spreading out from 
the petiole like the fingers of your widespread 
hand. If your mature false aralia suddenly starts 
producing small juvenile leaves at the top of the 
plant, then it is under stress and needs more 
nutrients and water.

This is another species that pitches a fit and 

drops its leaves to the floor when you bring 
it home from the store. It wants a permanent 
home and soon grows new leaves in its new 
location. Giving it a summer vacation out-
doors is probably not a good idea; it loses too 
many leaves.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Filtered light from an east or west 
window with sheer curtains works best for false 
aralia. Avoid full, direct, hot sun because the 

58      Trees and Shrubs

False aralia (aka spider aralia, threadleaf aralia,  
finger aralia).

plant’s root system is restricted by the pot and 
cannot deliver water to the foliage fast enough 
to keep the leaf tips and edges from dying and 
turning brown.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. False aralia may shed its 
leaves if the temperature drops below 60°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top 
of the potting medium becomes dry to a 
depth of 1 inch. Never allow false aralia to go 
completely dry.
HUMIDITY. High humidity is important to false 
aralia. Mist daily with a spray bottle of water. 
Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, mak-
ing sure the bottom of the pot never sits directly 
in the water by raising the pot up on pot feet 
or pebbles. Consider putting a humidifier in 
the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 

number (nitrogen) is higher than the other 
two. Apply dry fertilizer once in early spring 
and again in June. Apply liquid fertilizer at 
half-strength every two weeks in spring and 
summer. Stop feeding in fall and winter.
POTTING. When false aralia needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Keep it in a heavy 
clay or ceramic pot to prevent it from toppling 
over as it gets taller.
PROPAGATION. False aralia is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249) and spider mites 
(page 263).

Fiddle-leaf fig

A big, bold, dramatic houseplant that makes a 
beautiful addition to any room, fiddle-leaf fig 
(Ficus lyrata) is easy to grow and low mainte-
nance. You frequently see it as a large specimen 
plant or focal point in offices, malls, or other 
large public buildings that can provide suffi-
cient indirect light. Full sun is far too intense for 
fiddle-leaf fig. When grown as a houseplant, this 
broadleaf evergreen tree does not produce fruit 
and rarely exceeds 8 to 10 feet. You can trim it 
to encourage side branches and develop a bushy, 
full, rounded look. Or you can trim off side 
branches and lower leaves to expose the trunk 
and encourage a tall, erect, tree-like shape. The 
big, handsome leaves are 15 inches long and 10 
inches wide. Dark, glossy green and shaped like 
a lyre or violin (“fiddle”), the leaves have a leath-
ery texture, prominent veins, and a wavy mar-
gin. The dwarf ‘Little Fiddle’ gets only 6 feet tall 
with leaves half the size of standard varieties. 
The variegated ‘Ivonne’, with leaves splashed in 
white and pale green, is spectacular.

Fiddle-leaf fig (aka banjo fig).

Fiddle-leaf fig      59

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Give fiddle-leaf fig bright, fil-
tered light and it grows fairly rapidly. It toler-
ates a couple hours of direct sun from an east 
window but direct sun all day long from a south 
window is too much for it. Filter the light (and 
heat) from a south or west window with sheer 
curtains or Venetian blinds. In too much shade it 
grows very slowly.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your fiddle-leaf fig twice a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer 
or tray of water, making sure the bottom of the 
pot never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a 
humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other 
two. Apply dry fertilizer once in early spring 
and again in June. Apply liquid fertilizer at 
half-strength every two weeks in spring and 
summer. Stop feeding in fall and winter.
POTTING. When fiddle-leaf fig needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot again every 
year until it is as big as you want it to get. Keep 
it in a heavy ceramic pot to prevent it from top-
pling over.
PROPAGATION. Fiddle-leaf fig is difficult to 

60      Trees and Shrubs

propagate but it can be accomplished by 
air layering.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), spider mites 
(page 263), and leaf spot fungus (page 269).

Flowering maple

Flowering maple (Abutilon ×hybridum) is a 
fast-growing, broadleaf evergreen shrub with 
long twiggy stems that bend and arch under the 
weight of the flowers. It acquired its common 
name because the leaves have the same shape 
as maple leaves and because it has pretty flow-
ers. The plants typically grown as houseplants 
are a popular group of hybrids of garden ori-
gin, possibly between A. darwinii and A. pictum. 
They grow 2 to 4 feet tall and wide and develop 
a sprawling habit if you let them. Cut back in 
the spring, shortening the branches by a third, 
to keep plants compact. You can also pinch the 
growing tips off the stems during the growing 
season to force them to grow side branches. The 
thin, light green leaves clothe the bush closely, 
making it fairly dense. Leaves of some culti-
vars are flecked with gold and yellow patches, as 
shown in the photo. The gold flecking is caused 
by a virus and is considered a desirable feature. 
The viral infection seems not to harm the plant 
significantly. Variegated cultivars with patches 
of white and green are not virus-infected. The 
bell- or trumpet-shaped flowers dangle on thin 
stalks and come in red, orange, yellow, white, 
pink, and multicolor blends. They are as much 
as 3 inches across and have five overlapping pet-
als. In many cultivars the flowers open wide, 
becoming almost flat as they mature. Flowers 
are produced continuously all year long but are 
more abundant in spring and summer. They are 
edible and sweet, sometimes used in salads.

Flowering maple (aka parlor maple, Chinese bell flower, Chinese lantern, Indian mallow, velvetleaf).

Flowering maple      61

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Flowering maple can tolerate a 
few hours of direct sun but is at its best in cool 
morning sun from an east window. In order to 
flower this plant needs intense bright light. It 
does not do well in the heat, however, and the 
hot afternoon sun of a west window may cause 
it to wilt. Bright light filtered through sheer 
curtains of a south or west window also allows 
flowering maple to flower well but be sure it is 
well hydrated.
LOW TEMPERATURE. 65 to 75°F day and night.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist flowering maple several times a 
week with a spray bottle of water on a mist set-
ting, or use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a 
saucer or tray of water, making sure the bottom 
of the pot never sits directly in the water by rais-
ing the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider 
putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes. Don’t add lime because 
flowering maple prefers acidic soils.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either a 
powder or liquid formulation, where the second 
number (phosphorus) is higher than the other 
two to promote flowering. Apply once a month. 
Stop feeding your plant in winter.
POTTING. When flowering maple needs up- 
potting, shift it to a container with a diameter  
4 inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Flowering maple is easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), whiteflies (page 
265), and rust fungus (page 273).

62      Trees and Shrubs

Gardenia

The touchy gardenia (Gardenia jasminoides) 
is almost worth growing for the pretty leaves 
alone. But it’s the intensely fragrant pure white 
flowers that lure you to it. Their heady, tropical, 
unforgettable scent fills a room, making garde-
nia absolutely irresistible despite its demanding 
nature. Indoors, in a pot, this woody, broadleaf 
evergreen shrub grows 2 to 4 feet high and wide. 
If your gardenia grows too tall, prune it back 
to a more manageable size. Pruning stimulates 
the growth of new side branches and promotes 
flowering. The very attractive leaves are dark 
green, glossy, and prominently veined, which 

Gardenia (aka Cape jasmine, Cape jessamine).

gives them an undulating rippled effect. Flow-
ers are 2 to 3 inches wide and may be single (five 
petals) or double (many petals). Plants bloom 
most profusely in spring, and often again in fall. 
The color contrast between the lovely green of 
the foliage and the pure white of the flowers is 
quite beautiful.

Gardenia has a reputation as a finicky house-
plant. If your plant’s flower buds slowly turn yel-
low and fall off and then the leaves turn yellow 
and drop, your plant is telling you that it’s either 
too cold, or the soil isn’t acid enough, or the air 
is too dry, or it’s not getting enough light. And 
then it’s up to you to figure out exactly what the 
problem is and to fix it.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright indirect light filtered by 
sheer curtains on a south, east, or west window. 
Avoid direct sun because it can cause the plant 
to wilt or burn the leaves.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. Gardenia appreciates 
a nighttime temperature drop of about ten 
degrees, but temperatures lower than 60°F may 
cause it to drop its leaves and flower buds. Avoid 
cold drafts and blasts of hot air from a furnace.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Gardenia likes constantly high humid-
ity. Mist it daily with a spray bottle of water on 
a mist setting, or use a handheld mister. Put the 
pot in a saucer or tray of water, making sure the 
bottom of the pot never sits directly in the water 
by raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Con-
sider putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 

organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes. Do not add lime to the pot-
ting mix; gardenia wants acid soil.
FERTILIZER. Feed gardenia with an acidic organic 
fertilizer designed for acid-loving plants. A tea-
spoon of horticultural sulfur scratched into the 
surface of the potting soil makes the soil acidic 
enough for good growth. Gardenias also respond 
well to frequent applications of coffee grounds, 
though exactly why they respond so dramati-
cally is a bit of a mystery, as research has shown 
that coffee grounds do not acidify the soil. Other 
than pH, gardenia is not fussy. Any balanced 
organic fertilizer, in either a powder or liquid 
formulation, should work well. Apply dry fer-
tilizer once in early spring and again in June. 
Apply liquid fertilizer at half-strength every two 
weeks in spring and summer. Stop feeding in fall 
and winter.
POTTING. When your gardenia needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Gardenia is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings taken in early spring.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for flower bud drop (page 248), aphids 
(page 260), and root rot (page 272).

Hibiscus

Hibiscus (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis) is the state 
flower of Hawaii, and almost every advertise-
ment for a vacation in that paradise features 
a beautiful Hawaiian woman with a brilliant 
Technicolor hibiscus flower tucked behind her 
ear. Those gorgeous, evocatively tropical flow-
ers, the biggest of any plant grown as a house-
plant, are the best reason for bringing this plant 
into your home. As a houseplant, this woody, 
evergreen, multi-trunked shrub gets 5 to 6 feet 

Hibiscus      63

(top) Hibiscus (aka Hawaiian 
rose, rose mallow, Chinese 
hibiscus, China rose, shoe 
flower).

(left) Hibiscus, blended form.

64      Trees and Shrubs

tall and wide. Glossy, dark green leaves, 6 inches 
long and 4 inches wide, contrast beautifully with 
the vibrant flowers. In many cultivars the leaves 
are toothed along the edges. Flowers are huge, 4 
to 8 inches in diameter with overlapping petals 
that unfurl as the buds open to become wide and 
flat. They come in screaming scarlet, fluorescent 
orange, hot pink, intense yellow, pure white, and 
multicolor blends. Each flower lasts only a day, 
or two at most, but they are produced continu-
ously year-round. Hibiscus flowers are edible 
and widely used, dried, as a tea, for their delight-
fully acidic flavor.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Hibiscus needs abundant bright 
light in order to flower. It does well with a full 
day of bright indirect light filtered through sheer 
curtains. In too little light hibiscus grows lots of 
leaves, but no flowers.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F. Temperatures below 50°F can 
kill hibiscus.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist hibiscus twice a week with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Hibiscus is a little fussy about 
nutrients. Many cultivars suffer if they get too 
much phosphorus. Choose an organic fertilizer 

specially formulated for hibiscus with the ratio 
of N-P-K any multiple of 2-1-3. Use either a pow-
der or a liquid formulation and apply once in 
early spring and again in June.
POTTING. When hibiscus needs up-potting, shift 
it to a container with a diameter 4 inches larger 
than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Hibiscus is easy to propagate from 
stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for flower bud drop (page 248), whiteflies 
(page 265), and gray mold (page 268).

Japanese aralia

Japanese aralia (Fatsia japonica) was introduced 
into cultivation in the western world in the 
early 1800s and has been a popular houseplant 
ever since. It adds tropical flair to any room. 
This big, bold, burly foliage plant is especially 

Japanese aralia (aka fatsia, glossy leaved paper plant, false 
castor oil plant, fig leaf palm).

Japanese aralia      65

desirable because it does well in those difficult 
shady corners that are anathema to so many 
other houseplants. Japanese aralia has thick 
stems and grows pretty fast to 6 feet tall and 
3 to 4 feet wide, so give it plenty of space and 
it rewards you quickly and handsomely with 
its superb architectural presence. The huge, 
exotic, tropical-looking leaves are 12 inches 
across, deep green, and glossy. Each leathery, 
fan-shaped (palmate) leaf is deeply divided into 
seven to nine lobes, like a giant maple leaf. The 
leaf stalks (petioles) are also 12 inches long and 
carry the leaves well. ‘Variegata’, a very hand-
some form of the species, has creamy white 
patches on the leaves.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Give Japanese aralia bright indi-
rect light to partial shade, and limited direct sun. 
It succeeds well in the bright indirect light of 
a north window. It tolerates a few hours of sun 
from an east window in the cool of the morning. 
But the intense light and heat of a south or west 
window is not for this plant. Too much light 
burns the leaves.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F. Japanese aralia appreciates a 
rest with a cold period, a daytime temperature 
drop to about 50°F, in the winter time.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your Japanese aralia twice a 
week with a spray bottle of water on a mist set-
ting, or use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a 
saucer or tray of water, making sure the bottom 
of the pot never sits directly in the water by rais-
ing the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider 
putting a humidifier in the room.

66      Trees and Shrubs

POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other 
two. Apply dry fertilizer once in early spring 
and again in June. Apply liquid fertilizer at 
half-strength every two weeks in spring and 
summer. Stop feeding in fall and winter.
POTTING. When Japanese aralia needs up- 
potting, shift it to a container with a diameter 
4 inches larger than the current pot. Up-pot 
again every year until it is as big as you want it 
to get. After it has reached the size you want, 
prune it back by a third every year in the spring 
and use the trimmings to make cuttings. Prun-
ing it causes it to grow side branches and 
become bushy.
PROPAGATION. Japanese aralia is easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Norfolk Island pine

Every November markets are flooded with mil-
lions of tiny living Christmas trees in 4-inch 
pots. The trees are sprinkled with glitter, some-
times sprayed with green paint, and decorated 
with ribbons and little glass bulbs. These little 
seedlings of Norfolk Island pine (Araucaria het-
erophylla) may or may not survive the mass mer-
chandising process. A better, and longer-lived, 
option is to buy a larger specimen from your 
local independent garden center. They’re often 
available in various sizes, from compact tabletop 
forms to tall, tree-sized floor plants. In Hawaii, 

Norfolk Island pine (aka suicide tree, star pine, triangle 
tree, living Christmas tree).

Norfolk Island pine, adult leaves.

Norfolk Island pines are grown outdoors and 
used as cut Christmas trees for the holidays. 
They’re big enough to reach the ceiling, easy to 
decorate the wide spaces between the branches, 
and they last a long time. If you’re lucky enough 
to share your home with one of these large com-
panion trees year-round, it’s a simple matter to 
temporarily glitz it up for the holidays and use 
it as your permanent living Christmas tree year 
after year.

As a houseplant, this single-trunked coni-

fer slowly forms a beautifully symmetrical pyr-
amid 6 to 7 feet tall. The branches are whorled 
(formed in a ring around the trunk), with wide 
spaces on the trunk between each ring. Leaves 
change shape as they mature, thus the epithet 
heterophylla (“different leaves”). Juvenile leaves 
on young branches are 0.5-inch-long, soft, bright 
green needles. Adult leaves are spine-tipped, 
stiff, flat scales, 0.25 inch long and wide, that 

Norfolk Island pine      67

overlap and give the branches a braided, 
rope-like appearance. Norfolk Island pine has 
a weak root system and topples over in hurri-
canes. Obviously, you won’t have to worry about 
that in your living room, but be aware when 
re-potting that its root system is delicate.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Abundant light from a large south 
window is ideal. Medium light from an east or 
west window that provides at least two, prefer-
ably more, hours of direct sun is acceptable. A 
cool sunroom is perfect. Give the tree a quar-
ter turn every week to preserve its conical shape 
and pagoda-like branching pattern and prevent 
it from leaning into the light.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist Norfolk Island pine two or three 
times a week with a spray bottle of water on a 
mist setting, or use a handheld mister. Put the 
pot in a saucer or tray of water, making sure the 
bottom of the pot never sits directly in the water 
by raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Con-
sider putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Norfolk Island pine is a little fussy 
about nutrients. Use any organic fertilizer, in 
either a powder or liquid formulation, where the 
first number (nitrogen) is higher than the other 
two and that also supplies nutrients such as iron, 
manganese, and magnesium. Apply dry fertilizer  
once in early spring and again in June. Apply liquid 
fertilizer at half-strength every two weeks in spring 

68      Trees and Shrubs

and summer. Stop feeding in fall and winter.
POTTING. When Norfolk Island pine needs 
up-potting, shift it to a container with a diam-
eter 2 inches larger than the current pot. Han-
dle it gently because the roots are fragile. Up-pot 
again every two years until it is as big as you 
want it to get. Keep this tree in a heavy ceramic 
pot to prevent it from toppling over.
PROPAGATION. Norfolk Island pine is easy to 
propagate from seed.

COMMON PROBLEMS 
Watch for needle drop (page 252), scale insects 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Rubber tree

Rubber tree is indeed a tree, and it does in fact 
produce rubber; however, it is actually a fig, 
Ficus elastica, and in common with the rest of 
the species in the banyan group of figs, it readily 
grows aerial roots from its branches. As a house-
plant, rubber tree is grown for its beautiful, 
smooth, glossy, oval leaves 4 to 14 inches long 
and 2 to 6 inches wide. The evergreen leaves are 
thick and leathery, and several cultivars have 
reddish, variegated, or tricolor foliage. Rub-
ber tree grows slowly if it isn’t getting the right 
combination of light, warmth, and water, faster 
with more favorable conditions. Very old plants 
growing in pots may get as tall as 12 feet but take 
years to do so. The fruit is a small fig, about 0.3 
inch, but this tree is extremely unlikely to ever 
flower indoors.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright or moderate, indirect 
light but no direct sun serves rubber tree well. 

East or west windows filtered by sheer curtains 
are perfect.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your rubber tree twice a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 

never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month. Stop feeding in winter.
POTTING. When rubber tree needs up-potting, 

(left) Rubber tree, varie-
gated form. 

(above) Rubber tree (aka 
rubber fig, rubber bush, 
rubber plant, Indian rubber 
bush).

Rubber tree      69

shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Rubber tree is difficult to propa-
gate but it can be done by air layering.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), scale insects 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Sago palm

This extremely slow growing, very tough plant 
will live in your home for many years, provid-
ing a distinctly Asian accent. Sago palm (Cycas 
revoluta) looks like a palm, but isn’t, and looks 

like a fern, but isn’t. It’s a cycad, an ancient fam-
ily of plants that reached their heyday during 
the age of dinosaurs. Their seeds are borne in 
cones, marking them as gymnosperms, like gink-
gos and pine trees. Young plants are fern-like, 2 
to 3 feet tall. The short trunk is 1 inch thick in 
young plants and as much as 8 inches thick in 
older ones, at which point it looks a little bit like 
a shaggy brown pineapple, clothed in fibrous 
brown leaf bases in an attractive basketweave 
pattern. Leaves are pinnately compound 
(feather-like), 2 to 3 feet long, and are borne in 
a rosette at the top of the trunk. They look soft, 
but they’re surprisingly stiff to the touch. Glossy 
and dark green, the hard foliage almost feels 
plastic. The individual leaflets are very narrow 

Sago palm (aka king sago, sago cycad, Japanese sago palm).

70      Trees and Shrubs

and have strongly recurved edges. Young plants 
make only one or two new fronds each spring. 
It can take five or six years to grow a full crown 
of foliage. Older specimens add a whole rosette 
of new leaves to the crown each spring. Like all 
cycads, sago palm is dioecious, meaning plants 
are either male or female. Female plants pro-
duce seeds in structures called megasporophylls, 
and male plants produce pollen-bearing cones 
(strobili).

 This plant (especially its seeds) is poison-
ous to people and pets, with a fatality rate of 50 
to 75%. Fortunately, it is extremely unlikely that 
your sago palm could ever make seeds, and the 
stiff leaves are very difficult to chew. Neverthe-
less, if you suspect a victim has been poisoned, 
call your local emergency hotline, poison control 
center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Sheer curtains filtering the light 
from a south, east, or west window provide just 
the right environment.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Mist twice a week with a spray bot-
tle of water on a mist setting, or use a handheld 
mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 
making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 

number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month. Stop feeding in winter.
POTTING. When sago palm needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot again every 
three years or so until it is as big as you want it 
to get.
PROPAGATION. Sago palm is easy to propagate 
from seed. Seeds are vermilion but are rarely 
produced indoors.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for scale insects (page 262) and root rot 
(page 272).

Tree ivy

It’s pretty rare for plants from different genera 
to cross successfully, but tree ivy is just such an 
intergeneric hybrid, first created in 1912, at the 
Lizé Frères tree nursery in Nantes, France. One 
parent is Japanese aralia and the other is ivy. A 
shrub (Fatsia) crossed to a vine (Hedera) equals 

Tree ivy (aka aralia ivy, fatshedera, fat-headed Lizzy, botanical wonder).

Tree ivy      71

×Fatshedera lizei, a hybrid that can’t quite make 
up its mind whether it’s a shrub or a vine. Tree 
ivy’s stems tend to grow in a straight line, easily 
8 feet long, and flop about unless tied to a sup-
port of some kind. The stems are somewhat flex-
ible when young but get brittle and break easily 
when mature. If you intend to train it to a sup-
port, do it while the stems are young and pliable. 
You can also prune away the tips of the stems 
to make them grow side branches, which gives 
you a shorter, bushier houseplant. The leaves 
of tree ivy are evergreen, like both its parents, 
and intermediate in size between them. They 
are palmate (fan-shaped) and look like maple 
leaves or giant ivy leaves, to 10 inches across, 
with three to five lobes. The foliage is glossy, 
leathery, and bright green. The leaves of var-
iegated cultivars have a central yellow-green 
blotch (‘Annemieke’) or pure white borders 
(‘Variegata’).

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Sheer curtains filtering the sun-
light from south, east, or west windows pro-
vide the right quality of light during the 
growing season.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 0.5 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist tree ivy two or three times a 
week with a spray bottle of water on a mist set-
ting, or use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a 
saucer or tray of water, making sure the bottom 
of the pot never sits directly in the water by rais-
ing the pot up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 

72      Trees and Shrubs

organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month. Stop feeding in winter.
POTTING. When tree ivy needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot again 
every year in the spring until it is as big as you 
want it to get. Provide newly up-potted plants 
with cool shade for a week in order to avoid 
post-repotting collapse.
PROPAGATION. Tree ivy is easy to propagate from 
stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for post-repotting collapse (page 253), 
spider mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Umbrella tree

Each large, attractive leaf of umbrella tree 
(Schefflera actinophylla) and dwarf umbrella 
tree (S. arboricola) has seven to 11 or more leaf-
lets all attached to the same point at the tip of 
the petiole (leaf stalk). The leaflets radiate from 
the center and droop like the ribs of a shiny 
green umbrella. The resemblance to umbrel-
las ends there, however, because the leaflets 
are not joined side to side. Umbrella tree is a 
“houseplant gone wild”—an invasive weed in 
both Hawaii and Florida. Dwarf umbrella tree 
seems not to be nearly as invasive. Both spe-
cies are excellent houseplants, however, and 
indoors, in a container, they rarely get more than 
6 to 8 feet tall. Both plants have sturdy, woody 
trunks and branches, palmately compound 
(fan-shaped) leaves, and smooth, broadly oval 
leaflets. Umbrella tree leaflets get 10 inches long; 
the leaflets of dwarf umbrella tree are much 

Umbrella tree (aka Queensland umbrella tree, umbrella plant, octopus tree, schefflera).

smaller, only 3 inches long. Individual flowers 
are tiny, bright red in umbrella tree, yellow in 
dwarf umbrella tree, but it’s unlikely that either 
species would bloom inside the house.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Both species want dappled or fil-
tered light but no direct sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.

HUMIDITY. Mist twice a week with a spray bot-
tle of water on a mist setting, or use a handheld 
mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 
making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles. Consider putting a humidifier in 
the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month. Stop feeding in winter.
POTTING. When your tree needs up-potting, shift 

Umbrella tree      73

it to a container with a diameter 4 inches larger 
than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Umbrella trees are easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for plant sprawl (page 253), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Weeping fig

Weeping fig (Ficus benjamina), a fast-growing, 
broadleaf evergreen with gracefully drooping 
branchlets, well deserves a place of honor in 
any home. It’s one of the most popular house-
plants in the world—relatively low-maintenance, 
readily available, and very beautiful—but it is 
unlikely to produce its edible, tiny, true figs 
indoors. As a houseplant this tree, either single- 
or multi-trunked, grows to 8 feet tall. The trunk 
is pale brown and eventually sturdy, but very 
flexible when young. Growers sometimes braid 
the trunks of young specimens together and put 
all three trees in the same pot. The branches 
are thin and delicate, arching out and droop-
ing down to give a weeping effect. Like all figs, 
weeping fig has milky white sap that dries to 
rubber. The lovely leaves of this tree are dark 
green, 4-inch-long, glossy ovals with long, 
pointed drip tips. Many plants from humid trop-
ical rainforests have leaves with long drip tips 
that help the leaf shed the abundant rainfall. 
The edges of the leaves undulate, giving each 
leaf a slight rippled effect. The leaves dangle 
from the pendulous branchlets, pointing down 
toward the ground. Several cultivars have foliage 
with white or yellow markings.

Weeping fig does not like to be moved about 

and protests by throwing its leaves on the 
ground. Find the perfect spot for it and leave 
it there. If you’ve just purchased your fig and 

(top) Weeping fig (aka 
Benjamin fig, Benjamin 
tree, ficus tree, ficus).

(above) Weeping fig, varie-
gated form.

74      Trees and Shrubs

brought it home from the garden center don’t 
be surprised if it drops its leaves. If you’re 
up-potting an older specimen expect it to lose 
quite a few leaves. Be patient with it because it 
will grow new leaves fairly quickly.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. The light from a south, east, or 
west window, filtered by sheer curtains, is just 
right for weeping fig.
LOW TEMPERATURE. 65 to 75°F day and night.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Mist weeping fig occasionally with 
a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month. Stop feeding in winter.
POTTING. When weeping fig needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot again every 
two to three years until it is as big as you want it 
to get.
PROPAGATION. Weeping fig is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings taken in the spring.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), scale insects 
(page 262), and leaf spot fungus (page 269).

Zebra plant

Zebra plant (Aphelandra squarrosa) is an almost 
irresistibly gorgeous woody, broadleaf evergreen 
shrub. The striped foliage alone is a traffic- 
stopper, and when it’s in bloom it knocks your 
socks off. But it’s a cranky little devil—a real chal-
lenge to keep it alive in your home for more than 
a couple of years, much less coax it into bloom. 
Still, lots of people just have to have it and, if 
you give it exactly what it needs, it rewards you 
handsomely. As a houseplant, it rarely exceeds 2 
feet tall and wide, and many people prune it to 12 
to 18 inches. The amazing leaves are big, showy, 
and oval, 6 to 9 inches long by 3 to 4 inches wide, 
with pointed tips. Their rich, glossy, deep enamel 
green contrasts beautifully with the broad 
strokes of glistening pure white that cover their 
veins like stripes on a zebra. The waxy inflo-
rescence bears bright yellow bracts all along its 
length, with one tubular yellow flower peeking 
out from each. Flower spikes reach 8 inches in 
length at the tips of the stems and last as long as 
six weeks, from late summer into fall.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Sheer curtains over south, east, 
or west windows provide bright light that won’t 
burn the leaves. So, no direct sun.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Zebra plant requires high humidity to 
grow well. Mist daily with a spray bottle of water 
on a mist setting, or use a handheld mister. Put the 
pot in a saucer or tray of water, making sure the 
bottom of the pot never sits directly in the water 

Zebra plant      75

Zebra plant (aka saffron spike).

by raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Con-
sider putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other 
two. Apply dry fertilizer once in early spring 
and again in June. Apply liquid fertilizer at 
half-strength every two weeks in spring and 

76      Trees and Shrubs

summer. Stop feeding in fall and winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot again every 
year until the plant is as big as you want it to get.
PROPAGATION. Zebra plant is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), aphids 
(page 260), and root rot (page 272).

Herbaceous Perennials

Zebra plant      77

African violet

African violets (Saintpaulia spp.) are easily, and 
deservedly, the most popular houseplant in the 
world. People love them because they flower 
all year long, the jewel-like blossoms come in 
a rainbow of luscious colors, and the plants 
are small, compact, and easy to grow. They are 
charming even when not in bloom. The hun-
dreds of available cultivars differ in plant size, 
flower color and type, and leaf size, color, and 
type. All stand ready to add their boisterous 
attributes to any windowsill. African violets 
bear a superficial resemblance to true vio-
lets, but they are not violets. They are gesneri-
ads, first collected by Baron Walter von Saint 
Paul-Illaire in Tanzania in 1892. The generic 
name honors him.

African violet stems are very short, only 3 
to 4 inches in the standard varieties, with a 
saucer-like cluster of leaves arranged in a rosette 
at the tips of the stems. Plant size is determined 
by the diameter of this rosette: micro-miniature 
(less than 3 inches across), miniature (3 to 6 
inches across), standard (8 to 16 inches across), 
and large (more than 16 inches across). Leaves 
have long, rather succulent petioles (leaf stalks) 
with a heart-shaped blade at the tip. The blade 
is thick and softly furry, like little kitten paws. 
The leaves near the bottom of the rosette have 
the longest petioles and the leaves near the top 
of the rosette have the shortest petioles. In this 
way no leaf is shaded by the leaf above it, an 
arrangement known as imbricated.

There are many different foliage types in 
African violets. The standard plain green leaf 
is called a “boy” leaf, named for ‘Blue Boy’, the 
most famous of the early varieties. A “girl” leaf, 
named for ‘Blue Girl’, is green with wavy edges 
and a white spot at the base of the leaf blade. 
Variegated leaves are blotched or spotted with 
yellow, cream, or white. And then there are oak 

78      Herbaceous Perennials

African violet.

leaf types, fringed leaf types, and quilted leaf 
types, among others. Many cultivars are grown 
as much for the size, color, and shape of the 
leaves as they are for the lovely little flowers.

The flowers, borne in clusters on stalks that 

arise from the middle of the rosette, stand above 
the leaves. A well-grown plant in full flower is 
a perfect little nosegay. Flowers come in a huge 
array of colors including blue, pink, white, pur-
ple, magenta, red, and two-tone blends. As with 
leaf types, flower types abound. Single flowers 
have five petals with the top two smaller than 
the bottom three, and look most like true vio-
lets. Semi-double flowers have more than five 
petals, and double flowers have at least ten pet-
als. Frilled/ruffled flowers have petals with wavy 
edges, picotees have dark edges on pastel petals, 
and star flowers have five equally spaced petals, 
all the same size.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Provide filtered or dappled light 
and no direct sun. These low-growing plants 
also do really well under fluorescent lights with 
the lights about 12 inches above them.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch. Avoid getting water on the leaves 
or flowers.
HUMIDITY. African violets like high humid-
ity but don’t mist them because their hairy 
leaves stay too wet too long. If your home is 
dry you can raise the humidity by putting the 
pot in a saucer or tray of water, making sure 
the bottom of the pot never sits directly in the 
water. Raise the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. 
Never let your African violet sit in water and 
become waterlogged.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, well- 
drained, special-purpose potting soil designed 
for African violets. The best kinds will incorpo-
rate organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. For standard African violets, use a 
balanced organic fertilizer, that is, one where 
the N-P-K numbers are approximately the same 
(e.g., 14-12-14). Miniature African violets like a 
slightly different formula (e.g., 7-9-5). Use either 
a powder or a liquid formulation and apply 
every three months year-round. Alternatively, 
dilute liquid fertilizer to half-strength and apply 
some every time you water your plant.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 1 inch 
larger than the current pot. African violets pre-
fer small, shallow pots so avoid putting them 
in too large a pot. Their small root systems 

are incapable of mining a large volume of soil 
for moisture.
PROPAGATION. African violet is easy to propagate 
from leaf cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for whitish spots on leaves (page 256), 
mealybugs (page 262), and gray mold (page 
268).

Aluminum plant

Aluminum plant (Pilea cadierei) is an 
easy-to-grow tropical houseplant, welcome 
everywhere for its striking evergreen foliage. 
Plants get 12 inches tall by 8 inches wide; they 
live in good condition for up to five years and 
can be maintained indefinitely by rooting tip 
cuttings of their somewhat fleshy and succu-
lent stems. It’s the fantastic 3-inch-long leaves 
that make this plant worth growing. Each oval 
leaf has raised patches that give it a quilted tex-
ture, and each patch seems to have been brushed 

Aluminum plant (aka watermelon pilea).

Aluminum plant      79

with shiny, silvery aluminum. These pale streaks 
on a darker green background resemble water-
melon rind. Aluminum plant rarely flowers as a 
houseplant. If it does flower, the individual flow-
ers are extremely tiny and not at all showy or 
pretty. Just pinch them off so the plant doesn’t 
waste energy producing flowers and seeds you 
don’t want at the expense of those pretty leaves 
that you do want. It’s also a good idea to pinch 
off the stem tips, or take tip cuttings, to make the 
plant bushy.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Provide a half-day of filtered light 
as from an east or west window with sheer cur-
tains. Direct sun will burn the foliage.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Aluminum plant prefers moderate to 
high humidity. If the air in your home is drier 
than average, mist your plant twice a week with 
a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, cactus potting soil that incorpo-
rates sand along with organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply at half-strength every two weeks through 
the growing season.
POTTING. Pull the plant out of its pot and check 
the root system every spring. The root sys-
tem of aluminum plant can break pots if it gets 

80      Herbaceous Perennials

rootbound. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Aluminum plant is easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leggy growth (page 251), spider mites 
(page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Angel wing begonia

Angel wing begonias are easy, gorgeous 
year-round houseplants that bloom profusely 
with drooping clusters of small brightly col-
ored flowers. The original was a hybrid between 
Begonia aconitifolia and B. coccinea created by 
California plant breeder Eva Kenworthy Gray 
in 1926. Since that cross, many more have been 
made with several other species, and hundreds 
of beautiful angel wing begonias are now avail-
able. The beautiful leaves are asymmetrical at 
the base, shaped like wings, and carried along 
the length of the green stems, which are thin 
but strong, and knobby, reminiscent of bamboo. 
Although some plants grow quite tall, all can be 
kept shorter through judicious pruning. In gen-
eral, modern hybrids are much shorter and com-
pact; some are even suitable for hanging baskets. 
They are grouped into three classes: Superba 
Canes, Mallet Canes, and All Other Canes.

Superba Canes can easily reach 8 to 10 feet 
tall and have leaves that are deeply cleft, lobed, 
or fringed. Most also have silver polka-dots on 
the upper surface of the leaves, but in a few the 
leaves are entirely silver.

Mallet Canes are hybrids involving Begonia 

rex, which gives the foliage unusual coloring and 
texture. The original hybrid of this type, ‘Arthur 
Mallet’, has given its name to all other angel 
wing begonias of similar heritage. Most begonias 

Angel wing begonia (aka cane begonia, dragon-wing 
begonia).

Angel wing begonia, flower.

in this group have very colorful leaves that are 
thin-textured and sparsely hairy.

Begonia ×corallina falls into the All Oth-
ers class. It grows 3 to 4 feet tall on average. 
The edges of the beautiful leaves are smooth 
and entire (i.e., they aren’t toothed, serrated, or 
lobed). The green, bronze, or brownish upper 
surface of the leaves is usually spangled with 
shiny metallic silver polka dots. Sometimes the 
silver spots are absent. The underside of leaves 
is typically red.

Flowers give angel wing begonias additional 
appeal—small red, pink, or white blossoms cas-
cade from the stems. Interestingly, the flowers 
are edible and are both sweet and tart.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright, indirect morning light 
from an east window with sheer curtains is 
ideal. These begonias cannot handle direct sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. Begonias are easily dam-
aged by temperatures below 55°F so protect 
them from cold drafts.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 

Angel wing begonia      81

with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the second number (phosphorus) is 
higher than the other two to promote flowering. 
Apply at half-strength every two weeks during 
the growing season.
POTTING. In the spring, when your plant needs 
up-potting, shift it to a container with a diam-
eter 2 inches larger than the current pot. Angel 
wing begonias have a fibrous root system and 
grow best in a small pot. Putting them in too 
large a pot can lead to problems associated with 
overwatering, such as leaf drop and root rot.
PROPAGATION. Angel wing begonia is easy to prop- 
agate from leaf cuttings and stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), mealybugs (page 
262), and gray mold (page 268).

Bird’s nest 
philodendron

Philodendrons are the unsung heroes of the 
houseplant world. Not only are they perfectly 
comfortable living in the same environments 
as humans, they are lovely to look at and very 
tolerant of being relocated. Move them from 
room to room or take them outside for a sum-
mer vacation and they won’t sulk and throw 
all their leaves on the ground like some other 

82      Herbaceous Perennials

Bird’s nest philodendron.

houseplants. They will simply enjoy their new 
location. Bird’s nest philodendron is the name 
applied to a group of mostly man-made hybrids 
derived from several different Philodendron spe-
cies, including P. auriculatum and P. deflexum. 
It is so forgiving and commonplace as to be 
almost invisible, but newer and more colorful 
hybrids are introduced regularly, changing the 
face of this underappreciated workhorse com-
panion. Most grow to about 2 feet tall and wide. 
Leaves are 8 to 12 inches long and shaped like 
stretched-out spear points or arrowheads. They 
are one-third to one-half as wide as they are 
long and glossy to waxy deep green. Many cul-
tivars have foliage in colors other than green. 
Some have leaves that open coppery orange 
and then change to green as they mature. Oth-
ers have leaves that are bright chartreuse or 
dark burgundy with red veins. Some leaves 
are almost black at maturity. All these color-
ful leaves resemble a crown, or a bouquet, that 
seems almost to erupt from the soil itself. How-
ever, they are all attached to a very short stem at 

their bases. It is very rare for bird’s nest philo-
dendron to flower indoors. If it does you will 
see a small, scoop-shaped spathe surrounding a 
finger-like spadix covered with minute flowers. 
Female flowers near the base of the spadix form 
berries after fertilization.

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, causing 
painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If you 
suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits serious 
symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control center, 
or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Filtered light. Artificial light also 
works well for these forgiving plants. They also 
tolerate low light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant occasionally with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 

number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Make sure that the fertilizer also incorporates 
micronutrients. Apply once a month through the 
growing season, every other month in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Re-pot in spring or 
early summer every two years.
PROPAGATION. Bird’s nest philodendron is 
easy to propagate from stem tip cuttings or by 
air layering.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257), aphids 
(page 260), and root rot (page 272).

Calla lily

As with all aroids, the colorful part of the calla 
lily (Zantedeschia spp.) is the scoop-shaped 
spathe surrounding a finger-like spadix cov-
ered with minute flowers. Hundreds of these 
barely visible flowers are packed onto the spa-
dix. The big, bright spathe and the gorgeous 
foliage are the reasons we love these plants. 
Georgia O’Keeffe loved them too. She featured 
the elegant and sophisticated white calla lily 
(Zantedeschia aethiopica) in many of her sen-
suous paintings. This is a big plant, to 3 feet tall 
and wide when grown indoors. Modern hybrids 
developed from Z. rehmannii and Z. elliottiana 
are smaller plants, to 12 inches high and wide as 
houseplants. Their very colorful spathes can be 
deep purple, lavender, cream, orange, light and 
deep pink, or bright yellow.

All calla lilies have a bulb-like underground 

rhizome that is perennial. Leaves and flow-
ers sprout directly from the eyes in the tops of 
these rhizomes so there is no aboveground stem. 
White calla lily is nearly evergreen and does 
not go dormant. All the small colorful species 

Calla lily      83

Calla lily hybrids.

In late summer the small callas prepare for 
dormancy by ceasing to grow and flower. The 
leaves slowly turn yellow and fade away as the 
plant prepares to go to sleep and pulls all its 
resources down into the underground rhizome. 
Remove old flowers and fading leaves. Stop fer-
tilizing the plant and reduce watering until it is 
completely dormant. When dormancy is com-
plete, stop watering entirely. Place the plant 
in cool shade until you re-pot it in mid-winter. 
After re-potting, move the plant to warmth 
and light in early spring and begin to water 
again to encourage it to break dormancy and 
begin active growth.

Many people find that calla lilies in their sec-

ond or subsequent years as houseplants are 
not as vigorous and floriferous as they were 
in their first year, so they regard them as tem-
porary houseplants and discard them when 
they go dormant. 

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 

White calla lily (aka arum lily, altar lily, lily of the Nile).

and hybrids have a growth habit much like any 
temporary houseplant with bulbs: they go com-
pletely dormant in the autumn. Leaves of white 
calla lily are arrow-shaped, 18 inches long and 
10 inches wide. They are usually not spotted, 
but some cultivars have silvery white spots on 
the leaves. Leaves of the smaller hybrids are 
also arrow-shaped, 10 to 12 inches long and 
2.5 to 6 inches wide. Many have white spots on 
the leaves.

84      Herbaceous Perennials

if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, causing 
painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If you 
suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits serious 
symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control center, 
or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. These plants dislike direct sun-
light and will be at their best in filtered or dap-
pled light.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
AMPLE WATER. Callas like lots of water when 
they are in active growth and flowering. Water 
whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 inch. Stop water-
ing during their dormant period.
HUMIDITY. Calla lilies like high humidity. Mist 
your plant every other day with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, mak-
ing sure the bottom of the pot never sits directly 
in the water by raising the pot up on pot feet 
or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, well- 
drained, general-purpose potting soil that incor-
porates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son. Do not fertilize during the dormant period.
POTTING. In mid-winter your small calla needs 
re-potting before it begins a new cycle of growth 
and flowering. Remove the bulb-like rhizome 
from the old spent soil and pot it up with fresh 
potting medium. For the white and the small, if 

the rhizome appears to be rootbound, up-pot to 
a container with a diameter 4 inches larger than 
the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Calla lilies are easy to propagate 
by dividing the rhizome when re-potting.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for loss of vigor (page 252), aphids (page 
260), and soft rot (page 274).

Cast-iron plant

Cast-iron plant (Aspidistra elatior) is practically 
indestructible, as its common name suggests. 
This tough-as-nails, easy-to-grow plant was very 
popular and quite common in the Victorian era. 
In modern times, however, it’s harder to find 
and can be pricey: it grows very slowly and so 
it’s expensive for growers to get it to market-
able size. This plant has no stems above the soil 
line, just leaves that seem to sprout directly from 
the potting medium. Well-grown, older plants 
have as many as 12 to 18 leaves that arch grace-
fully. Leaves are 2 feet long, 4 inches wide, deep 
green and glossy. Some cultivars have varie-
gated leaves with creamy white stripes or small 
creamy spots. These grow even more slowly 
than the green-leafed original. You may be sur-
prised one day to find a flower peeking up out 
of the dirt. Only mature plants flower and even 
then only rarely. They produce one small pur-
plish brown flower at a time, right at the surface 
of the potting medium.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
LOW LIGHT. This plant does very well in the dim 
ambient light of a north window. It also does well 
in artificial light. It cannot tolerate direct sun.

Cast-iron plant      85

Cast-iron plant (aka barroom plant, saloon plant).

MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. Unlike most houseplants, 
cast-iron plant is very forgiving in its tempera-
ture requirements and readily adapts to a wide 
range of temperatures, from 45 to 85°F.
LOW WATER. For most of the year, water when-
ever the top of the potting medium becomes dry 
to a depth of 2 inches. But when the plant is in 
active growth in late spring and early summer, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Cast-iron plant does well in dry air 
and needs no supplemental humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, well- 
drained, general-purpose potting soil that incor-
porates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes.

86      Herbaceous Perennials

FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son. If your plant develops slits in the leaves, it’s 
getting too much fertilizer.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. This very slow 
grower will need to be up-potted only every 
three to five years.
PROPAGATION. Cast-iron plant is easy to propa-
gate by division of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257) and scale 
insects (page 262).

Chinese evergreen

In addition to their beauty, Chinese evergreens 
(Aglaonema commutatum, A. modestum, A. pic-
tum) are undemanding; thus, they are widely 
grown in public spaces such as shopping malls, 
hospitals, and hotels. The plant’s small size 
and proven ability to purify indoor air make it 
a perfect companion for the home and office as 
well. Crowns of deep green foliage—mottled, 
marbled, and painted with splashes of pale sil-
very green—are typical for these handsome, 
easy-to-grow plants. Some newer cultivars have 
bright red, pink, and creamy white markings on 
the leaves. Stems are short—it is the crown of 
beautiful foliage that gives the plant its height 
and width. Many older cultivars become 2 to 3 
feet tall and wide as they mature, but newer cul-
tivars are bred to be very short and compact, 
about 1 foot tall and wide. Stems can become 
trunk-like with age as the oldest leaves are 
shed. Leaf size and shape varies widely; typical 
leaves are 6 to 10 inches long and 3 to 4 inches 
wide, but some cultivars have very narrow foli-
age, only 1 to 2 inches wide. The inflorescence 
is a small, pale green, scoop-shaped spathe sur-
rounding a finger-like spadix covered with tiny 
flowers. Female flowers near the base of the spa-
dix form red berries after fertilization.

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, causing 
painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If you 
suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits serious 
symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control center, 
or vet.

(top) Chinese evergreen 
(aka aglaonema, painted 
drop tongue, poison 
dart plant).

(above) Chinese evergreen, 
narrow-leaved form.

Chinese evergreen      87

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
LOW OR MEDIUM LIGHT. Cultivars with darker 
green foliage do best near a north window. 
Those with lighter, more extensive variegation 
of the foliage need the brighter light of an east 
window with curtains to filter the light. All vari-
eties do well under artificial light. Chinese ever-
green is intolerant of direct sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. This plant is sensitive to 
cold air so avoid drafty locations and tempera-
tures below 60°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. These plants tolerate moderately dry 
air very well. But if the air in your home is very 
dry, then mist your plant twice a week with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a 
handheld mister.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son, every two months in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
every two years or so, shift it to a container with 
a diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. 
These plants prefer being a little rootbound. 
Re-potting can be done any time of year.
PROPAGATION. Chinese evergreen is easy to prop-
agate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves changing color (page 249), 
scale insects (page 262), and bacterial leaf spot 
(page 267).

88      Herbaceous Perennials

Clivia

The slow-growing clivia (Clivia miniata) has 
2-foot-long, 2-inch-wide, dark evergreen, 
strap-shaped leaves. These arch out gracefully, 
seemingly direct from the potting medium. 
There are stems, but they are short and com-
pletely covered by the foliage. Underground, 
the plant has long, ropy rhizomes. Mature, 
well-grown specimens of clivia can be 2 to 3 feet 
high and wide. The beautiful leaves grow in fans, 
making the plants appealing even when not in 
flower. As the plant grows, the oldest leaves clos-
est to the ground will wither and turn brown. 
This is normal. Just remove the dead leaves as 
they occur.

Clusters of ten to 20 brilliantly colorful 

flowers float above the foliage on thick stalks 
(peduncles). Each flower is a wide-open bell 

Clivia (aka Natal lily, bush lily).

with flaring petals that are joined at the base. 
Flower color varies from orange, salmon, red, 
and yellow to white in the various cultivars and 
hybrids. A plant more than three years old will 
flower if you give it a cool rest in autumn. Move 
it into low light in a cool room (50 to 65°F is 
ideal), and water sparingly for three months 
(e.g., October through December). After three 
months of rest, bring it back into active growth 
by moving it into a warm room and gradu-
ally increasing water. Six to 12 weeks later, the 
plant will flower. When the blooms fade, cut the 
flower stalks off at the base; otherwise the plant 
will put its energy into making seeds.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Cool morning light from an east 
window with sheer curtains is best. Direct sun 
can easily burn the leaves.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F, during the growing sea-
son. During the autumn resting period, give 
it cool daytime temperature of 50 to 65°F for 
three months.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch through the growing season. Gradu-
ally decrease watering during the autumn rest-
ing period by watering only when the potting 
medium is dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Clivia tolerates dry air very well. 
Avoid misting this plant.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting medium designed for 
semi-terrestrial orchids, one that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either a 
powder or liquid formulation, where the second 

number (phosphorus) is higher than the other 
two to promote flowering. Apply once a month 
through the growing season. Do not feed in the 
autumn rest period and winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Clivia prefers being 
somewhat rootbound, so re-pot only every three 
to five years or so. Put it in a heavy pot that is 
relatively shallow to keep it from toppling over.
PROPAGATION. Clivia is easy to propagate by 
separating pups from the main plant after the 
flower stalks fade.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257), spider 
mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Coleus

The appeal of coleus (Solenostemon scutellari-
oides) lies in its fantastic, bizarre, amazing foli-
age. Three or four brilliant kaleidoscopic colors 
of green, yellow, red, pink, orange, magenta, 
white—even black—adorn each soft, velvety leaf 
in discrete patches or intricate lace-like pat-
terns. The basic shape of a typical coleus leaf is 
ovate (egg-shaped), wide at the base and nar-
row at the tip, but there are hundreds of cul-
tivars, several of which have earned the Royal 
Horticultural Society’s Award of Garden Merit. 
Leaves of most cultivars are 3 to 4 inches long 
and 2 to 3 inches wide. Some cultivars have 
long, narrow leaves, others have short, wide 
leaves. Some cultivars have leaves with scal-
loped edges, others have lobed or fringed edges. 
Easy and fast-growing, these bushy evergreen 
perennials get 2 to 3 feet tall and wide. Stems get 
woody at the base as they age. The flowers are 
unremarkable—small, pale purplish blue, borne 
in spiky inflorescences at the tip of each stem. 

Coleus      89

HUMIDITY. Keep humidity high by misting your 
plant several times a week with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, mak-
ing sure the bottom of the pot never sits directly 
in the water by raising the pot up on pot feet 
or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in 
either a powder or liquid formulation, where 
the first number (nitrogen) is higher than the 
other two. Apply dry fertilizer once in early 
spring and again in June. Apply liquid fertil-
izer at half-strength once a week through the 
growing season.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Coleus gener-
ally does not need a pot larger than 8 inches 
in diameter.
PROPAGATION. Coleus is easy to propagate from 
stem tip cuttings rooted in water. It is also easy 
to grow from seed, but each seedling will be a 
unique individual that does not duplicate the 
original plant.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and gray mold (page 268).

Creeping saxifrage

Creeping saxifrage (Saxifraga stolonifera) is a 
perennial that keeps on giving. Plant one out in 
your garden and before you know it, you will 
have thousands of them. As a houseplant, it is 
just as generous but much more controllable—
though you’ll still have to watch out for it 

Coleus (aka painted nettle, flame nettle, painted leaf, poor 
man’s croton).

Most growers pinch off the flower buds to keep 
the plant vigorous and encourage additional fab-
ulous foliage. Making flowers and subsequent 
seed production saps the energy of the plant.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Coleus prefers light from an 
east or west window filtered by sheer curtains. 
Direct sun at midday will bleach the color of the 
leaves or even burn them badly.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
AMPLE WATER. During the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 inch. In winter, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.

90      Herbaceous Perennials

Creeping saxifrage (aka Aaron’s beard, creeping rockfoil, roving sailor, strawberry begonia, strawberry geranium, 
strawberry saxifrage).

crawling into bed with its neighbors. This sax-
ifrage has very attractive leaves reminiscent 
of begonia/geranium foliage, and it grows just 
like a strawberry, sending out runners in every 
direction that take root and grow new plant-
lets. Plants spread rapidly, forming mats from 6 
to 8 inches tall and 12 inches wide. Leaves are 
nearly round, about 4 inches across, and dark 
green, with beautiful silver veins and pink to 
purple-red undersides. Some cultivars have 
maroon leaves. The starry, delicate, 1-inch-wide 
flowers are white with tiny pink to red freck-
les on the three small, pointed upper petals. The 
two lower petals are four times longer than the 
upper petals, pure white, and pointed. Flow-
ers appear in May and June and are carried on 
2-foot-long stalks in loose, open clusters well 
above the foliage. Grown in a hanging basket, 

creeping saxifrage will have lots of red run-
ners cascading down around the sides of the 
pot. These form new little plantlets at their tips, 
and the overall effect is lovely. Even in a pot sit-
ting on a windowsill, the runners will form little 
plantlets that sit on the sill all around the feet of 
the mother plant.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. This plant does well with dap-
pled or filtered light. Keep it out of direct sun 
because the foliage burns easily in hot sun.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 

Creeping saxifrage      91

the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Creeping saxifrage does well with 
average humidity, but if the air in your home 
is drier than normal raise the humidity by put-
ting the pot in a saucer or tray of water, mak-
ing sure the bottom of the pot never sits directly 
in the water by raising the pot up on pot feet 
or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the second number (phosphorus) is 
higher than the other two to promote flowering. 
Apply at half-strength once a month through the 
growing season.
POTTING. This plant grows fast and does not 
like to be rootbound, so you should probably 
up-pot or re-pot it once a year. Up-pot to a con-
tainer with a diameter 4 inches larger than the 
current pot.
PROPAGATION. Creeping saxifrage is easy to 
propagate by layering the stolons.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), aphids (page 
260), and root rot (page 272).

False shamrock

Don’t confuse false shamrock (Oxalis triangu-
laris) with either its weedy relative, O. cornicu-
lata, or true Irish shamrock (Trifolium dubium), 
both of which have yellow flowers. False sham-
rock is neither invasive nor weedy, and its dainty 
flowers are white or pale pink. It is endemic to 
Brazil—a very long way from Ireland. Leaves 
sprout directly from odd-looking, scaly little 
underground bulbs, forming a mound of foliage 

92      Herbaceous Perennials

6 to 10 inches high and wide. Each leaf has three 
triangular leaflets at the top of a thin stalk (pet-
iole). In the most popular cultivars these leaf-
lets are dark purple with a bright purple center. 
In other varieties the leaflets are green on the 
upper surface and purple on the lower surface, 
or green with a silver edge. No matter what 
color the leaves are, they all move. The three 
leaflets of each leaf fold down at night and open 
up in daylight. The starry flowers, with five 
wide-spreading petals, are carried in clusters on 
long stalks above the foliage. The dramatic con-
trast between the dark foliage and the pale flow-
ers is another attractive aspect of this plant.
False shamrock goes dormant from time 
to time, particularly when it’s finished flow-
ering in the autumn. Like many other bulbs, 
the plant just wants to go to sleep for a while 
and will resume growth after it has a period of 
rest. When this happens you might think your 

False shamrock (aka shamrock, Irish shamrock, purple 
shamrock, lucky shamrock, love plant, woodsorrel).

plant is dying. It isn’t. Just reduce watering, 
let the plant dry out, and all the leaves will die 
back. After a month or so of dormancy, it will 
start into active growth again. At that point, 
resume watering and your plant will soon be in 
flower again.

 The leaves are edible in small doses by 

adults. They add a fresh, acidic taste and deep 
purple color to green salads. But don’t eat too 
much because these plants contain soluble 
oxalates that can cause mild to severe poison-
ing if sufficient quantities are consumed. Keep 
this plant out of the reach of children and pets. 
Symptoms to watch for include drooling, vomit-
ing, diarrhea, lethargy, and weakness. If you sus-
pect a child or pet is in difficulty, call your local 
emergency hotline, poison control center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Provide dappled or filtered light.
LOW TEMPERATURE. 65 to 75°F day and night.
MODERATE WATER. While your plant is in active 
growth, water whenever the top of the potting 
medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. This plant is very tolerant of the dry 
air in the average home. If your home is really 
dry, however, mist your plant twice a week with 
a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either a 
powder or liquid formulation, where the second 
number (phosphorus) is higher than the other 

two to promote flowering. Apply dry fertilizer 
once a month during the growing season. Apply 
liquid fertilizer at half-strength every two weeks 
through the growing season.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. False shamrock is easy to prop-
agate by division of the bulbs while the plant 
is dormant.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for premature dormancy (page 254), spi-
der mites (page 263), and leaf spot fungus (page 
269).

Flamingo flower

What’s not to love about a plant that grows 
slowly, likes the warmth and reduced light of 
our homes, and whose flowers last for months? 
Flamingo flowers (Anthurium spp.) are, in many 
ways, perfect flowering houseplants, and even 
when not in bloom, their heart-shaped foliage is 
appealing. Indeed, some species, A. crystallinum 
in particular, are grown primarily for their attrac-
tive leaves. The leaves of all anthuriums are 
leathery, evergreen, and glossy. They are held 
erect on stiff peduncles and slowly swivel to face 
the light. The showy part of flamingo flower’s 
inflorescence is the big colorful, scoop-shaped 
spathe, which surrounds a finger-like spadix 
covered with minute flowers. Flower colors 
include bright red, scarlet, orange, pink, laven-
der, purple, and white. Multicolored flowers 
with green on the “ears” of the spathe are called 
obake (“ghost,” in Japanese). The flowers are very 
stiff and feel almost like plastic. This heavy con-
struction is one reason they last so long, whether 
on the plant (for months, literally) or as cut 
flowers (easily three or four weeks in the vase).

Flamingo flower      93

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. These plants flower well with 
bright light from an east window filtered by 
sheer curtains. They also do well in low light 
from a north window or skylight. They should 
never be exposed to direct sun unless they have 
been cautiously acclimated because their heavy 
foliage burns quickly.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. These plants will suffer if 
the temperature drops below 60°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 0.5 inch.
HUMIDITY. Flamingo flower loves high humid-
ity. Mist your plant daily with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, mak-
ing sure the bottom of the pot never sits directly 
in the water by raising the pot up on pot feet or 
pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting medium designed for 
semi-terrestrial orchids, one that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic fer-
tilizer. Apply at half-strength every two weeks 
throughout the year because these plants tend to 
flower at any time of year.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Flamingo flower is easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings and stem cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and anthurium blight (page 266).

Flamingo flower (aka boy flower, anthurium, pigtail 
anthurium, painted flamingo, flamingo lily, painter’s pal-
ette, tailflower, laceleaf).

The large flowers of Anthurium andraeanum, 

which are so frequently used in tropical floral 
arrangements, are borne on big plants to 3 feet 
tall and wide. The pigtail (A. scherzerianum), 
only 18 inches high and wide, got its common 
name because its spadix is coiled in a spiral like 
the tail of a pig. Modern small-flowered hybrids 
derived from A. amnicola are about the same 
size as pigtail, but have a straight rather than 
curly spadix.

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, causing 
painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If you 
suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits serious 
symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control center, 
or vet.

94      Herbaceous Perennials

Geranium

The geraniums we grow as houseplants in the 
United States are species and cultivars of the 
genus Pelargonium. All are evergreen perennials 
whose original home was South Africa, so they 
are all frost-tender. These include scented-leaf 
geraniums (various species with strongly aro-
matic foliage), zonal geraniums (P. ×hortorum), 
ivy geranium (P. peltatum), and Lady Wash-
ington (or regal) geraniums (P. ×domesticum). 
Because cold weather kills them, many people 
grow them outdoors as annual bedding plants. 
But you can keep them alive and well, and flow-
ering to boot, all winter long inside your home.
Zonal geraniums grow into shrubby plants, 

1 to 3 feet tall and wide, with stems that are 
woody at the base and succulent at the tips. 
They have circular or kidney-shaped foliage 
that is velvety soft and hairy. Most cultivars 
have a circular red-brown zone in the middle 
of the leaf, but some have entirely green leaves. 
Fancy-leaved cultivars are grown for their 
brightly colored—yellow, orange, red, brown—
foliage alone. But most of the 500 or so cultivars 
of zonal geraniums are grown for their beauti-
ful flowers. The 1-inch-wide, five-petaled flow-
ers come in every possible tint and shade of red, 
scarlet, rose, pink, salmon, orange, mauve, laven-
der, violet, and white. Flowers are borne in tight, 
ball-like clusters of 30 to 50 blossoms.

Ivy geraniums are vine-like plants with thin, 
trailing stems that can get as long as 6 feet. They 
are typically grown in hanging baskets because 
of their prostrate, spreading habit. The 2- to 
3-inch-wide leaves, smooth, waxy, and palmately 
lobed, bear a superficial resemblance to leaves 

(top right) Geranium (aka 
garden geranium, pelargo-
nium, storksbill).

(right) Geranium, flowers.

Geranium      95

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Put geraniums in full sun in a south 
window. They need strong light in order to 
flower well.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. These plants grow well in average 
room humidity. They don’t need to be misted.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the second number (phosphorus) is 
higher than the other two to promote flower-
ing. For foliage types, choose a fertilizer where 
the first number (nitrogen) is higher. Apply at 
half-strength once a month through the grow-
ing season.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Put ivy geraniums 
in hanging baskets and all other types into regu-
lar pots.
PROPAGATION. All geraniums are easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for edema (page 247), whiteflies (page 
265), and gray mold (page 268).

of ivy (Hedera helix). The 1-inch-wide flowers 
have two upper petals that are slightly smaller 
than the three lower petals, giving each flower 
an asymmetrical look. Flowers are pink, red, or 
white, streaked with darker lines, and borne in 
small clusters of two to nine blossoms.

Lady Washington geraniums are shrubby 

plants with woody stems; they grow 3 feet tall 
and wide. Their 2- to 4-inch-wide dark green 
leaves are heart- or kidney-shaped, crinkled, 
and have pointed teeth along the margins. The 
flowers, however, are the glory of this striking 
type. They are large, to 3.5 inches across, very 
showy, and colorful. Flower colors range from 
white through pink, red, lavender, and purple. 
The petals have brilliant blotches and streaks of 
darker colors.

The foliage of scented-leaf geraniums is 

strongly aromatic. The lightest touch of any leaf 
is enough to release the powerful fragrance it 
contains: rose (Pelargonium capitatum, P. gra-
veolens), lemon (P. crispum), apple (P. odorat-
issimum), strawberry (P. ×scarboroviae), and 
peppermint (P. tomentosum). The scented gera-
niums are a varied lot as you might expect with 
so many different species involved. Most grow 
1 to 3 feet high and wide. Many have deeply 
divided palmately lobed, ferny foliage that is 
gray-green or silvery; some have round, green 
leaves. The leaves range in size from minute to 
4 inches wide. Flowers are small, usually white 
or rosy pink, but are secondary in importance 
to the scented leaves. Scented geranium leaves 
have a variety of medicinal and culinary uses 
and are perhaps best known for their contri-
bution to desserts in the form of cakes, jellies, 
and flavored drinks. The essential oils of certain 
cultivars (‘Attar of Roses’, ‘Sweet Mimosa’, and 
‘Paton’s Unique’, among others) exhibit antibac-
terial and antifungal properties.

96      Herbaceous Perennials

Gloxinia

Spectacular flowers, in eye-catching colors and 
as velvety soft as a horse’s nose, almost guaran-
tee impulse purchases of gloxinia (Sinningia spe-
ciosa). How could anyone pass this houseplant 
up when it is in full gorgeous bloom? Gloxinias 
strongly resemble their cousins, African violets, 
except that their flowers are bigger, as much as 4 
inches across. Flowers come in bright red, pink, 
purple, and white, sometimes with white edges 
and sometimes with spots or lines of contrast-
ing colors on the petals. The softly furry leaves 
form a compact basal rosette near ground level, 
and the flowers emerge from the center of the 
whorl of leaves. Leaves are large, 8 to 12 inches 
long, with shallow crenellations along the edges. 
They are often green above and purple on the 
undersides. Mature gloxinia plants get 6 to 12 
inches tall and wide. Modern hybrids with such 
species as S. pusilla or S. concinna have been 
developed to obtain smaller versions of this 

Gloxinia (aka florist gloxinia).

large-flowered beauty and an extended range of 
colorful flowers.

These plants sprout from small underground 
tubers. They tend to bloom all summer and then 
they die to the ground in the autumn. When this 
happens, don’t panic—your plant is not really 
dying. It is just going to sleep for the winter. 
When your gloxinia goes dormant, move its pot 
to a dark, cool place (50 to 60°F), stop watering 
and fertilizing, and allow it to dry out over win-
ter. In late winter re-pot the tubers in fresh pot-
ting medium, bring them back into the light, and 
resume watering. The plants will resume growth 
and soon be flowering again.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Provide filtered or dappled light, 
no direct sun. These low-growing plants also do 
really well under artificial lights with the lights 
about 12 inches above them.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water throughout the grow-
ing season whenever the top of the potting 
medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. Avoid 
getting water directly on the leaves. Do not 
water when the plant is dormant.
HUMIDITY. Gloxinia appreciates humidity but do 
not mist the foliage. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, African violet potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Choose an acidic liquid organic fer-
tilizer designed for acid-loving plants where 
the second number (phosphorus) is higher 

Gloxinia      97

than the other two to promote flowering. Apply 
at half-strength every two weeks through the 
growing season. Do not fertilize when the plant 
is dormant.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Re-pot in late winter 
when the plant is dormant.
PROPAGATION. Gloxinia is easy to propagate from 
leaf cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for whitish spots on leaves (page 256), 
spider mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Goldfish plant

All goldfish plants—Nematanthus wettstei-
nii, Columnea gloriosa, and Neomortonia 
nummularia—are trailing evergreen peren-
nials that grow very well in hanging baskets. 
The small leaves are thick and waxy, glossy in 
some, fuzzy in others. Leaf color is usually a 
crisp bright green but can be dark green, var-
iegated, or even purplish. Many cultivars have 
a red blotch on the undersides of the leaves. 
All these plants have small flowers in shades of 
bright orange, red, or yellow. Most look rather 
like little pot-bellied goldfish with tiny, round, 
open mouths. Some lack the pot-bellied pouch 
on the underside and are simple tubes with five 
petals that flare open at the mouth. Still others 
have flowers that flare out into a hood at the tip. 
Plants are shrubby, with lax, spreading stems 
that get as much as 3 feet long. Young gold-
fish plants in small pots generally grow upright, 
but as they age, the stems get longer, tumbling 
out and down from the plant’s center. Pinching 
off the tips of the stems causes them to branch 
into a bushier form that produces more of the 
charming flowers.

98      Herbaceous Perennials

Goldfish plant (aka candy-corn plant, guppy plant, 
dolphin plant).

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Give these plants light filtered 
by sheer curtains or a half-day of sun from an 
east window. They also do very well under 
artificial light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
AMPLE WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 inch. In winter cut 
back and water whenever the top of the potting 
medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Goldfish plant likes high humidity. 

Mist your plant daily with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, mak-
ing sure the bottom of the pot never sits directly 
in the water by raising the pot up on pot feet or 
pebbles. Alternatively, use a humidifier in the 
room to bring the humidity up to higher levels.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting medium designed for 
semi-terrestrial orchids, one that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either a 
powder or liquid formulation, where the second 
number (phosphorus) is higher than the other 
two to promote flowering. Apply at half-strength 
every two weeks through the growing season.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, in 
two to three years, shift it to a container with a 
diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. To 
keep it in a same-size container, re-pot in spring 
and prune the roots lightly.

PROPAGATION. Goldfish plant is easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings. Newly rooted cut-
tings will not flower until they are a year old.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Lipstick plant

Lipstick plant (Aeschynanthus radicans) is a 
vine-like evergreen perennial that grows to per-
fection in hanging baskets. The 2-foot-long 
stems arch gracefully out and down, away from 
the center of the plant. Cutting the stems back 
by not more than one-third encourages side 
branching and makes for a bushier form that 
will produce more flowers. The flowers begin 
as bright scarlet buds poking out of velvety 
purple-black calyx tubes—together, the pair-
ing looks for all the world like red lipstick in a 

Goldfish plant.

Lipstick plant (aka lipstick vine, basket vine).

Lipstick plant      99

MEDIUM LIGHT. Lipstick plant does best in bright, 
strong light filtered by sheer curtains. It cannot 
tolerate direct sun.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F, during the spring and summer 
growing season. In winter, give it cooler tem-
peratures to 55 to 65°F and this will stimulate 
flower production. Do not expose it to temper-
atures below 55°F because this will cause the 
leaves to drop off.
AMPLE WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 inch. Reduce water-
ing in winter and water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Lipstick plant likes high humidity. 
Mist your plant daily with a spray bottle of water 
on a mist setting, or use a handheld mister. Bet-
ter yet, use a humidifier in the room. Put the pot 
in a saucer or tray of water, making sure the bot-
tom of the pot never sits directly in the water by 
raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained potting medium designed for 
semi-terrestrial orchids, one that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the second number (phosphorus) is 
higher than the other two to promote flowering. 
Apply at half-strength once a month through the 
growing season.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. This plant will 
flower best when kept slightly rootbound.
PROPAGATION. Lipstick plant is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Lipstick plant.

dark lipstick tube. As the flowers mature they 
extend far beyond the tube, and the petals flare 
at the tips, opening up the flower so that it no 
longer looks like lipstick. But while the buds are 
developing the common name is a dead ringer 
for this plant. The leaves are thick, glossy, 2 to 
4 inches long, bright green, and very attractive. 
The leaves are opposite (a pair of leaves at every 
node) and handsomely arranged. Some cultivars 
have variegated foliage in green and white. Some 
people consider this plant worth growing for the 
foliage alone, but for most of us, it is most desir-
able when it’s in full bloom.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.

100      Herbaceous Perennials

Lucky bamboo

Lucky bamboo (Dracaena braunii) isn’t really 
a bamboo and it’s a good thing. Real bam-
boo doesn’t make a good houseplant, whereas 
lucky bamboo is nearly indestructible inside 
our homes. It is often found in dimly lit restau-
rants, on the front desk of hotel lobbies, even 
in the dentist’s office—all because of the widely 
held belief that the plant brings happiness and 
prosperity. Maybe that’s why you’ll often see it 
right beside the cash register. As a houseplant, 
especially when grown in water, this extremely 
slow grower will live comfortably on a desk or 
table for many years. Its green stems merely 
look jointed, like real bamboo, because they are 
ringed by attractive white leaf scars. The light 
to medium green strap-shaped leaves are 6 to 10 
inches long, 1 to 2 inches wide at their bases, and 
pointed at the tips. Some cultivars have beauti-
fully variegated leaves bordered in pure white. 
Flowers are insignificant.

Lucky bamboo is most often sold as pieces 

of stem in short, medium, or long lengths stuck 
into a vase of water. The stems may or may not 
have roots. The pieces of stem may be straight, 
or, more frequently they have been coerced by 
growers in Taiwan and China into interesting 
twisted shapes, spirals, circles, or braids. Lucky 
bamboo does not naturally grow in circles. It is 
forced to do so by being kept on its side in a box 
with a shifting light source. As it slowly grows 
toward whatever side has the light, the stem 
turns a tiny bit every day. Eventually it will have 
grown into a complete circle or spiral. Once 
this intensive training stops, the plant resumes 
its normal growth habit, and new stems grow 
straight up from the decoratively twisted por-
tion of the plant.

Lucky bamboo will grow for years in a vase 
with an inch or so of chlorine-free water in the 

Lucky bamboo (aka Belgian evergreen, Chinese  
water bamboo, curly bamboo, friendship bamboo, 
Goddess of Mercy plant, ribbon dracaena, ribbon 
plant, Sander’s dracaena).

bottom along with a few marbles or pebbles 
to stabilize the plant. Change the water once 
a week and keep it free of fallen leaves, which 
will rot and infect your plant. The chlorine in 
tap water causes the leaves to turn yellow and 
drop, so use bottled or filtered water. Give it 
a drop or two of liquid fertilizer and it will be 
happy. You can also grow this plant in potting 
medium in a container, just as you would any 
other houseplant.

Lucky bamboo      101

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
LOW LIGHT. Bright but indirect light from a north 
window or skylight works very well for lucky 
bamboo. Some even survive windowless bath-
rooms! This cannot be recommended as a gen-
eral policy, but it just goes to show how tough 
this plant is. Avoid direct sunlight; it will burn 
the foliage.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. If you’re growing lucky bam-
boo in potting medium, water whenever the top 
of the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch. If you’re growing it in water, keep the 
water about 1 inch deep and change it every 
week. Use filtered water. This plant is sensitive 
to the chlorine in tap water.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant twice a week with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer where the 
first number (nitrogen) is higher than the other 
two. For plants in potting medium, use either 
a powder or a liquid formulation. For plants 
grown in water, use one drop of fertilizer in the 
vase of water every other month.
POTTING. Lucky bamboo grows very slowly and 
can live in the same container for years. When 
your plant needs up-potting, shift it to a con-
tainer with a diameter 2 inches larger than the 
current pot.
PROPAGATION. Lucky bamboo is easy to 

102      Herbaceous Perennials

propagate from stem tip cuttings and 
stem cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Nerve plant

Nerve plant (Fittonia albivenis) is a creeping 
houseplant grown for its dramatic evergreen 
foliage. Each leaf displays an intricate, lace-like 
network of veins in white, magenta-pink, or 
red that contrasts beautifully with the dark 
olive-green background. The resulting intense 
color patterns invite closer inspection. It’s a 
small plant, only 6 inches high and 12 inches 
wide, with egg-shaped leaves to 4.5 inches long. 
Flowers rarely appear and are not showy if 

Nerve plant (aka mosaic plant, painted net leaf, silver 
net leaf).

they do. Most people just cut the flower spikes 
off the plants because the spikes actually detract 
from the attractive foliage. There are two dif-
ferent groups of nerve plant. The Verschaffeltii 
Group has dark green leaves with pink to red 
veins. The Argyroneura Group has dark green 
leaves with white veins.

Nerve plant, like a temperamental opera star, 

needs attentive coddling to perform. This lit-
tle diva is at its best in the constant moisture 
and high humidity of dish gardens and terrari-
ums. Treat it like a common, ordinary house-
plant, kept in a pot by itself sitting on a table, 
and it may have a hissy fit, reacting badly to the 
dry air of your home. It is possible to have this 
plant do well for you outside of a terrarium, but 
you will need to be extra attentive in meeting its 
demands for humidity and water.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light, or artificial 
light, is best for nerve plant.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 
inch. This plant will faint or collapse completely 
if it dries out at all so keep it well watered. Just 
make sure it also has good drainage.
HUMIDITY. Nerve plant needs high humidity and 
is very successful in a terrarium. If your plant is 
not in a terrarium, mist it daily with a spray bot-
tle of water on a mist setting, or use a handheld 
mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 
making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles. Consider putting a humidifier in 
the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 

well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Nerve plant is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for plant collapse (page 252), aphids 
(page 260), and root rot (page 272).

Peace lily

Peace lilies (Spathiphyllum spp.), like so many 
aroids, are among the easiest and most reliable 
of all houseplants, blooming regularly with min-
imum fuss and tolerating a certain amount of 
benign neglect with aplomb. If your plant wilts 
because you forgot to water it, it will bounce 
right back after a good soaking. Dozens of culti-
vars are available. Some grow into large robust 
plants to 2 to 3 feet tall and wide. Others are 
miniatures that stay under 1 foot tall and wide.
Peace lilies have no aboveground stems. The 

cluster of evergreen leaves arises like a crown 
directly from underground rhizomes. The 
leaves are borne on long, thin stalks from 6 to 
24 inches long depending on the cultivar. The 
oval, pointed leaf blades are glossy deep green 
and attractively ribbed with prominent veins. In 
larger cultivars the blades can be 10 inches wide; 
smaller cultivars have correspondingly smaller 
blades to 3 inches wide. Plants generally flower 
in spring. A showy leaf-like spathe surrounds 
a finger-like spadix, covered with tiny, almost 

Peace lily      103

Peace lily (aka closet plant, white sails).

microscopic flowers. The spathe is usually white 
but may also be green or pale yellowish on the 
backside. The spathes are held well above the 
foliage on long, thin stalks.

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, caus-
ing painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If 
you suspect a person or pet has ingested parts 
of this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits seri-
ous symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call 
your local emergency hotline, poison control 
center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Peace lily thrives in bright fil-
tered light. It cannot tolerate full sun. It will 
even do well in low light from a north window 
or skylight.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 
1 inch. Peace lilies can be sensitive to the chlo-
rine in tap water so filtered or bottled water is a 
better choice.

104      Herbaceous Perennials

HUMIDITY. Mist your plant regularly with a spray 
bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a hand-
held mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, well- 
drained, general-purpose potting soil that incor-
porates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply at half-strength once a month through the 
growing season.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Peace lily is easy to propagate by 
division of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Peacock plant

The aptly named peacock plant struts its strik-
ing evergreen foliage with panache. Commonly 
grown species include Calathea lancifolia, C. 
makoyana, C. rufibarba, and C. zebrina. These 
tropical beauties and their numerous hybrids 
can be a little demanding with their water and 
humidity needs but are well worth the effort. 
Plants form clumps from 2 to 4.5 feet tall and 
wide. The slender stems bear large, distinctively 
patterned leaves, pale green on dark green or 
vice versa, that spiral around the stem. Although 
the leaves are very beautiful, they are also very 
tough. In some varieties the leaf blades are oval, 
4 to 8 inches long and 6 inches wide. Other 
varieties have narrow, lance-shaped leaves up 
to 16 inches long with rippled, undulating leaf 

Peacock plant (aka calathea, prayer plant, rattlesnake 
plant, zebra plant).

margins. On all peacock plants, newly emerg-
ing leaves are rolled into a cylinder and each 
handsome, attractively variegated leaf has a red-
purple underside. Flowers are insignificant in 
most species and hybrids.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Filtered light is best for pea-
cock plant. Avoid direct sun as the leaves are 
easily burned.

Peacock plant      105

MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 
inch. Use filtered or even distilled water because 
peacock plant is sensitive to fluoride, chlorine, 
and salts in tap water. Although this plant wants 
a lot of water, it also requires good drainage and 
will not tolerate waterlogged soil.
HUMIDITY. Peacock plant needs high humid-
ity. Mist your plant daily with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, use a handheld mister, 
or put a humidifier in the room. Put the pot in a 
saucer or tray of water, making sure the bottom 
of the pot never sits directly in the water by rais-
ing the pot up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month year-round.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Peacock plant is propagated by 
division, but it can be fussy. Divide only really 
large, crowded plants and do it in the spring. 
Expect the plant to sulk after this operation.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves turning brown (page 251), spi-
der mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Peperomia

Peperomias are well worth growing for their 
attractive evergreen leaves. They are quietly 
undemanding, not at all flashy or flamboyant, 

106      Herbaceous Perennials

Peperomia (aka baby rubber plant, radiator plant, water-
melon peperomia).

and because they tolerate a wide range of envi-
ronmental conditions, they are easy to keep as 
houseplants. The most commonly cultivated 
species are Peperomia argyreia, P. caperata, 
and P. obtusifolia. Plants are small and com-
pact, less than 12 inches tall and wide. Flow-
ers are microscopic and tightly packed by the 
hundreds onto whitish rat-tail-like conical 
structures—interesting curiosities, perhaps, but 
not at all showy. It is the foliage that is the rea-
son to grow these plants. Some peperomias have 
small, heart-shaped leaves; others have longer, 
oval leaves. Sometimes the veins of the leaves 
are lined with silver. In other forms the leaf is 
deeply corrugated or waffled, and in still oth-
ers the leaves are variegated with creamy yel-
lowish patches. In all, the leaves are thick and 
waxy, and the stems are fat and slightly suc-
culent, which might lead you to think these 
are dought-tolerant plants, but you would be 
wrong. These tropical beauties are not adapted 
to arid environments.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light from an east 
window or even the low light of a north window 
suits these plants perfectly. They also do very 
well under artificial lights.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 0.5 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant regularly with a spray 
bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a hand-
held mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply at half-strength every two weeks through 
the growing season, once a month in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. These plants are 
small so keep the pots small as well. Putting 
them in too large a pot will lead to root rot.
PROPAGATION. Peperomia obtusifolia is easy to 
propagate from stem tip cuttings in spring. Prop-
agate P. argyreia and P. caperata by leaf cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for edema (page 247), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Piggy-back plant

Most good houseplants are tropical, adapted to 
warm nighttime temperatures and rainforest 
conditions. Piggy-back plant (Tolmiea menziesii) 
is an exception. The maritime climate from 
which this native Pacific Northwesterner hails 
is very different from the typical home environ-
ment, and yet piggy-back plant holds its own as a 
houseplant. Its tiny inconspicuous flowers are 
reddish brown and carried on 1- to 2-foot-tall 
stems. The softly hairy foliage is roughly heart- 
shaped with scalloped and lobed edges. The 
leaves, 2 to 5 inches long, are borne on hairy leaf 

Piggy-back plant (aka hedge nettle, thousand mothers, 
youth-on-age).

Piggy-back plant      107

stalks that likewise vary in length. Leaf color is 
typically bright medium green, but variegated 
cultivars are available. Piggy-back plant has the 
distinctive habit of growing new baby plantlets 
where the leaf stalk joins the leaf blade. As these 
baby plantlets grow larger, they form little 
plantlets of their own, and the result is a 
cascading chain of foliage. These long chains of 
leaves, with plantlets attached, are especially 
attractive dangling from a hanging basket.

Some people are sensitive to the hairs on 

the leaves and stems of piggy-back plant, 
from which they can acquire a contact der-
matitis. If you think you might be sensitive, 
or just want to be cautious, wear gloves when 
handling this plant.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Filtered light with no direct sun 
suits piggy-back plant best.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant occasionally with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply every two weeks through the growing 
season and monthly in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 

108      Herbaceous Perennials

shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Piggy-back plant is easy to 
propagate from leaf cuttings and by division 
of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246) and spider 
mites (page 263).

Poinsettia

A major contributor to poinsettia’s popular-
ity is the fact that it can be brought into bloom 
at will by growers simply by manipulating day-
length. This, in combination with flaming red 
“flowers” and deep green leaves, more or less 
predestined poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcher-
rima) to become wildly popular during the win-
ter holiday season. It is ubiquitous across North 
America in homes, offices, public buildings, and 
churches every December. So popular, in fact, 
that 75 million poinsettias are sold every year. 
The actual flowers of poinsettia are inconspic-
uous, grouped into little yellow clusters and 
hidden in the heart of the plant. But they are 
surrounded by the large brilliant scarlet bracts 
(modified leaves) that make the plants irresist-
ible at Christmas time.

Poinsettias are tropical evergreen shrubs 

with slender woody stems that can bloom when 
only 12 to 18 inches tall. They get larger over the 
years, though, if given the chance and a suitably 
large pot. A 3-foot-wide container can hold a 
7-foot-tall specimen. Poinsettia leaves and bracts 
are 3 to 6.5 inches long and coarsely serrate 
along the margins with soft, broad teeth. When 
the plant is in bloom, the bracts in the upper 
part of the plant, the ones surrounding the  
tiny flowers, turn bright red, pink, white— 
any color other than dark green. Recent years 

flowering; and the night cannot be interrupted 
by flashlights, streetlights, or headlights. After 
ten weeks of these long nights, the plant flowers.
A lot of people are concerned about the poin-

settia being poisonous to pets, but the truth is 
that it’s only mildly toxic and not nearly as much 
of a concern as other seasonal threats, like mis-
tletoe or holly.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Poinsettia prefers bright 
filtered light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 0.5 inch.
HUMIDITY. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either a 
powder or liquid formulation, where the second 
number (phosphorus) is higher than the other 
two to promote flowering. Apply once a month.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Poinsettia is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings taken in July and grown 
in shade.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), whiteflies (page 
265), and root rot (page 272).

Poinsettia      109

Poinsettia (aka Christmas star, lobsterplant, 
Mexican flameleaf).

have seen the development of varieties with 
cream, orange, pale green, and marbled/
variegated bracts.

For most people, the poinsettia is a temporary 

houseplant that either ends up on the compost 
pile after the holidays or is planted out in the 
garden, if they happen to live in a frost-free area. 
But many keep poinsettias indoors year-round 
and bring them into bloom regularly. To initi-
ate bloom at any time through the year, put your 
poinsettia into a light-free space, like a closet, 
every night from 5pm to 7am the next morn-
ing. Then bring it into light during the day-
time. Poinsettias need 14-hour nights to initiate 

Polka dot plant

The short-lived polka dot plant (Hypoestes phyl-
lostachya) is grown for its unusual and often 
colorful foliage. The 2-inch-long leaves look 
almost as though they’ve been painted with 
white, red, or (the favorite) pink enamel, shot 
through with green veins and random green 
polka dots. As a houseplant, polka dot plant will 
perform well for you for the first year, growing 
into a loose-limbed little bush about 2 feet high, 
but in its second year it may try to flower and, 
if it does, it will deteriorate rapidly and either 
go dormant or die. Since tighter, bushier plants 
have more leaves, pinch out the tips of stems 
that grow more than 10 inches long to encour-
age side branching and bushiness. More foli-
age means a more colorful and dramatic impact. 
The inconspicuous lavender flowers are borne 
on 6-inch-long spikes. Pinching off these flower 
spikes keeps the plant going for a while, but it 
seems that once flowering has been initiated the 
plant is pretty much on a downhill slide.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. This plant requires bright indirect 
light or filtered direct sun to develop the most 
colorful foliage. If it doesn’t get enough light 
the leaves gradually turn green; if it’s getting too 
much light the leaf tips will turn brown.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.

110      Herbaceous Perennials

Polka dot plant (aka freckle face, measles plant, pink 
polka-dot plant).

POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, general- 
purpose potting soil that incorporates organic 
fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other beneficial 
microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic fer-
tilizer. Apply at half-strength every two weeks.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, shift 
it to a container with a diameter 4 inches larger 
than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Polka dot plant is easy to propa-
gate from seed. Stem cuttings will eventually take 
root but are very slow to develop.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves changing color (page 249), 
whiteflies (page 265), and powdery mildew (page 
272).

Prayer plant (aka maranta, herringbone plant, rabbit’s foot).

Prayer plant

Prayer plant (Maranta leuconeura) is a low- 
growing, rhizomatous houseplant prized for its 
beautiful evergreen foliage. Whenever it gets 
dark, it rolls its striking leaves up into cylinders 
and holds them erect, as if in evening prayer. 
In the morning, or when you turn the lights 
on, the leaves unroll and lie flat again. You can 
watch prayer plant do its leaf-rolling trick by 
turning lights on and off, or moving the plant 
from light to dark and back to light again. This 
is even more fun than opening and closing the 
fridge door with your toddler to watch the light 
go on and off. The 5-inch-long, oval leaves are 

bizarrely marked with contrasting colors. Some 
cultivars (var. kerchoviana) have splotches of 
dark green that alternate down the midrib, sug-
gesting rabbit tracks. Others (var. erythroneura) 
have patches of bright yellow green on a dark 
green background and bright red veins that 
curve gracefully from the midrib to the mar-
gins. Prayer plant grows to 12 inches tall and 
16 inches wide and rarely flowers in the house, 
but this is no great loss. The small, white, and 
tubular flowers pale into insignificance beside 
the magnificent foliage. Prayer plant slows its 
growth in winter and takes a rest. Give it less 
water and fertilizer during its resting period. It 
will resume vigorous growth in the spring.

Prayer plant      111

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Filtered light from an east win-
dow is best. Prayer plant also does well with low 
light from a north window and artificial light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the first number (nitrogen) is higher 
than the other two. Apply at half-strength every 
two weeks through the growing season, once a 
month in winter.
POTTING. Re-pot annually in spring. Prayer plant 
likes a lot of air around its roots so do not pack 
the potting medium tightly around it. When 
your plant needs up-potting, shift it to a con-
tainer with a diameter 2 inches larger than the 
current pot.
PROPAGATION. Prayer plant is easy to propagate 
by division; however, it will sulk for a few weeks 
after this operation.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246) and spider 
mites (page 263).

112      Herbaceous Perennials

Purple  
passion plant

Purple passion plant is a hybrid of two closely 
related species, Gynura aurantiaca and G. pro-
cumbens. Velvety soft amethyst-purple hairs 
cover the new growth and the dark green stems, 
and when the sun lights them up, this house-
plant really stands out. It’s a fast-growing ever-
green to 20 inches tall and wide with weak 
stems that are woody at the base. As plants age 
the stems tend to sprawl and then trail. Some 
forms (often sold as G. aurantiaca) are more or 
less erect, especially in young plants. Others 
(often sold as G. procumbens) are vine-like with 
stems that hang down or trail, making them suit-
able for hanging baskets. Both forms are easy to 
grow. Coarsely toothed leaves to 8 inches long 
are dark green and somewhat egg-shaped with a 
broad base and a pointy tip. A white-variegated 

Purple passion plant (aka velvet plant, purple velvet plant, 
royal velvet plant, purple passion vine).

cultivar is available; purple hairs give its white 
patches and blotches a pinkish purple cast.
Once your purple passion plant begins to 
bloom, it has reached maturity. Deep orange- 
yellow flowers perfectly complement the plant’s 
overall psychedelic purple look, but they are 
small, and they smell so bad that most people 
cut them off. After the plant blooms it will start 
to decline. Be sure to start new plants from stem 
tip cuttings before the onset of flowering. When 
your new and vigorously growing cuttings are 
established you can transfer your old plant to 
the compost heap.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light through 
sheer curtains is perfect for this plant. The 
purple effect tends to fade in too much shade. 
If this happens, try giving the plant brighter 
light, but avoid full sun. Hot direct light will 
scorch the leaves.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 
1 inch. If the plant ever gets too dry it will wilt 
rapidly. Fortunately it recovers quickly when 
adequately rehydrated.
HUMIDITY. Avoid misting this plant. Its hairy 
leaves stay too wet too long when misted and 
present an open invitation to disease. Put the 
pot in a saucer or tray of water, making sure 
the bottom of the pot never sits directly in 
the water by raising the pot up on pot feet 
or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.

FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply as directed on the package.
POTTING. When this fast-growing plant needs 
up-potting, shift it to a container with a diam-
eter 4 inches larger than the current pot. Re-pot 
in spring, but if plants are more than two years 
old propagate new ones from stem tip cuttings.
PROPAGATION. Purple passion plant is easy to 
propagate from stem tip cuttings. Take your cut-
tings when your plant is mature but before it 
starts to flower.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and gray mold (page 268).

Rex begonia

Begonia rex has been used extensively in hybrid-
ization with B. masoniana and other species and 
hybrids to give rise to the Rex Cultorum group 
of complex hybrids, known collectively as rex 
begonias. Rex begonias, with their showstop-
ping foliage, are the kings of the begonia world. 
Shimmering colors reminiscent of fine ceram-
ics on spiral-shaped leaves to 6 inches long are 
the hallmarks of these plants. Stunning patterns, 
ribbons, and marks of iridescent silver, glit-
tering rose, and dark green and burgundy vel-
vet create infinite variations from one plant to 
the next. Some have leaves with smooth mar-
gins and some have toothed, fringed, or lobed 
leaves. As with all begonias, leaves are asym-
metrical. One side of the leaf is much longer and 
wider than the other side, which causes them 
to grow in a spiral or coil. The same phenome-
non gives rise to the attractive but more sedate 
leaf shape of the angel wing begonias. Rex bego-
nias kick it up a notch, however, and many have 

Rex begonia      113

Rex begonia (aka fancy-leafed begonia, iron cross, king begonia, painted-leaf begonia).

tightly coiled foliage. No two plants are alike, 
and most garden centers and nurseries offer a 
wealth of choices.

Flowers of rex begonias are pretty enough, 

but they’re small, pink, and completely upstaged 
by the dramatic leaves. These evergreen peren-
nials generally spread to 2 feet but are only half 
as tall, short enough to do well under artificial 
lights. Some go dormant in winter and will even 
drop their leaves. If your plant does this, let it 
rest. Don’t let it dry out completely, but water it 
much less frequently and don’t fertilize it when 
it’s dormant. In the spring it will resume active 
growth and be drop-dead gorgeous once again.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Light from an east window 

114      Herbaceous Perennials

filtered by sheer curtains is ideal. Low light from 
a north window also works well, as does artifi-
cial light. Do not put rex begonias in direct hot 
sun because it will burn the foliage.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 
1 inch. Be careful not to overwater; these plants 
are susceptible to root rot.
HUMIDITY. Rex begonias want high humidity, but 
don’t mist them because it encourages powdery 
mildew and gray mold. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, well- 
drained, general-purpose potting soil that incor-
porates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes.

FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the first number (nitrogen) is higher 
than the other two. Apply at half-strength every 
two weeks.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Use shallow pots for 
these beauties.
PROPAGATION. Rex begonias are easy to prop-
agate by division of the rhizome and from 
leaf cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and powdery mildew (page 272).

Selloum

Selloum (Philodendron bipinnatifidum), like 
other Philodendron species, is an excellent 
houseplant, well adapted to the reduced light 
and warm nights of our homes. You’ll also fre-
quently find this plant in shopping malls, hos-
pitals, and lobbies of public buildings, where 
it creates a tropical jungle ambiance. It’s a big, 
bold plant, 3 to 6 feet tall and wide at maturity, 
so it commands considerable real estate in pri-
vate homes and offices. Newer, more dwarf cul-
tivars fit nicely into smaller spaces and are just 
as handsome as their big brothers.

Over time selloum develops a stout, short 
trunk, 3 to 4 feet tall and 4 to 5 inches thick. 
The trunk is crowned by huge leaves at the apex 
and develops a large number of rope-like aer-
ial roots that sprout from the side of the trunk 
and snake their way down to the pot. The trunk 
is marked with an attractive characteristic pat-
tern of “eye-drop” leaf scars, left by leaves that 
were discarded as the plant grew. The leaves 
are somewhat arrowhead-shaped, wide at the 
base and pointed at the tip, but are fringed with 

finger-like lobes along both sides. The lobing of 
the edges of the leaves is what gives the plant its 
airy, lace-like quality. The larger cultivars have 
leaf blades as much as 3 feet long and 2 feet wide 
on 18-inch stalks. Smaller cultivars have much 
smaller leaves with 1-foot-long blades on 8-inch 
stalks. It is very rare for this plant to flower 
indoors. The inflorescence is a small, pale green, 
funnel-shaped spathe surrounding a finger-like 
spadix covered with minute flowers. Female 
flowers near the base of the spadix form red ber-
ries after fertilization.

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, caus-
ing painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If 
you suspect a person or pet has ingested parts 
of this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits seri-
ous symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call 
your local emergency hotline, poison control 
center, or vet.

Selloum (aka anchor philodendron, lacy-tree philodendron, 
tree philodendron).

Selloum      115

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Selloum tolerates full sun but 
does best with a half-day of morning sun from 
an east window. It also does very well with 
bright filtered light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant frequently with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month year-round.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Re-pot in spring and 
place the aerial roots in the potting medium.
PROPAGATION. Selloum can be propagated by 
potting up the pups that appear at the plant’s 
base. Or decapitate the plant, making sure the 
leafy top has plenty of aerial roots to support 
it. The headless base of the plant will sprout 
new shoots.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257), aphids 
(page 260), and root rot (page 272).

116      Herbaceous Perennials

Spider plant

Spider plant (Chlorophytum comosum) is a 
perennial favorite, among the most common, 
easy-to-grow, and undemanding of all house-
plants. You frequently see it in hanging baskets, 
but it does just as well in pots on a table or desk. 
Numerous strap-shaped evergreen leaves, to 18 
inches long and 1 inch wide, arise from thick, 
fleshy, tuberous roots, forming a clump to 2 feet 
tall and wide. Starry 1-inch-wide white flow-
ers are carried on string-like stems that emerge 
from the center of the crown of grass-like foli-
age. The slender flowering stems continue to 
grow out and down, eventually developing lit-
tle plantlets at their tips. Often the little plant-
lets produce stems with still more plantlets, so 
that the mother plant is characteristically sur-
rounded by a cloud of dangling babies on chains 
as long as 3 feet. Plants less than one year old 
are too young to flower, but they’ll flower in 
their second year. Flowering is initiated in 
the autumn, when days are short and nights 
are long. If your plant is in a room where you 
have the lights on at night, the plant’s flowering 
response will be delayed or even aborted.

‘Vittatum’ has a broad white stripe down the 

middle of each leaf bordered on both sides by 
dark green ribbons. ‘Variegatum’ reverses that 
pattern with a broad green stripe down the mid-
dle of the leaf bordered on both sides by white. 
These white-striped forms are almost the only 
kinds available these days.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Spider plant does really well 
with bright filtered light. It tolerates a couple 
of hours of full sun from an east window, but 

is inside a hanging basket and there is a saucer 
inside the basket under the pot, make sure the 
plant is not sitting in water by, again, raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply at half-strength every two weeks through 
the growing season, once a month in winter.
POTTING. When your young plant needs up- 
potting, shift it in spring to a container with a 
diameter 4 inches larger than the current pot. 
Handle the roots carefully; they are easily bro-
ken. Mature plants need re-potting only every 
two years.
PROPAGATION. Spider plant is easy to propagate 
by division or by layering the flowering stems.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves turning brown (page 251), spi-
der mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Streptocarpus

Gorgeous large flowers hover on wiry stems 
above a flat rosette of hairy, wrinkled leaves in 
these unusual plants. Many of these tropical 
evergreens are in cultivation, but the primary 
ones grown as houseplants are Streptocarpus 
×hybridus. These complex hybrids derive from  
S. dunnii, S. johannis, and the miniature S. 
cyanandrus, among others. Plants are generally 
12 to 18 inches tall and wide, including flower 
stalks, but some are tiny little miniatures, 3 to 6 
inches tall and wide. Flower size and leaf size 
varies enormously, too, depending on which 
species occur in the plant’s background. Rarely 

Streptocarpus      117

Spider plant (aka airplane plant, hen-and-chickens, 
ribbon plant).

the leaves will burn if they’re exposed to too 
much sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch. This plant is sensitive to fluoride 
so use bottled or distilled water if your tap 
water is fluoridated. If the leaf tips turn brown 
and you can rule out sunburn, try switching 
your water source.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant occasionally with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. If your plant’s pot 

More typical are flowers in blue, purple, red, 
pink, and white. Most have contrasting darker 
lines, stripes, and spots on the lower three lobes. 
Some are basically white with intense color on 
the edges of the lobes—a picotee effect. The 
flowers are held horizontally, facing away from 
the center of the plant. Flower stems originate 
from the base of the leaves. Another strange 
habit: many streptocarpus shed the upper half 
of a leaf in winter. The basal half of the leaf 
begins new growth in the spring. Most com-
monly available streps will have several hairy 
tongue-shaped leaves that grow close to the 
ground in a rosette; however, some kinds have 
only one leaf that grows continuously.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright light filtered by sheer cur-
tains is best. Streptocarpus also does very well 
under artificial lights. The plants will tolerate a 
couple of hours of direct sun from an east win-
dow in the cool of the morning. But they suf-
fer if they get too hot, and the leaves will burn if 
they’re exposed to more than a couple of hours 
of full sunlight.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F. This plant likes cooler tempera-
tures than other gesneriads.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches. 
Try to water just before the plant wilts but don’t 
let it completely dry out. If you misjudge and the 
plant wilts it will rehydrate quickly and won’t 
skip a beat once you have watered it. These 
plants do not tolerate soil that is too wet so keep 
them on the dry side.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant twice a week with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 

Streptocarpus (aka Cape primrose).

are streptocarpus offered in big box stores and 
supermarkets. You’ll sometimes see them in 
local, independent garden centers, but if you 
look for them on the Internet you’ll find a lot of 
reliable suppliers.

The velvety flowers of most modern 

hybrids are 3 inches long, and 2 inches wide 
at the mouth. Five petals fuse together into 
a trumpet-like tube that flares out into five 
lobes at the tip. The two upper lobes are a little 
smaller than the three lower lobes. The newest 
and harder to find colors are orange and yellow. 

118      Herbaceous Perennials

String of pearls (aka string of beads).

tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil 
that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes. 
Good drainage is key for streptocarpus. You 
can always add extra perlite to your potting 
medium to improve drainage if you have any 
doubts about it. Adding 1 part perlite to 3 parts 
general-purpose organic potting soil makes a 
good mix for this plant.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the second number (phosphorus) is 
higher than the other two to promote flowering. 
Apply at half-strength every two weeks through 
the growing season, once a month in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 

shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Avoid deep pots for 
this shallow-rooted plant.
PROPAGATION. Streptocarpus is easy to propagate 
from leaf cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257), mealy-
bugs (page 262), and gray mold (page 268).

String of pearls

String of pearls (Senecio rowleyanus) is a strange 
little desert succulent, a botanical oddity that 
looks exactly like its common name, except that 
the pearls are green—like a string of peas. Long, 
trailing, string-like stems hang down around 
all sides of the pot and it’s the leaves, swollen, 

String of pearls      119

fleshy, and pea-like, that form the beads. 
Because of its trailing habit this plant is often 
grown in hanging baskets. String of pearl flow-
ers are pale yellowish white, really not much to 
look at. But they have a surprisingly strong and 
delightful fragrance of cinnamon and allspice, 
with a little clove mixed in. The spaghetti-like 
stems lie flat on the ground and grow roots from 
the nodes so the plant eventually forms a mat to 
3 feet wide. These same stems can get 3 feet long 
when allowed to cascade down all around the 
edges of the plant’s container.

Internet rumor has it that the fleshy, bead- 
like leaves are poisonous to people and pets, 
but no authoritative scientific study to sup-
port this idea is ever cited. Both the ASPCA and 
the Humane Society now consider this plant 
non-toxic.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Full sun is ideal for this succulent, 
but it also tolerates bright filtered light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F, during the growing season. 
In winter give it a cool rest at 55 to 65°F.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. This plant tolerates dry air very well.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, well- 
drained, cactus potting medium that incorpo-
rates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes. You can make your 
own cactus mix by adding 1 part sand to 3 parts 
general-purpose organic potting soil.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply at half-strength once a month through 
the growing season. You probably don’t need 
to fertilize in winter when the plant is not 
actively growing.

120      Herbaceous Perennials

POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. This plant is 
shallow-rooted so use a shallow pot.
PROPAGATION. String of pearls is easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for mealybugs (page 262) and root rot 
(page 272).

Zanzibar gem

In many ways Zanzibar gem (Zamioculcas zami-
ifolia) is the ideal houseplant. It’s very slow 
growing, tough, easy to grow, low maintenance, 
and resistant to insect attack. In addition to all 
its maintenance merits, the plant is really pretty. 
This is an evergreen foliage plant, not grown for 
its flowers. Plants grow to 2 feet tall and wide 
from a thick, fleshy, underground, somewhat 
potato-like rhizome that stores water. A crown 
of glossy, thick, leathery, fern-like leaves arches 
gracefully out of the pot from the soil level. 
Each 2-foot-long leaf is pinnately compound 
(feather-like), with six or eight pairs of smooth, 
shiny, dark green leaflets. The leaves look and 
feel almost artificial they’re so sturdy. But they 
give the plant an artistic, sculptural quality that 
enhances any decor. It is very rare for Zanzi-
bar gem to flower indoors. If it does you’ll see a 
small, yellow-green, funnel-shaped spathe sur-
rounding a finger-like spadix covered with min-
ute flowers. The inflorescence seems to sprout 
directly out of the soil at the base of the plant. 
Female flowers near the base of the spadix form 
berries after fertilization.

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 

soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, causing 
painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If you 
suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits serious 
symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control center, 
or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Zanzibar gem performs best in 
bright filtered light. It tolerates low light from 
a north window, but it is more lush in brighter 
light. It will not tolerate direct sun, which will 
burn the foliage.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. This plant tolerates dry air very well.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, cactus potting medium that incor-
porates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes. You can make your 
own cactus mix by adding 1 part sand to 3 parts 
general-purpose organic potting soil.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply at half-strength every three months.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Zanzibar gem is easy to propagate 
by division and from leaf cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257) and root 
rot (page 272).

Zanzibar gem      121

Zanzibar gem (aka aroid palm, eternity plant, fat boy, 
zz plant).

Vines and 
Vine-like Plants

122      Vines and Vine-like Plants

Arrowhead plant

One of the easiest, lowest maintenance house-
plants of all, arrowhead plant (Syngonium podo-
phyllum) has been cultivated indoors for a 
long time. It is especially nice in hanging bas-
kets, which show its gracefully draping vin-
ing stems to best advantage. Alternatively, it 
can be attached to upright moss-covered stakes 
and allowed to clamber all the way to the ceil-
ing and back. Modern cultivars, however, have 
been selected for shorter, less rambunctious 
habits and are much more compact and less 
vine-like. Its leaves, which change shape and 
size as plants mature, are the primary reason 
for growing arrowhead plant. The plants most 
often seen for sale are youngsters with juve-
nile foliage to 6 inches long and 3 inches wide; 
these baby leaves are shaped like arrowheads 
and are simple, not compound. Mature leaves 
are palmately compound with five to 11 leaflets 
and grow to 15 inches long and 12 inches wide. 
The three largest leaflets point down and the 
two smaller leaflets point up. Most of the com-
monly available cultivars have foliage with vary-
ing degrees of white variegation. Some offer 
bright green leaves with crisp white veins; oth-
ers have white patches covering most of the leaf. 
Newer cultivars add pinkish or bronze tones 
to the color range. It is very rare for arrow-
head plant to flower indoors. The inflorescence 
is a scoop-shaped, greenish white spathe sur-
rounding a finger-like spadix covered with very 
tiny flowers that look like little greenish white 
bumps. Female flowers near the base of the spa-
dix form brown-black berries after fertilization.
 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, causing 
painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If you 

Arrowhead plant (aka African evergreen, American ever-
green, arrowhead philodendron, arrowhead vine, goosefoot 
plant, nephthytis, syngonium).

suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits serious 
symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control center, 
or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light is best for 
arrowhead plant. It does not like full sun and 
too much light causes the leaves to lose color, 
becoming pale and limp.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 

Arrowhead plant      123

of 1 inch. Strive to keep the soil slightly moist 
at all times but don’t overwater. Water less 
often in winter.
HUMIDITY. This plant needs regular misting to 
raise humidity. Use a spray bottle of water on a 
mist setting, or use a handheld mister. Put the 
pot in a saucer or tray of water, making sure the 
bottom of the pot never sits directly in the water 
by raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply at half-strength every two weeks through 
the growing season, once a month in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Re-pot in spring, but 
only every two years or so.
PROPAGATION. Arrowhead plant is easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings or by layering.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves changing color (page 249) and 
scale insects (page 262).

Blushing  
and heartleaf 
philodendrons

Philodendrons are superstars of the houseplant 
world. They’ve been popular for many decades, 
and deservedly so, because they’re perfectly 
comfortable living in the same environments 
as humans. Not only are they lovely to look at, 

124      Vines and Vine-like Plants

Blushing philodendron (aka climbing philodendron).

they tolerate being moved with aplomb. You can 
relocate them from room to room or take them 
outside for a summer vacation without fear-
ing they’ll have a hissy fit and throw all their 
leaves on the ground. Two basic kinds of philo-
dendrons, mounding and vining, are commonly 
grown as houseplants. The two discussed here 
have a vining habit.

Blushing philodendron (Philodendron eru-

bescens) is a robust vine with waxy arrow-
head-shaped leaves, up to 16 inches long and 8 
inches wide, on bright red stems. In some cul-
tivars, leaves are burgundy or red when young, 
turning greener as they mature. Blushing philo-
dendron doesn’t have tendrils, and it doesn’t 
twine, so the stems need to be fastened to a 
sturdy stake or moss-covered pole for support. 
Once you have tied it to the pole, it will slowly 
wrap its aerial roots around the support. After 
several years of growth, it forms a mound or col-
umn 6 feet tall and 3 to 4 feet wide.

covered with tiny flowers. Female flowers near 
the base of the spadix form berries after fertil-
ization. In blushing philodendron the spathe is 
deep red and the flowers are fragrant. Heartleaf 
philodendron has white spathes.

 These plants are toxic to people and pets 
and should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. 
Plant tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, 
and if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate 
the soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, caus-
ing painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If 
you suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
these plants, or if a person or pet exhibits seri-
ous symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call 
your local emergency hotline, poison control 
center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light, artificial 
light, or low light works well for these very for-
giving plants.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant frequently with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a 
handheld mister. Not only will misting raise the 
humidity, it will also moisten the pole and stim-
ulate the aerial roots. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 

Blushing and heartleaf philodendrons       125

Heartleaf philodendron.

Heartleaf philodendron (Philodendron hed-

eraceum var. oxycardium) is more finely tex-
tured and smaller than blushing philodendron. 
The 2- to 4-inch, rounded, heart-shaped leaves 
are borne on slender green stems that are lax 
and trailing. Cultivars with variegated leaves are 
available. Heartleaf philodendron does very well 
in a hanging basket or on a high shelf where its 
flexible stems can dangle down all around the 
container. The stems can also be fastened to a 
trellis or pole, easily climbing to 8 feet or more. 
Like blushing philodendron, heartleaf does not 
have tendrils and does not twine, so you have to 
tie it to the support. Once fastened, it will slowly 
attach itself to the support via its aerial rootlets.

It is very rare for these plants to flower 

indoors. The inflorescence is a small, scoop- 
shaped spathe surrounding a finger-like spadix 

a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son, every other month in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Re-pot in spring or 
early summer every two years.
PROPAGATION. These philodendrons are easy to 
propagate from stem tip cuttings or by layering.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257), aphids 
(page 260), and root rot (page 272).

Creeping fig

Creeping fig (Ficus pumila) is a modest little 
woody evergreen vine that forms tiny roots all 
along its stems. Vigorous and fast-growing, it is 
perfectly capable of engulfing stone walls and 
covering houses in mild-winter regions (zones 
9 through 11). As a houseplant, it will cover the 
pot’s surface, crawl over the rim, and climb 
down its sides. Although it sounds like the blob 
that ate Chicago, this pretty tiny-leaved thing 
really is worthy of a place in any home. And 
besides, it’s very easy to grow. It’s a true fig, but 
the extremely inconspicuous flowers require 
pollination by an equally small wasp in order 
to make fruit. So don’t expect any figs when it’s 
grown indoors. The reason to grow this vine is 
for its beautiful little leaves. New leaves are only 
1 inch long, heart-shaped, and reddish bronze 
at first, maturing to a longer and more leath-
ery glossy, bright green. Cultivars offer white-
variegated leaves, oak-leaf-shaped leaves, and 
ivy-shaped leaves. You’ll need to prune this vig-
orous plant, whether its grown in a hanging bas-
ket, on a topiary form, or in an ordinary pot, 
to keep its size manageable. Happily, creeping 

126      Vines and Vine-like Plants

fig tolerates pruning with aplomb. Prune it in 
spring and be aware that the stems have milky 
white sap, like all figs, which dries to rubber and 
sticks to your tools. Wipe your tools, and hands, 
with a damp cloth before the sap dries.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. This plant does well with bright 
filtered light. It does not like full sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Creeping fig does well with average 
room humidity.

Creeping fig (aka climbing fig, creeping ficus, creeping 
rubber plant).

POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Creeping fig is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves turning brown (page 251) and 
aphids (page 260).

Grape ivy (aka Venezuela treebine).

Grape ivy

Grape ivy (Cissus alata) is a tropical evergreen 
vine that climbs by means of tendrils. Indoors, 
in a pot, it can be kept to a manageable 2 feet 
tall with annual pruning in spring. Two other 
species, begonia vine (C. discolor) and kanga-
roo vine (C. antarctica), are also frequently seen 
as houseplants. All three are in the same fam-
ily as the cultivated grape, genus Vitis. Flow-
ers are tiny, inconspicuous, greenish, and borne 
in clusters like the flowers of grapes. They are 
so underwhelming you’d probably never notice 
them if your plant ever did flower, something 
it rarely does indoors. Because they are vines 
their stems are long and flexible, and they don’t 
stand erect on their own. In order to grow tall 
they need something to climb on like trellises or 
bamboo stakes. Their tendrils coil around and 
hold tight to these supports and allow them to 
gain height to 10 feet or more. Otherwise, with-
out a support of some kind, the stems hang 
gracefully down around the sides of the pot 
and are particularly attractive in hanging bas-
kets. When young the stems of grape ivy and 
kangaroo vine are clothed in reddish brown 
fuzz that gradually disappears as the stems 
mature. The stems of begonia vine are smooth, 
not fuzzy.

Grape ivy and kangaroo vine have glossy, 

dark green, compound leaves with three leaflets. 
The individual leaflets are diamond-shaped and 
have coarse teeth around the edges. The upper 
surface of the mature leaflet is glossy and dark 
green while the undersurface has silky brown 
hair. Young leaves, like the stems, are clothed in 
brownish fuzz that disappears from the upper 
surface as the leaves age.

In begonia vine, the leaves are simple (not 
compound) and velvety (not glossy), and the 
leaf shape is a long, drawn-out, pointed heart. 
But it’s the color that’s the most dramatic 

Grape ivy      127

difference. These leaves are painted burgundy 
over green with a herringbone pattern of shiny 
silver splashes between the veins. The col-
ors are brightest and most dramatic in new, 
young leaves, tending to fade somewhat as the 
leaves mature. Underneath, the leaves are bright 
purple-red. The stems and tendrils are red too, 
adding another color note to the plant. Begonia 
vine is, however, much more fussy to grow than 
either grape ivy or kangaroo vine. It demands 
higher humidity and warmer, more tropical tem-
peratures than its cousins.

You can keep all these vines smaller and 

bushier by pinching out the growing tips and 
forcing side branches to grow out. Another way 
to accomplish the same thing is to take stem tip 
cuttings and propagate more plants yourself.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Grape ivy, kangaroo vine, and 
begonia vine grow well with bright filtered light 
from an east window, or under artificial lights.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. In winter grow grape ivy 
and kangaroo vine five degrees cooler, day and 
night. Begonia vine appreciates temperatures 
five degrees warmer in all seasons.
AMPLE WATER. During the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 inch. Water 
less often in winter by waiting till the potting 
medium is dry to a depth of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. All three vines really like high humid-
ity. Mist your plant daily with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. Group other houseplants under and around 
your hanging baskets to raise the humidity. If 
your plant is not in a hanging basket, put the 
pot in a saucer or tray of water, making sure the 

128      Vines and Vine-like Plants

bottom of the pot never sits directly in the water 
by raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, well- 
drained, general-purpose potting soil that incor-
porates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot or re-pot in 
early summer and provide a trellis or other sup-
port for the plant to climb. Younger, smaller 
plants always look good in hanging baskets, but 
older, larger specimens do very well in large pots 
set on the floor.
PROPAGATION. All three vines are easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), aphids 
(page 260), and powdery mildew (page 272).

Ivy

Ivy (Hedera helix) can find a safe haven in any 
home, whether potted or rooted in a vase of 
water. It will grow happily in semi-darkness 
for months with zero attention or care. Many 
nurseries and garden centers also carry other 
super easy and equally low maintenance spe-
cies, such as Algerian ivy (H. algeriensis), Irish 
ivy (H. hibernica), Japanese ivy (H. rhombea), 
Persian ivy (H. colchica), Nepal ivy (H. nepalen-
sis), or Russian ivy (H. pastuchovii). Ivy starts 
life as a broadleaf evergreen vine. However, like 
a teenager, it alters its appearance and behavior 
dramatically when it reaches sexual maturity, 
turning itself into a bush and changing its leaf 

Algerian ivy.

Ivy      129

size and shape. Cuttings taken from the bushy 
adult remain shrubby; they’re not capable of 
becoming vine-like again. Cuttings of the juve-
nile vines will remain juvenile for many years, 
probably indefinitely as houseplants indoors. Ivy 
should remain indoors, because it is highly inva-
sive. It is illegal to even sell the wild species in 
Oregon, for example. But the more than 500 cul-
tivars of H. helix are much more mannerly and 
well behaved. So long as they are maintained 
indoors, in their juvenile state, they are unable 
to flower. Thus, they are unable to form black 
berries (beloved by birds—and rats!) and escape 
cultivation through dissemination of their seeds. 
All can, of course, escape by rooting into the soil 
wherever a stem touches the ground, so watch 
your pots on summer vacations out of doors.
People treasure ivy as a houseplant for its 

attractive juvenile leaves. The leaves are glossy, 
dark green, leathery, and palmately lobed like 
a maple leaf. Leaf size varies between culti-
vars, with the normal size being 2 to 4 inches 
across. Small-leaf and miniature-leaf cultivars 
(‘Needlepoint’ and ‘Needlepoint Miniature’, 
for example) have leaves 1 to 2 inches across. 
Leaf shape varies from deeply lobed, to ruf-
fled, arrow-shaped, or divided into leaflets. And 
leaf color varies from the standard glossy dark 
green to variegated with crisp white blotches or 
yellow patches.

 Ivy foliage is poisonous to people and 

pets if it is eaten in large quantities. It can also 
cause severe skin irritation (contact dermati-
tis) if the sap gets on the skin, so keep it in an 
out-of-the-way place. If you think a victim is in 
serious trouble, call your local emergency hot-
line, poison control center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.

130      Vines and Vine-like Plants

MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light serves these 
plants best. Avoid full sun.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant occasionally, espe-
cially in hot weather, with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 
making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply once a month.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Re-pot in spring or 
fall every two years.
PROPAGATION. Ivy is easy to propagate from stem 
tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves changing color (page 249), spi-
der mites (page 263), and leaf spot fungus (page 
269).

Jasmine

The attractive evergreen leaves of jasmine (Jas-
minum polyanthum) are pinnately compound 
(feather-like) with five to seven leaflets that are 
bright green on the upper surface and lighter 
green on the undersurface. Indoors, this robust 

Because it tends toward rampant growth you’ll 
likely want to prune it to keep it under control. 
Do your pruning in spring after flowering is fin-
ished. You can also pinch the stem tips dur-
ing the growing season to encourage bushiness. 
But don’t do any more pruning after late sum-
mer because it will be forming flower buds at 
that time, and you don’t want to accidentally cut 
them off. The blossoming of jasmine is a delight-
ful gift to brighten winter’s gloom and remind 
us that spring is on the way. Dark red to bright 
pink buds give way to clusters of 1-inch-wide, 
trumpet-shaped, pure white, starry flowers in 
February. The flowers are scented, especially at 
night. The fragrance is not as powerful as Ara-
bian jasmine (J. sambac), the one used to flavor 
tea, but is nevertheless strong and very pleas-
ant. Arabian jasmine is also sometimes seen as a 
houseplant but is more finicky than jasmine and 
needs extra warmth and humidity.

Jasmine needs a cold treatment in order to 
set flower buds. Put your plant outdoors in the 
autumn for six weeks prior to your first kill-
ing frost. It will easily tolerate temperatures 
down to 40°F but don’t let it get much colder 
than that. Jasmine also needs long nights. Make 
sure it is not exposed to any artificial light after 
sundown during the autumn cold treatment as 
that will also disrupt the initiation of flowering. 
Before your first frost, bring it back indoors; give 
it cool temperatures and indirect light until it 
flowers again in late winter.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Jasmine wants direct sun through 
the growing season in order to grow well and set 
abundant flower buds. It will tolerate a half-day 
of direct sun from an east window.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, 

Jasmine      131

Jasmine (aka Chinese jasmine, pink jasmine, white jas-
mine, winter jasmine).

twining vine accommodates itself very well to 
a container, wrapping its stems around a sup-
port such as a trellis or bamboo stakes inserted 
into its pot. It will also grow in a hanging basket, 
latching onto the ropes or chains supporting the 
basket and climbing up to the ceiling. In addi-
tion, it lolls gracefully down all around the pot. 

nighttime 55 to 65°F. Cool nighttime tem-
peratures are critical in autumn in order to 
stimulate flowering.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 
inch. Never let the soil dry out completely, but 
avoid soggy, waterlogged soil.
HUMIDITY. Mist jasmine frequently with a spray 
bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a hand-
held mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a humidi-
fier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 

Pothos (aka Australian native monstera, centipede Tonga 
vine, devil’s ivy, golden pothos, hunter’s robe, ivy arum, 
money plant, silver vine, Solomon Islands ivy, taro vine).

132      Vines and Vine-like Plants

incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either a 
powder or liquid formulation, where the second 
number (phosphorus) is higher than the other 
two to promote flowering. Apply at half-strength 
every two weeks through the growing season to 
help set flower buds. Don’t fertilize in winter.
POTTING. Re-pot annually in spring when it’s 
finished flowering and after you’ve pruned it. 
Make sure jasmine has a trellis or bamboo stakes 
to climb. When it needs up-potting, shift it to a 
container with a diameter 4 inches larger than 
the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Jasmine is easy to propagate from 
stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for failure to flower (page 247), mealy-
bugs (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Pothos

Pothos (Epipremnum aureum) is often consid-
ered the easiest and most foolproof of all house-
plants. It has shiny, gold-flecked, heart-shaped 
leaves on trailing stems that get 8 feet long and 
dangle from a hanging basket or a container on 
a high shelf. Most are very sedate, graceful vines 
with leaves 2 to 4 inches across. Fastened to a 
support, pothos can easily cover a lot of terri-
tory. One office specimen in a 12-inch pot had 
stems more than 20 feet long! If your pothos 
gets too rambunctious and outgrows its allot-
ted space, cut the stem tips back by removing up 
to a third of the stem’s length. This will cause 
the remaining stem to branch and make it bush-
ier. Use the severed stem tips as cuttings and 
root them to make new plants. Pothos is one of 
those intriguing aroids that changes leaf size 
and shape dramatically when it’s given a chance 

to climb up a support. It is very rare for pothos 
to flower indoors. If yours flowers you will see 
a small, scoop-shaped spathe surrounding a 
finger-like spadix covered with minute flowers. 
Female flowers near the base of the spadix form 
berries after fertilization. 

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, causing 
painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If you 
suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits serious 
symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control center, 
or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered or artificial light is 
best for pothos. It will tolerate an hour or two of 
direct sun but too much sun will burn the leaves.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist pothos occasionally with a spray 
bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a hand-
held mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 

number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply every two weeks through the growing 
season, once a month in winter.
POTTING. Re-pot annually in spring. When 
pothos needs up-potting, shift it to a con-
tainer with a diameter 2 inches larger than the 
current pot.
PROPAGATION. Pothos is easy to propagate from 
stem tip cuttings or by layering.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves changing color (page 249), 
mealybugs (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Split-leaf 
philodendron

Split-leaf philodendron (Monstera deliciosa) is 
actually a monstera, a cousin of philodendrons. 
The genus name is a reference to the mon-
strous holes and slits in its foliage. Few house-
plants evoke tropical jungles as effectively as 
this one. When you first acquire one it will likely 
be about 2 feet tall with lustrous green leaves 6 
to 8 inches long. However, it does not stay small. 
After several years it will reach 6 to 8 feet tall 
with foot-long leaves. As your split-leaf philo-
dendron grows, and you move it up to larger 
pots, the stems will get thicker and heavier, and 
it will need a sturdy support to climb. Small 
specimens are happy with a bamboo stake or 
a moss-covered pole. Like philodendrons and 
pothos, split-leaf philodendron grows aerial 
roots from its stems, and it will attach itself to 
the support with those roots. If it gets too ram-
bunctious and outgrows its allotted space, cut 
the stem tips back by removing up to a third of 
the stem’s length. This will cause the remain-
ing stem to branch and make it bushier. Use the 

Split-leaf philodendron      133

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, causing 
painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If you 
suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits serious 
symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control cen-
ter, or vet. The crystals are also present in the 
green, unripe fruit and it is not safe to eat until it 
is ripe. Wait until the fruit is fully ripe, aromatic, 
soft, and custardy before you attempt to eat it.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light with no 
direct sun suits split-leaf philodendron well.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your split-leaf philodendron 
occasionally with a spray bottle of water on a 
mist setting, or use a handheld mister. Put the 
pot in a saucer or tray of water, making sure the 
bottom of the pot never sits directly in the water 
by raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply every two weeks during the growing sea-
son, once a month in winter.
POTTING. When your split-leaf philodendron 

Split-leaf philodendron (aka ceriman, cheese plant, fruit 
salad plant, Mexican breadfruit, monster fruit, monstera, 
Swiss cheese plant, windowleaf).

severed stem tips as cuttings and root them to 
make new plants. It is very rare for this plant to 
flower indoors, but in the wild, the inflorescence 
is a small, creamy white, scoop-shaped spathe 
surrounding a finger-like spadix covered with 
minute flowers. When fully ripe, the banana-like 
spadix is indeed “deliciosa”—it is edible and 
tastes like pineapple.

134      Vines and Vine-like Plants

needs up-potting, shift it to a container with a 
diameter 4 inches larger than the current pot. As 
it grows it will need a very heavy pot to keep it 
from toppling over.
PROPAGATION. Split-leaf philodendron is easy 
to propagate from stem tip cuttings or by air 
layering.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Swedish ivy

Swedish ivy (Plectranthus verticillatus) is neither 
Swedish nor an ivy. It comes to us from south-
ern Africa and is a lovely, fast-growing evergreen 
perennial that is very easy to grow as a house-
plant. The plant is only 8 to 12 inches high, but 
its somewhat fleshy and semi-succulent stems 
spread 4 to 6 feet wide and trail as they mature. 
In a hanging basket its long, flexible stems dan-
gle around its planter and are very attractive. 
They are clothed with lush, thick, glossy green 
leaves, 1.5 inches long and wide, with deep pur-
ple undersides. Some cultivars have all green 
leaves and some have leaves variegated in white. 
Flowers are whitish to pale lavender or pink 
with deep lavender freckles and have the typi-
cal two-lipped shape of most of their mint fam-
ily relatives. Individual flowers are small, but 
they’re borne in 8-inch-long upright clusters of 
many flowers. Flowers can appear any time of 
year but show up most frequently in spring or 
summer. Swedish ivy doesn’t climb. It doesn’t 
have tendrils, it doesn’t twine, and it doesn’t 
have aerial rootlets to grab onto a support. Basi-
cally, if you grew it outside in the garden it 
would be a groundcover.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light year-round 
with very little direct sun suits Swedish ivy best. 
It will tolerate a couple of hours of cool morning 
sun, but if leaves look dull and the plant seems 
to droop it’s getting too much light. It will perk 
up in the shade.

(top) Swedish ivy (aka creep-
ing Charlie, money plant, 
Swedish begonia, whorled 
plectranthus).

(above) Swedish ivy, flowers.

Swedish ivy      135

MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist Swedish ivy several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, 
or use a handheld mister. If you have it in a pot 
rather than a hanging basket, put the pot in a 
saucer or tray of water, making sure the bottom 
of the pot never sits directly in the water by rais-
ing the pot up on pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.

FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply every two weeks during the growing sea-
son, once a month in winter.
POTTING. Re-pot annually in spring. When your 
Swedish ivy needs up-potting, shift it to a con-
tainer with a diameter 4 inches larger than the 
current pot.
PROPAGATION. Swedish ivy is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves changing color (page 249), spi-
der mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Wandering Jew

Three different wandering Jews are commonly 
seen as fast-growing, easy, excellent house-
plants, valued for their ability to clean indoor air. 
All three are in the genus Tradescantia (spider-
worts), characterized by three-petaled flowers, 
and all three need the same cultural conditions. 
Like the Israelites who wandered the desert for 
40 years after their exodus from Egypt, these 
plants do, in fact, wander. They are so good at 
wandering that they are ranked as invasive nox-
ious weeds in the U.S. South and in Australia.
Tradescantia fluminensis has 1-inch-wide 
white flowers. Its 1.5- to 2.5-inch-long leaves 
are egg-shaped, flat, green, shiny, smooth, and 
slightly succulent. The soft, hairless, fleshy 
stems are indefinite in length and wander across 
the ground, rooting at the nodes. In a hanging 
basket the green stems and leaves dangle grace-
fully all around the pot. Variegated cultivars are 
available.

Tradescantia pallida ‘Purpurea’ has 

1.5-inch-wide bright pink flowers. Its 4- to 
6-inch-long leaves are V-shaped, pointed, and 

Wandering Jew (aka inch plant, purple heart, purple 
queen, river spiderwort, small-leaf spiderwort, wander-
ing gypsy, wandering sailor, wandering tradescantia, 
wandering Willie), variegated form.

136      Vines and Vine-like Plants

violet-purple. The thick, somewhat succu-
lent stems are also violet-purple and grow 6 to 
9 inches tall. Stems are floppy, spreading to 18 
inches, and trail across the ground, rooting as 
they go. In a hanging basket the plant forms a 
bright purple cascade.

Tradescantia zebrina has 1-inch-wide pur-
ple flowers. Its 2.5-inch-long leaves are flat, 
egg-shaped, and blue-green with two broad sil-
very stripes. The leaves are solid purple on the 
undersides. Plants typically grow about 6 inches 
tall and 2 feet wide and, just like the others, 
they plant themselves as they crawl across the 
ground. In hanging baskets they form a colorful 
display of green, purple, and silver.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of each 
recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light is best for 
Tradescantia fluminensis and T. zebrina. Trad-
escantia pallida ‘Purpurea’ does better and 
will be more brightly colored with a few hours 
of full sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. These plants are somewhat drought 
tolerant and do not need to be misted.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply every two weeks through the growing 
season, once a month in winter.
POTTING. When wandering Jew needs up-potting, 

shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot. After two to three 
years it tends to shed its lower leaves and 
become unsightly. Cut it back heavily to rejuve-
nate it, or start new plants from stem tip cuttings 
and discard the old one.
PROPAGATION. Wandering Jew is easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings and by division.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), aphids 
(page 260), and root rot (page 272).

Wax plant

People have cultivated wax plant (Hoya carnosa) 
for 200 years. That this semi-succulent subtrop-
ical vine so often survives neglect in doctor’s 
offices and dim parlor corners is testament to its 
durability. You will be astonished when it trans-
forms itself by bursting into fragrant bloom, 
even under adverse conditions. Wax plant 
twines up a trellis or other support, reaching 10 
feet in height and 1 to 2 feet in width. Its stems 
twist around in a counterclockwise circle until 
they bump into something. When they touch 
an object they’ll wrap themselves around it and 
corkscrew their way up to the top. Stems are 
clothed in pairs of handsome, dark green leaves 
up to 4 inches long. Leaves are so thick, firm, 
and waxy, they feel almost like plastic. Some cul-
tivars have leaves variegated in creamy white or 
cream with a pink tinge.

The intricate jewel-like flowers seem not to 
belong to the sturdy vine that supports them. 
Each satiny flower, only 0.5 inch in diameter, is 
borne in a tight, crown-like cluster (umbel) of 
ten to 30 flowers. These clusters look like little 
nosegays. Flowers are white to very pale pink or 
dark pink, with a star-shaped red-orange corona 
in the center. Their sweet scent is heavenly. The 

Wax plant      137

MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright light filtered by sheer cur-
tains or a half-day of morning sun from an east 
window provides enough light for wax plant to 
flower well. It will tolerate low light, meaning 
it won’t die, but it won’t flower for you either. 
Avoid hot afternoon summer sun, which will 
scorch the foliage.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Wax plant’s thick, semi-succulent 
leaves tolerate dry air very well, so average home 
humidity is adequate.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the sec-
ond number (phosphorus) is higher than the 
other two to promote flowering. Apply every 
two weeks through the growing season, once a 
month in winter.
POTTING. When wax plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Hoyas have a repu-
tation of blooming more reliably when they are 
slightly rootbound.
PROPAGATION. Wax plant is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings or by layering. This plant 
has milky white sap that dries to rubber and will 
stain clothing and furniture. Use a damp cloth 
to wipe up the sap when you prune wax plant or 
take cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for failure to flower (page 247), mealy-
bugs (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Wax plant (aka Hindu rope plant, honey plant, hoya, porce-
lain flower).

flower clusters are held on spurs (specialized 
short stems). Each spur is long-lived and flow-
ers year after year, so don’t remove them when 
you’re deadheading your plant after flowering 
is finished. The flowers produce a lot of sugary 
sweet nectar to attract pollinators, and excess 
nectar sometimes drips out of the flowers and 
onto the floor. While your plant is developing 
flower buds or is actively blooming don’t move it 
to a new location or try to re-pot it. It will freak 
out and drop all its flower buds.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.

138      Vines and Vine-like Plants

Ferns and 
Fern-like Plants

Wax plant      139

Asparagus fern

Two very different looking houseplants share 
the common name asparagus fern. Neither is 
actually a fern, but both Asparagus aethiopicus 
and A. densiflorus really are asparagus, closely 
related to the popular vegetable. Both are 
low-maintenance, drought-tolerant evergreen 
perennials, with a cascading habit that makes 
them attractive subjects for hanging baskets. 
Their cut stems are often used as long-lasting 
greens in floral arrangements. The stems of A. 
aethiopicus tend to be more loose and floppy, 
cascading out of a hanging basket with the 
branchlets spreading wide. The 1-inch-long and 
0.1-inch-wide needle-like “leaves” (technically, 
modified stems) also spread wide. The stems 

of A. densiflorus are more upright, very tightly 
columnar, like the tail of a fox. The stems have 
very short branchlets with small “leaves” all 
held close together like a bottlebrush. In a hang-
ing basket this species is more stiffly erect, its 
stems arching gracefully out and away from the 
center. Its cultivar ‘Myersii’ has earned the Royal 
Horticultural Society’s Award of Garden Merit.
Asparagus ferns have small greenish white 

flowers. The sexes are borne on separate 
plants, and only female plants make red ber-
ries. Plants are easily rejuvenated by pruning off 
old, decrepit stems at ground level; then they 
make brand new stems from the root system in 
the spring.

 Both ferns are toxic to people and pets and 

should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. If 
someone should eat the berries or foliage, gas-
trointestinal symptoms (diarrhea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain) can result. If you suspect a per-
son or pet has ingested parts of these plants, call 
your local emergency hotline, poison control 
center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light is best for this 
plant. Avoid hot afternoon sun because it causes 
the leaves to turn yellow.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Asparagus ferns have thick, 
fleshy, tuberous roots that store water, so dur-
ing the growing season, water whenever the 
top of the potting medium becomes dry to a 
depth of 1 inch. In winter, cut back on water-
ing and wait till the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches, but don’t let 
it dry out completely.
HUMIDITY. Asparagus fern prefers high humidity. 

Asparagus fern (aka emerald fern, lace fern, Sprenger’s 
asparagus fern).

140      Ferns and Fern-like Plants

slightly rootbound. Re-pot in spring after prun-
ing off old stems to make way for new growth.
PROPAGATION. Asparagus fern is easy to propa-
gate by division. Be sure that each division has 
several of the tuber-like roots.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257), spider 
mites (page 263), and leaf spot fungus (page 
269).

Bird’s nest fern

Bird’s nest fern (Asplenium nidus) is a gorgeous 
true fern, though it doesn’t look like one. Its 
long, strap-shaped leaves sprout directly from a 
very short, mostly underground rhizome. Leaves 
aren’t divided or compound or even ferny. They 
are bright chartreuse-green, like a Granny Smith 
apple, and have a black midrib. Indoors in a pot, 
they’ll easily get 2 feet tall. A dozen or more of 
these big beautiful leaves grow in a rosette from 
the crown at the soil line, arching out and away 
from the center like the spokes of a wheel. The 
overall shape of the plant is like a large basket, 
or a bird’s nest, thus the common name. Leaf 
edges are smooth and, in some cultivars, rip-
pled or undulating. Brown spots (sori) on the 
undersides of the leaves contain the spores by 
which this and all ferns reproduce. Those leaves 
that sporulate gradually turn brown and even-
tually die. The old, dead leaves curl up at the 
base of the plant, and you can just cut them off 
to keep your plant tidy and fresh-looking. Shiny 
new green leaves quickly replace old brown 
decrepit ones.

If you like to give your plants a summer vaca-
tion outdoors, watch this one carefully for snail 
and slug damage. Those creatures love to feast 
on ferns, and one snail can easily and quickly 
disfigure the gorgeous leaves. This fern is also 

Bird’s nest fern      141

Foxtail fern (aka plume asparagus).

Mist your plant daily with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 
making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the first number (nitrogen) is higher than 
the other two. Apply at half-strength once a 
month through the growing season.
POTTING. When your fern needs up-potting, shift 
it to a container with a diameter 2 inches larger 
than the current pot. This plant prefers being 

Bird’s nest fern (aka Hawaii birdnest fern, nest fern).

sensitive to chemical sprays—insecticides, fungi-
cides, leaf-polishing agents. Any chemical other 
than insecticidal soap, in fact, causes a phyto-
toxic reaction that burns the foliage and turns 
the leaves brown.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. This plant prefers moderately 
bright filtered light and will even tolerate quite a 
bit of shade in low light conditions. However, it 
will not tolerate full sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 

potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 
inch. This fern needs a lot of water but fares 
poorly if the soil is soggy.
HUMIDITY. This plant needs high humidity. Mist 
it daily with a spray bottle of water on a mist set-
ting, or use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a 
saucer or tray of water, making sure the bottom 
of the pot never sits directly in the water by rais-
ing the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider 
putting a humidifier in the room and growing 
this fern with orchids and bromeliads.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any potting medium 
designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, one that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes. Be sure it is 
rich in organic matter yet very well drained.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 

142      Ferns and Fern-like Plants

where the first number (nitrogen) is higher than 
the other two. Apply at half-strength every two 
weeks through the growing season.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Even though you’re 
using smallish pots, choose heavy ones to pre-
vent these top-heavy plants from toppling over.
PROPAGATION. Bird’s nest fern can’t be divided 
and has to be raised from spores, a difficult task 
for the average houseplant grower.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves turning brown (page 251) and 
scale insects (page 262).

Boston fern (aka Boston swordfern, fishbone fern, tuber 
ladder fern, wild Boston fern).

Boston fern

Boston fern (Nephrolepis exaltata) is the clas-
sic parlor fern: its long, bright green leaves curve 
gracefully out of a container or hanging basket, 
adding simple homespun charm to any room. 
All plants in cultivation are natural mutations 
of the species. The original mutant, ‘Bostoni-
ensis’, was discovered in 1894 in a shipment of 
ferns sent to Boston by a Philadelphia grower. 
In contrast to the species, which has upright 
fronds, its fronds dangled down and away from 
the central crown. Since then other mutations 
with curly, twisted, drooping, or doubly-pinnate 
fronds have appeared (e.g., ‘Florida Ruffle’, 
‘Fluffy Duffy’, ‘Compacta’). Plants generally 
grow to 3 feet tall and wide, but the leaves can be 
2 to 7 feet long depending on the cultivar. Leaves 
are pinnately compound (feather-like) with 1- 
to 3-inch-long wedge-shaped pinnae (leaflets) 
alternating on each side of the midrib. This ever-
green perennial is a true fern, reproducing by 
means of spores, so it does not make flowers, 
fruits, or seeds.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Bright but indirect light from a  
south window and no direct sun fulfills this  
plant’s needs.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 
inch. This plant needs constant moisture but you 
don’t want to drown it. Just make sure it never 
dries out or it will drop all its leaves.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant twice a week with a 
spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 

Boston fern      143

tray of water, making sure the bottom of the pot 
never sits directly in the water by raising the pot 
up on pot feet or pebbles. Or put a humidifier in 
the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil that 
incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation, where the first 
number (nitrogen) is higher than the other two. 
Apply at half-strength once a month through the 
growing season.
POTTING. Re-pot annually in early summer. 
When your plant needs up-potting, shift it to a 
container with a diameter 2 inches larger than 
the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Boston fern is easy to propagate 
by division in spring.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for yellowing leaves (page 257) and spi-
der mites (page 263).

Davallia fern

What’s not to love about a furry-footed fern? 
Three davallias are commonly grown as house-
plants: deer’s foot fern (Davallia canariensis), 
rabbit’s foot fern (D. fejeensis), and squirrel’s foot 
fern (D. trichomanoides). Their softly furry rhi-
zomes really do look like little animal feet. The 
color of the fuzz, light brown or silvery, adds 
to the illusion. Davallia ferns produce broadly 
triangular, glossy, dark green, semi-evergreen 
fronds 12 to 18 inches tall at regular inter-
vals along the rhizomes. The fronds are finely 
divided three or four times and are pinnate 
(feather-like). They look very delicate and airy, 
but they’re actually pretty tough. The plants 
shed some of their leaves in winter but replace 

144      Ferns and Fern-like Plants

Davallia fern.

them in spring. All three species are at their very 
best in hanging baskets. If plants are kept con-
sistently moist, the furry rhizomes crawl across 
the surface of the plant’s container and then out 
and over the sides, covering the pot or dangling 
in mid-air—a delightful feature of these pretty 
houseplants. The rhizomes absorb moisture and 
nutrients from damp surfaces, and in big old 
plants can grow as long as 2 feet or more. Plants 
eventually form large clumps, 2 to 4 feet wide 
and 2 feet tall. Ferns that big are daunting and 

heavy to handle in hanging baskets, so it’s proba-
bly best to divide them into smaller plants when 
you re-pot. Cut the rhizome into pieces, with 
each piece having a good supply of roots and 
several leaves. When re-potting be careful not 
to bury the furry rhizomes because they’ll rot. 
Get the roots down into the potting medium but 
keep the rhizomes on the surface.

Davallia ferns are sensitive to chemical 

sprays—insecticides, fungicides, leaf-polishing 
agents. Any chemical other than insecticidal 
soap, in fact, causes a phytotoxic reaction that 
burns the foliage and turns the leaves brown.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
LOW LIGHT. These plants do well in ambient light 
from a north window. They can be placed in cool 
morning light from an east window as long as 
the light is filtered by sheer curtains. Artificial 
light also works well. Avoid full sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 
1 inch. Strive to keep the soil consistently moist 
but not soggy and waterlogged.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant every day with a spray 
bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a hand-
held mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles. Put a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Choose a good organic, 
well-drained, general-purpose potting soil 
that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhi-
zal fungi, and other beneficial microbes, and 
mix it 50/50 with peat moss to increase the 
water-holding capacity.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 

where the first number (nitrogen) is higher 
than the other two. Apply at half-strength every 
two weeks.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Choose a shallow 
pot, one wider than it is deep, or use a hang-
ing basket. Re-pot in spring, every two years. 
Despite davallia’s toughness when it comes to its 
growing conditions, handle the fuzzy rhizomes 
carefully—they’re brittle and can break. Be care-
ful not to bury them when re-potting.
PROPAGATION. Davallia ferns are easy to propa-
gate by division of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves turning brown (page 251), spi-
der mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Hare’s foot fern

Hare’s foot fern (Phlebodium aureum) is so 
called for its creeping rhizome, 0.5 to 1 inch 
thick and densely clothed in golden brown, 
fur-like scales, very much resembling the tiny 
paw of a hare. This really is a classic fern in 
looks and habit: large, robust, 2 to 4 feet tall and 
spreading to 2 feet wide. It hails from tropical 
rainforests, so as a houseplant it may decide to 
shed its leaves if it gets too dry. Keep it watered 
and it will remain leafy. Should it drop its leaves, 
it will grow a new set fairly quickly. Fronds are 
pinnatifid (deeply lobed) with large, wavy-edged 
pinnae (leaflets). The pinnae are widely spaced 
on the fronds, which gives the plant a rather 
coarse texture. Brown spots (sori) on the under-
sides of the leaves contain the spores by which 
this and all ferns reproduce. Leaf color varies 
from bright green to blue-green. Most clones 
in cultivation have blue-green foliage and wavy 
undulating edges.

Hare’s foot fern      145

POTTING MEDIUM. Add extra perlite to improve 
drainage of a good organic, general-purpose 
potting soil that incorporates organic fertil-
izer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other beneficial 
microbes. This fern wants a potting medium 
that drains rapidly.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the first number (nitrogen) is higher 
than the other two. Apply at half-strength 
once a month.
POTTING. When this fast-growing plant needs 
up-potting, shift it to a container with a diam-
eter 4 inches larger than the current pot. Use a 
shallow pot, wider than deep.
PROPAGATION. Hare’s foot fern is easy to propa-
gate by division of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249) and mealybugs 
(page 262).

Holly fern

Holly fern (Cyrtomium falcatum) is quite beau-
tiful, with long leaves that resemble mahonias 
(Oregon grape) or a less prickly holly tree. And 
it’s easy to grow. It is unusual for such a cold 
tolerant plant (zones 6 through 10) to succeed 
as a houseplant. Most houseplants are tropi-
cal; that’s why they do well inside our homes. 
Holly fern succeeds as a houseplant for one rea-
son: its leathery leaves tolerate dry air quite 
well. This evergreen perennial grows 1 to 2 feet 
tall and spreads 2 to 3 feet wide. The pinnately 
compound (feather-like) leaves are borne in a 
vase-shaped cluster. Leaves are 1.5 feet long and 
have six to ten glossy, dark green leaflets. Each 
thick, leathery leaflet is slightly toothed along 
the edges and either flat or wavy, with a net-like 
pattern of veins.

Hare’s foot fern (aka bear’s paw fern, cabbage palm fern, 
gold-foot fern, golden polypody, golden serpent fern).

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. This fern wants brighter light 
than many ferns but not direct sun. Filtered light 
from east windows is perfect.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 0.5 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant daily with a spray bot-
tle of water on a mist setting, or use a handheld 
mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 
making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles. Or put a humidifier in the room.

146      Ferns and Fern-like Plants

Holly fern (aka Japanese holly fern, Japanese net-vein holly fern).

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Holly fern succeeds in bright fil-
tered light from an east window. It tolerates 
brighter light than most ferns, even a little bit of 
direct sun; however, the leaves burn in too much 
sun, so it’s better to err on the side of shade.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 
1 inch. This fern tolerates occasional dry spells 
quite well.
HUMIDITY. Holly fern’s thick, leathery leaves tol-
erate low humidity so you probably don’t need 
to mist your plant to keep it happy.

POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the first number (nitrogen) is higher 
than the other two. Apply at half-strength once 
a month.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Holly fern is propagated by divi-
sion of the rhizome in spring.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for scale insects (page 262) and leaf spot 
fungus (page 269).

Holly fern      147

Maidenhair fern

Maidenhair ferns (Adiantum spp.) have a well- 
deserved reputation for being persnickety, but 
boy do they deliver in the houseplant catego-
ries of “distinctive character” and “strong sculp-
tural quality.” Their demands are simple, but 
they are also uncompromising. Give them what 
they want or they’ll die. And what they want is 
high humidity, warmth, and shade. Give them 
less than that and they go belly-up fairly quickly. 
The ones that succeed best as houseplants are 
Venus maidenhair (A. capillus-veneris), delta 
maidenhair (A. raddianum), and rosy maiden-
hair (A. hispidulum). The fronds of these ever-
green perennials arise from creeping rhizomes 
at the soil level. Fronds are delicate, lacy, and 
gorgeous, with wiry, glossy black stems that con-
trast beautifully with the bright green leaflets. In 
most of these ferns the leafstalks arch gracefully 
so that the leaflets dangle in a layered, downward 
cascade. The small, 0.5-inch-wide leaflets are fan- 
shaped, with wedge-shaped bases and lobed tips.

Venus maidenhair fern grows only 6 to 12 
inches high and 12 to 36 inches wide and its 
glossy black stem is not forked. Nor is it in 
delta maidenhair fern; its fronds are three- or 
four-times pinnate (feather-like), 12 to 24 inches 
long and 6 inches wide. Rosy maidenhair fern 
grows 12 to 18 inches tall and wide. Its fronds 
are two- or three-times pinnate and 14 inches 
long, with a forked leafstalk. New growth is 
pink, maturing to green or bronze-green.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
LOW LIGHT. Maidenhair ferns cannot tolerate 
direct sun. They’ll do well in ambient light from 
a north window or in the stronger light of an 
east window so long as the cool morning sun is 
filtered by sheer curtains.

148      Ferns and Fern-like Plants

HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 
0.5 inch. These ferns need lots of water but 
they also need good drainage. They don’t want 
soggy soil.
HUMIDITY. Maidenhair ferns require high humid-
ity and so do well in bathrooms and kitch-
ens. Mist your plant daily with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, mak-
ing sure the bottom of the pot never sits directly 
in the water by raising the pot up on pot feet or 
pebbles, or use a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the first number (nitrogen) is higher than 
the other two. Apply at half-strength once a 
month through the growing season.
POTTING. Re-pot every year or two. Divide your 
plant at re-potting time. When your plant needs 
up-potting, shift it to a container with a diame-
ter 2 inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Maidenhair fern is easy to propa-
gate by division.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves turning brown (page 251),  
scale insects (page 262), and root rot (page  
272).

Staghorn fern

Staghorn fern (Platycerium bifurcatum) is 
an interesting, bizarre-looking plant guaran-
teed to attract attention and start conversa-
tions. And though it is a true fern, it’s not lacy, 
or delicate, or ferny in any way. In its native 

Maidenhair fern.

Maidenhair fern      149

tropical rainforests, it is an epiphyte (a plant 
that grows on another plant for support), perch-
ing on the branches or trunks of trees. Stag-
horn fern has two distinctly different kinds of 
leaves: basal and aerial. Its basal leaves are flat 
and kidney-shaped. In nature, they tightly clasp 
the tree on which the fern grows, and the rhi-
zome grows underneath them. Aerial leaves 
are divided into large, strap-shaped lobes that 
resemble deer antlers, thus the common name. 
These leaves arch out horizontally into mid-
air and can grow to 3 feet long and wide. Young 
staghorn ferns are sometimes grown in pots, but 
because they are epiphytes, they do best when 
mounted on plaques of wood or bark hung on 
walls or suspended in air. Hanging baskets, in 
which leaves emerge through the sides of the 
baskets, are another alternative. The plant even-
tually encloses the basket with its fronds.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light, but no direct 
sun, suits these ferns best.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
AMPLE WATER. Plants mounted on plaques or in 
hanging baskets should be watered when the 
potting medium is dry to a depth of 0.5 inch. 
Provide more water as temperatures rise in sum-
mer. Make sure drainage is perfect; the water 
should drain away quickly.
HUMIDITY. Staghorn ferns require high humid-
ity. Mist your plant frequently with a spray bot-
tle of water on a mist setting, or use a handheld 
mister. Put a humidifier in the room and group 
other houseplants nearby to raise the humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. In a hanging basket, use  
any good organic, well-drained, general- 
purpose potting soil that incorporates organic 

150      Ferns and Fern-like Plants

fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the first number (nitrogen) is higher 
than the other two. Apply at half-strength every 
two weeks.
POTTING. When your fern needs up-potting, shift 
it to a hanging basket with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current one. To mount the fern 
on a plaque, wrap the roots in a ball of moss 
and tie the plant to the plaque with some old 
pantyhose.
PROPAGATION. Staghorn fern is easy to propagate 
by division.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), scale insects 
(page 262), and bacterial leaf spot (page 267).

Staghorn fern (aka elkhorn fern).

Temporary Houseplants

Staghorn fern      151

Amaryllis

Huge, red, and incredible don’t begin to describe 
the amazing amaryllis (Hippeastrum spp.), a 
beloved winter holiday gift. The first thing to 
emerge from your potted bulb will be bright 
green, strap-shaped leaves. As they elongate, 
a thick flower stalk begins to grow straight up 
from the center of the foliage. Maybe a week 
later, enormous flower buds develop on top of 
the stalk and slowly begin to open. In a couple 
of days, flowers will be fully open, with petals 
spread wide. The sight will knock your socks 
off! Every year during the winter holiday sea-
son, millions of amaryllis bulbs find their way 
into garden centers, supermarkets, and big box 
stores. They come in attractive, full-color boxes 
displaying photos of their stunningly gorgeous 
flowers. Each box contains a complete kit with 
the bulb, a pot, and a bag of potting medium. All 

Amaryllis (aka hippeastrum).

152      Temporary Houseplants

one has to do is plant the bulb in the pot and, 
in a few short weeks, just in time for Christ-
mas it will flower gloriously. Modern hybrids 
have been developed from six different species, 
H. aulicum, H. leopoldii, H. pardinum, H. puni-
ceum, H. reginae, and H. vittatum. The huge 
flowers come in various shades of red, pink, 
salmon, near-orange, creamy yellow, or white. 
Some are striped, or have colored petal edges 
(picotee), or are variously streaked and spotted. 
The plant has two or three flowers, each 8 to 9 
inches across, borne in a cluster atop a hollow 
2-foot-tall stem.

When it’s finished flowering, cut the flower 
stalk off 3 to 5 inches above the bulb. Do not cut 
off any of the leaves, and be careful not to dam-
age them. Since amaryllis is a perennial bulb, 
the leaves must make enough food to store in 
the bulb to flower again next year, and the plant 
can best accomplish that task by being outdoors 
in dappled shade through the growing season. 
So, in spring, after all danger of frost has passed, 
put your amaryllis outdoors. Then, before any 
expected frost, bring it back inside and put it in 
a dark place at 50 to 55°F. Amaryllis needs this 
cold treatment for eight to ten weeks in order 
to flower. During this cold-dark treatment the 
foliage turns brown and dies back. Just cut the 
dead leaves off. Don’t water it during this time. 
While it’s dormant take it out of the pot; remove 
the used potting medium and replace it with 
fresh potting medium. After your cold treat-
ment, bring the dormant bulb in its pot out into 
light and warmth and start watering it. Soon this 
temporary houseplant will flower again—just in 
time for another holiday season, if you’ve timed 
it right.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.

MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light but no direct 
sun is best for amaryllis.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer where the 
second number (phosphorus) is higher than the 
other two to promote flowering. While the plant 
is in flower, use a liquid fertilizer. During the 
summer, use dry fertilizer.
POTTING. Re-pot annually when dormant, and be 
sure the top third of the bulb is not buried in the 
potting medium. If the bulb appears to be root-
bound, up-pot to a container with a diameter 2 
inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Like all hybrids, amaryllis hybrids 
don’t come true from seed. They’re propagated 
asexually. Slice the bulb from top to bottom into 
12 pieces. Be sure each piece has a chunk of the 
basal plate and a few bulb scales. Plant each 
piece in damp vermiculite and keep them in the 
dark. The pieces will grow tiny little bulbs called 
bulbils that can then be planted and grown on 
into mature plants.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for failure to flower (page 247), mealy-
bugs (page 262), and leaf spot fungus (page  
269).

Caladium

People grow and love caladium (Caladium 
bicolor) for its fantastic foliage. The leaves are 
large and shaped like an arrowhead, very thin 
and delicate. The more than a thousand available 
cultivars offer every imaginable combination of 
color: flaming red, bright pink, white, and green. 
The leaves are often spotted and mottled with 
veins in contrasting colors. Unfortunately this 
tropical perennial has those incredibly showy 
leaves only from spring to autumn; it is dormant 
and leafless all winter long, which is why we’ve 
labeled it a temporary houseplant. Caladium 
develops a cluster of leaves, 12 to 30 inches tall 
and wide, from underground tubers. The very 
colorful leaf blades are up to 18 inches long and 
put on a very dramatic show during the grow-
ing season. It is very rare for caladium to flower 
indoors. The inflorescence is a small, pale green-
ish white, scoop-shaped spathe surrounding a 
finger-like spadix covered with minute flowers. 

Caladium (aka angel wings, elephant ears, heart of Jesus).

Caladium      153

Caladium.

154      Temporary Houseplants

Female flowers near the base of the spadix form 
berries after fertilization. Many of caladium’s 
close aroid relatives are valued air-filtering 
plants. It is possible that further research may 
prove caladium too to be valuable in this regard.
 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. Its 
tissues contain calcium oxalate crystals, and 
if leaves are chewed the crystals penetrate the 
soft tissues of lips, tongue, and throat, causing 
painful swelling, drooling, and vomiting. If you 
suspect a person or pet has ingested parts of 
this plant, or if a person or pet exhibits serious 
symptoms such as difficulty breathing, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control center, 
or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
LOW LIGHT. Caladium does well in ambient light 
from a north window where it does not get any 
direct sun. Medium filtered light from an east 
window also works well. In general, the wider 
the foliage, the more shade the plant needs.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 0.5 inch.
HUMIDITY. Caladium requires high humidity. Mist 
your plant daily with a spray bottle of water on 
a mist setting, or use a handheld mister. Put the 
pot in a saucer or tray of water, making sure the 
bottom of the pot never sits directly in the water 
by raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Con-
sider putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.

FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the first number (nitrogen) is higher than 
the other two. Apply every two weeks during the 
growing season.
POTTING. Each autumn, when the leaves die 
back, move your plant to a dry, cool (55°F) loca-
tion. Re-pot before active growth begins again in 
spring: take the dormant tubers out of the pot, 
remove the old soil, and plant them in fresh pot-
ting medium. If you up-pot, choose a container 
with a diameter 4 inches larger than the current 
pot.
PROPAGATION. Caladium is easy to propagate by 
dividing the dormant tubers.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves turning brown (page 251), 
aphids (page 260), and leaf spot fungus (page 
269).

Cupid’s bow

Achimenes erecta with bright red flowers and A. 
longiflora with big blue flowers are two of the 
main species used to create the Cupid’s bow 
hybrids. This is another large group of house-
plants with a pronounced dormant period. In 
winter the whole plant goes away. It doesn’t die, 
it just goes to sleep. Its underground rhizomes 
resprout in the spring. In summer, tubular flow-
ers 3 inches wide and 2 inches long—in every 
color of the rainbow—adorn the lax stems. The 
softly furry, deep green leaves are borne in pairs, 
are up to 3 inches long, and have serrated edges. 
Some cultivars have stems that droop and trail, 
cascading down as much as 2 feet; these are per-
fect in hanging baskets. Others are more erect 
and do well in ordinary pots. Flowers flare out at 
the tip, like the bell of a trumpet, and have five 
petals. They’re borne on short stems in the axils 
of the leaves and, although each flower lasts only 

Cupid’s bow      155

a few days, Cupid’s bow blooms continuously 
through the growing season. Flower color var-
ies by cultivar and includes red and blue through 
pink, white, purple, violet-blue, and yellow. 
Some varieties are striped.

At the end of summer your Cupid’s bow 

starts to turn yellow and begins to die back to 
the ground. When this happens, stop watering 
it until it has gone completely dormant. When 
dormancy is complete, cut it to the ground and 
knock it out of the pot. Shake off the old potting 
medium and put the rhizomes in a paper bag 
with some fresh but dry potting medium. Keep 
the rhizomes dry, dark, and cool (but above 
50°F) through the winter. In late winter or very 
early spring, replant the little rhizomes (they 
look like tiny pine cones) in 4- or 6-inch pots in 
fresh potting soil and bring them into the light 
and warmth. Discard any shriveled or rotted rhi-
zomes and plant only the healthy ones. Begin 
watering and feeding them, and they’ll soon be 
growing and flowering again.

Cupid’s bow (aka achimenes, Cupid’s bower, hot water 
plant, magic flower, orchid pansy).

156      Temporary Houseplants

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Cupid’s bow does best in very 
bright filtered light with no direct sun. An east 
or west window with sheer curtains is perfect. If 
its leaves start to turn brown, it’s probably get-
ting too much light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. This tropical species 
dislikes temperatures below 50°F and hates 
cold drafts.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 
inch. However, be certain your potting medium 
is well drained because Cupid’s bow hates 
waterlogged soil. On the other hand, if it ever 
dries out it’ll go dormant.
HUMIDITY. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, African 
violet potting soil that incorporates organic fer-
tilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other beneficial 
microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the second number (phosphorus) is 
higher than the other two to promote flowering. 
Apply at half-strength every two weeks during 
the growing season.
POTTING. When Cupid’s bow needs re-potting 
in the spring, plant the little rhizomes in 4- or 
6-inch pots.
PROPAGATION. Cupid’s bow is easy to propagate 
by division of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves turning brown (page 251), 
aphids (page 260), and root rot (page 272).

Florist azalea

A classic Mother’s Day gift, the florist azalea is 
a hybrid evergreen shrub derived from various 
Rhododendron species. Unlike deciduous aza-
leas, these evergreen types are not hardy and 
cannot tolerate freezing temperatures. They are 
grown in greenhouses and forced into bloom as 
spring holiday gifts. In that season, a florist aza-
lea literally covers itself with pink, white, peach, 
lavender, red, or bicolored blossoms, making a 
gorgeous living bouquet for three to four weeks 
when kept in a cool room. But it’s tricky to get it 
to repeat the show the following year. It really 

Florist azalea.

needs to be outdoors during the spring and sum-
mer growing season. After it’s finished blooming 
indoors and all danger of frost has passed, take 
your plant outdoors and grow it in the shade 
through autumn. Just sink the pot into the gar-
den soil up to the rim. Azaleas need the cool fall 
weather (or even mild winter weather) to set 
the flower buds that will open next spring. Be 
sure to exhume the plant, pot and all, and bring 
it back indoors in the fall before the first frost. 
Indoors in winter, it will remain evergreen but 
won’t bloom until spring. That’s why it’s a tem-
porary houseplant. Florist azaleas are typically 
dwarf shrubs, up to 1.5 feet tall and wide, with 
dark green oval leaves. Flowers are 1 to 2 inches 
across and are borne in clusters at the tips of 
thin, woody branches. 

 All parts of the azalea—foliage, flowers, 
and nectar—contain grayanotoxins, chemicals 
that are toxic to people and pets. Plants should 
be kept in an out-of-the-way place. The physi-
ological effects on gastrointestinal, cardiovas-
cular, and central nervous systems are mild to 
severe, depending on how much of the toxin was 
consumed. If you suspect a person or pet has 
ingested parts of this plant, call your local emer-
gency hotline, poison control center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Florist azaleas do well with 
bright filtered light, no direct sun, during their 
time indoors. Outdoors, in summer, keep them 
in filtered shade.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F. Outdoors, temperatures need to 
be between 40 and 55°F for six weeks in autumn 
in order for your plant to set flower buds for next 
spring. Bring this tender shrub back indoors if 
temperatures threaten to go below 40°F.

Florist azalea      157

Freesia

Freesias are herbaceous perennials from 
bulb-like corms that have the same growth 
habit as spring bulbs; they’re in active growth 
during cool, wet winter/spring weather, and 
they go dormant in hot, dry summers. The 
ones treasured as temporary houseplants are 
all hybrids derived from Freesia corymbosa, F. 
laxa, F. refracta, and other species. Apprecia-
tion for freesia’s lovely flowers is nearly univer-
sal, but people wax most eloquent over their 
fragrance, which can perfume an entire room. 
Flowers come in a wide array of beautiful col-
ors, including lavender, pink, orange, red, yel-
low, white, and multicolor blends. They are 2 
inches wide, trumpet-shaped, and borne appeal-
ingly on one side of the flowering spike, which is 
12 to 18 inches tall. The flowering stems emerge 
from a tuft of narrow, grass-like foliage 4 to 12 
inches tall.

When your potted freesia finishes flowering, 
take it outdoors for the summer and put it in full 
sun to finish its growth cycle. It needs to cycle 
from a cool, wet winter to a hot and dry heat 
treatment in summer to flower. Keep it watered 

MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 
inch and try to maintain even moisture. If your 
tap water is hard and has a lot of calcium (lime) 
in it, water your azalea with distilled water. 
Since the potting medium is half peat moss, it 
can be difficult to re-wet if it dries out too much 
between waterings. If that happens, submerge 
the entire pot in tepid water for at least 15 min-
utes until all the bubbles stop rising to the sur-
face. Then pull the pot out of the water and let 
it drain.
HUMIDITY. These plants benefit from medium to 
high humidity. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a humidi-
fier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil, one that incorpo-
rates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and 
other beneficial microbes, and mix it 50/50 with 
peat moss.
FERTILIZER. The plant requires an acidic organic 
fertilizer, in either a powder or liquid formula-
tion. Choose one that supplies iron and whose 
second number (phosphorus) is higher than the 
other two to promote flowering. Feed your aza-
lea once a year, as soon as it’s finished blooming.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
every three years or so, shift it to a container 
with a diameter 4 inches larger than the cur-
rent pot. Up-pot or re-pot in spring after the last 
blooms have withered.
PROPAGATION. Florist azalea can be propagated 
from stem tip cuttings, but it is slow to root. It 
is easy to grow from seed, but like all hybrids, it 
doesn’t come true from seed.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for flower bud drop (page 248), whiteflies 
(page 265), and root rot (page 272).

Freesia.

158      Temporary Houseplants

until the foliage turns yellow and dies back. In 
late spring or early summer, all the foliage dies 
down and the plant goes dormant. At this time 
stop watering the plant and let it dry out and 
cook in high summer heat. In late summer or 
early fall, dump the contents of the pot out and 
sort out the corms, discarding the old soft and 
wrinkled ones (which are not going to flower 
again) and the used potting medium. There 
should be a lot of new, young corms that are 
firm and smooth. Keep these in a paper bag until 
planting time in autumn. The corms are about 1 
inch in diameter and have a pointy side and a flat 
side. When you plant them, be sure the pointy 
side is up. Freesias flower best after six months 
of dormancy at high temperatures.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Full sun or very bright indirect light 
is best for freesias. Cool morning sun makes the 
flowers last longer.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F, while the plants are flowering. 
After corms have been planted, give them 80°F 
until they start to sprout. Once they’re actively 
growing, cool them down.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Freesias enjoy moderate humid-
ity. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 
making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 

where the second number (phosphorus) is 
higher than the other two to promote flowering. 
Apply at half-strength twice a month during the 
growing season.
POTTING. Re-pot corms in autumn, like tulip 
bulbs. They’ll bloom in late winter to early spring.
PROPAGATION. Freesia is easy to propagate from 
corms.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for flower bud drop (page 248), spider 
mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Persian violet

When in full bloom Persian violet (Exacum 
affine) is a knockout. And it is very easy to 
grow—for a while. But if you acquire one as an 
impulse purchase, don’t be disappointed when 
it gives up the ghost despite your best efforts to 
keep it alive. This irresistible plant is an annual 
with a death wish, determined to bloom itself 
into oblivion, so it is only a temporary house-
plant. The plant makes a perfect little mound to 
12 inches high. Despite its common name, it is 
not a violet but a gentian, a family renowned for 
tubular flowers in intense shades of blue. Lightly 
scented 0.5-inch-wide Persian violet flowers 
look flat because their five lobes flare out wide. 
In the center of each is a small button of sta-
mens in brilliant yellow, the perfect complement 
to the violet petals. The flowers are further set 
off by the glossy bright green leaves. If you were 
determined to snip off every flower as it fades, 
you might keep Persian violet alive for a few 
months. But in the usual course of events, you 
see it in full bloom at the garden center so you 
have to have it, you take it home—and it starts 
to fail shortly after. A few weeks later it’s dead. 
Nonetheless, Persian violet is well worth having 
as a living bouquet. If you’re looking to buy one, 

Persian violet      159

look for one that has lots of buds that have not 
yet opened. If it has not yet reached peak bloom, 
it will last longer in your home.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH OR MEDIUM LIGHT. Light from a south, east, 
or west window serves this plant well.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.

Persian violet (aka German violet, Arabian violet, 
tiddly-winks).

160      Temporary Houseplants

MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant regularly with a spray 
bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a hand-
held mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic fer-
tilizer. Apply at half-strength every two weeks 
until death do you part.
POTTING. If your plant is rootbound and needs 
up-potting, shift it to a container with a diame-
ter 4 inches larger than the current pot. Disturb 
the roots as little as possible when up-potting.
PROPAGATION. Persian violet is easy to propagate 
from the very tiny seeds.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for flower bud drop (page 248), aphids 
(page 260), and root rot (page 272).

Rieger begonia

Riegers (Begonia ×hiemalis) are a hybrid begonia 
strain created in 1955 by German plant breeder 
Otto Rieger, who crossed tuberous begonias (B. 
×tuberhybrida) and wax begonias (B. cucullata). 
The 2-inch-wide flowers are often perfect rep-
licas, in miniature, of their fabulous parent the 
tuberous begonia, and they have a slightly trans-
lucent quality that makes them seem to glow. 
Plants generally grow 12 to 18 inches tall and 
wide with reddish, fleshy, succulent stems that 
are somewhat jointed. The thick stems are brit-
tle and easily broken. As with most begonias, 

Rieger begonia (aka elatior hybrid, Rieger hybrid begonia, 
winter-blooming begonia).

Rieger begonia.

leaves are asymmetrical, larger on one side of 
the midrib, like an angel wing. They are glossy, 
rather frilly, and have serrated edges. This 
hybrid begonia is usually grown for a single 
season and discarded when it disappears for 
its dormant period. But it is a perennial, and it 
will come back to life after it rests for about six 
weeks. Because it blooms in winter, it does very 
well on a windowsill with amaryllis, Christmas 
cactus, or other winter holiday plants, brighten-
ing short days with its flowers, which come in 
mouthwatering, candy-colored shades of red, 
pink, salmon, orange, or yellow.

When your Rieger begonia flags and begins 
to go out of bloom, cut the stems back to 3-inch 
stubs and move the plant to a cool location out-
doors in shade for six weeks in summer. Keep it 
on the dry side. When it starts back into active 
growth, move it to bright indirect light and 
start watering and fertilizing. The short days 
and cool nights of fall and winter stimulate it to 
bloom again.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.

Rieger begonia      161

MEDIUM LIGHT. Rieger begonias do best with 
a half-day of filtered sunlight, especially cool 
morning light from an east window with 
sheer curtains. Because these are short-day 
(long-night) plants that flower in winter, try to 
avoid locations that provide supplemental light 
at night, such as streetlights and indoor light-
ing, because the extra light can cause them to 
stop flowering.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 1 
inch. Avoid getting water on the foliage because 
the moisture promotes fungus diseases.
HUMIDITY. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, African 
violet potting soil that incorporates organic fer-
tilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other beneficial 
microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the second number (phosphorus) is 
higher than the other two to promote flowering. 
Apply once a month through the winter grow-
ing season. Stop fertilizing when the plant stops 
flowering in spring.
POTTING. When your Rieger begonia begins to 
grow again after its resting period, it may need 
up-potting. Shift it to a container with a diame-
ter 2 inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Rieger begonias are easy to propa-
gate from leaf cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaves turning brown (page 251), 
mealybugs (page 262), and gray mold (page 
268).

162      Temporary Houseplants

Spring bulbs

Crocus, daffodils, grape hyacinths, hyacinths, 
and tulips will grace your home at a time when 
winter has a firm grip on the garden. Their 
riotous, happy colors in full bloom—red, pink, 
orange, yellow, blue, deep purple, lavender, and 
white—are a great tonic for chasing away win-
ter’s gloom. These bulbs are temporary house-
plants because they decorate your home only 
briefly, as living bouquets, before and dur-
ing their flowering time. The rest of the year 
they have to be outdoors because they require 
a three-month cold treatment to flower. Paper-
whites (Narcissus papyraceus) are a bit of an 
exception. This type of daffodil is tender to cold. 
They are usually started indoors in water in 
autumn, brought into bloom for the winter holi-
days, and then discarded.

To force spring bulbs into early indoor bloom 

plant them in pots outdoors in autumn. Keep-
ing them outside in cold weather stimulates the 
root system to grow. Bringing them indoors in 
mid-winter, into light and warmth, stimulates 
the tops and flowers to grow. When the flower-
ing is done, they go back outside into the sun-
shine where the foliage dies and the bulbs go 
dormant. Then the cold wet weather of autumn 
stimulates them to start the cycle all over again. 
If you live in a warm climate, where winters 
aren’t cold enough, you’ll have to put your bulbs 
in the refrigerator, or buy pre-chilled bulbs from 
a reliable supplier.

To rebloom spring bulbs, let the pots dry out 
during their summer dormancy. In the autumn, 
dump them out of their pots, remove the old 
potting medium, and re-pot the bulbs in fresh 
medium. The bulbs will probably have made a 
number of small new bulbs or bulblets during 
their last growing season. Segregate the smaller 
from the larger bulbs and pot them up sepa-
rately. The smallest bulbs take a couple years to 

get big enough to flower. The larger bulbs will 
probably flower, but don’t be surprised if the 
flowers are smaller than they were in their first 
season. Water the pots after planting so that root 
growth can begin when cold weather arrives.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Spring bulbs need full sun.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth  
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either a 
powder or liquid formulation, where the second 
number (phosphorus) is higher than the other 
two to promote flowering. Apply once a month, 
indoors and out, until the plants go dormant.
POTTING. Bulbs are usually crowded into shallow 
6-inch pots.
PROPAGATION. Spring bulbs are easy to propagate 
by planting the little new bulblets that are pro-
duced each growing season.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for flower bud drop (page 248), spider 
mites (page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Spring bulbs      163

Daffodils.

Orchids and Bromeliads

164      Orchids and Bromeliads

Beallara and 
Aliceara

The huge and utterly fascinating orchid world 
contains thousands of fully fertile complex 
hybrids made between species in different gen-
era. Beallaras and alicearas are in the Odon-
toglossum/Oncidium alliance. Many of these 
hybrid genera in this alliance were named after 
the first orchid breeder to register the cross 
with the Royal Horticultural Society in Eng-
land. For example, many years ago, Mr. Beall of 
the old Beall’s Orchid Nursery on Vashon Island 
in Puget Sound created Beallara Tahoma Gla-
cier, and the genus name honors him. Most 
Tahoma Glaciers have large off-white flowers 
with purple-red blotches in the middle of the 
petals; they’re pretty easy to recognize and com-
monly available, often seen in full bloom in big 
box and grocery stores. Another gorgeous hybrid 
orchid that’s fairly common in supermarket flo-
ral departments is Aliceara Marfitch, whose 
flowers look like a Tahoma Glacier dipped in 
raspberry juice.

Beallara.

Aliceara.

Beallara and Aliceara      165

All the species in the background of these 

hybrids are epiphytes in nature, clinging to tree 
branches high in the tropical rainforest can-
opy. They never grow in soil. They are simi-
lar in growth habit and in flower structure 
because both have pansy orchids and spider 
orchids in their makeup. Both have 2-foot-long, 
1-inch-wide, strap-shaped, flexible foliage grow-
ing from the tops of pseudobulbs. The smooth, 
bright yellow-green pseudobulbs, which func-
tion as water storage devices, are usually 
teardrop-shaped, 4 inches tall, 2 inches wide, 
and about 0.5 inch thick. They are clustered 
together at the soil line and produced at regu-
lar intervals from a creeping rhizome. Flowers 
are 3.5 inches wide and are borne on 5-foot-long 
wiry stems that arise from the base of the 
pseudobulbs. Each flowering stem carries as 
many as 14 to 16 flowers, and each flower lasts 
from 20 to 30 days, so plants are in bloom for a 
long time.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light from an east 
window is best for orchids in the Odontoglos-
sum/Oncidium alliance. No direct sun. And 
avoid the heat load of a south or west window.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
LOW WATER. Give these orchids a good long 
drink once a week. Orchids are sensitive to 
water quality and should be irrigated with fil-
tered, rain-, or distilled water, rather than tap 
water. Let tepid water flow through the entire 
root zone until all the potting medium is soaked. 
Let the pot drain and air out, then put it back 
in its place. Mark the pot so that your plant 
is returned to its original position every time. 
Turning your orchid causes the flowers to twist 

166      Orchids and Bromeliads

and bend to face the light, which destroys their 
elegant arrangement.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, but make absolutely sure the bot-
tom of the pot never sits directly in the water by 
raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Con-
sider putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, orchid 
potting medium such as medium orchid bark. 
Do not use garden soil or ordinary potting soil 
because it will kill this epiphytic orchid.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a water soluble or liquid formulation, one where 
the second number (phosphorus) is higher than 
the other two to promote flowering. Apply at 
one-quarter-strength once a week, right after 
watering the plant.
POTTING. Your orchid needs to be up-potted 
every two years or so. Choose a pot with a 
diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. 
Orchids generally prefer being rootbound in 
smallish pots.
PROPAGATION. Beallaras and alicearas are easy to 
propagate by division of the rhizome. Next time 
you need to up-pot your plant, cut the rhizome 
into two pieces so that each piece has a decent 
number of roots, pseudobulbs, and leaves.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), scale insects 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Corsage orchid

Corsage orchids acquired their common name 
during the 1940s and ’50s when Cattleya cor-
sages were all the rage among fashionable 
women of high society. First Lady Mamie Eisen-
hower popularized them; she was rarely seen in 

Corsage orchid (aka cattleya).

public without a corsage of one or two of these 
orchids during her husband’s two terms as Pres-
ident of the United States. The flowers are huge, 
6 inches across or more, strongly fragrant, and 
come in every color except true blue. The lower 
petal, or lip, of the flower is usually very large, 
frilly, and rolled into a tube at the base. The two 
upper petals are flat, often as wide as the lip, and 
may or may not be the same color as the lip. The 
three sepals are more narrow and pointy than 
the three petals.

Corsage orchids are in the Cattleya alli-

ance. Each natural genus in the alliance has sev-
eral species, and some have many. Cattleya, for 
example, has 113 species and Broughtonia, only 
six. Hybridizers have been busy making every 
conceivable intergeneric cross in this group, 
and hybrids with as many as seven different 

Corsage orchid.

genera in their backgrounds are known. Many 
of the plants in this group are fairly large. A 
standard-sized Cattleya alliance orchid has tall, 
slender pseudobulbs that look a bit like jointed 
stems. They’re very hard (almost woody), rather 
club-shaped (thick at the top, thin at the bot-
tom), furrowed, and green. They range in size 
from 1 to 4.5 feet, depending on the species or 
hybrids involved in the plant’s background. 
Each pseudobulb has a single leaf (unifoliate) or 
two leaves (bifoliate) at its top. The leaves are 
extremely stiff, leathery, and firm—so hard, they 
feel more like plastic. The plants have a creep-
ing rhizome that sprouts new pseudobulbs until 
your pot becomes crowded with them. Some 

Corsage orchid      167

growers like to up-pot their plants into wider 
and wider pots as the years go by until they have 
produced a magnificent specimen that, in bloom 
with dozens of flowers all at once, is a spec-
tacular sight. But it’s a challenge to get a plant 
that large and avoid root rot. Most growers opt 
to divide their cattleya orchids periodically, 
keeping them smaller and more manageable. 
Modern breeders have created a whole world 
of delightful and easy-to-grow miniature cat-
tleyas (mini-catts, for short) that often stay 
under 6 inches tall in a 4-inch pot, the perfect 
size for many situations, including a windowsill 
in your home.

The flower stalks of corsage orchids emerge 
from the top of the pseudobulbs. In some spe-
cies, such as Broughtonia sanguinea, the flower 
stalks are 2 feet long, slender, and carry several 
2-inch-wide flowers. In others, like Cattleya coc-
cinea, the flower stalk is short, stout, and car-
ries few 3-inch-wide flowers. A large species like 
C. labiata has a short, stocky inflorescence with 
three huge 6- to 8-inch-wide flowers. Interge-
neric hybrids, of course, vary enormously in the 
size, number, and disposition of their flowers.
Usually, when you buy a corsage orchid, it’s 
in full flower. Then when the flowers fade you 
hope the plant blooms again for you next year. 
However, many people have trouble getting 
their orchids to rebloom. The trick with corsage 
orchids, as with any houseplant orchid, is to pay 
attention to the plant’s growth patterns. After 
the last flowers fade on your corsage orchid look 
for new roots and new growing points emerg-
ing from the rhizomes. When you see these new 
bright green roots with their white tips, be dil-
igent about keeping your plant well watered 
and fertilized. Do not let it get desiccated and 
make sure it’s getting enough light, warmth, and 
constant weak fertilizer. That new growth you 
spotted slowly matures into a new pseudobulb, 
which will flower for you next year.

168      Orchids and Bromeliads

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Cattleya alliance orchids need 
very bright light, but they can’t take direct sun 
because their thick leaves cook and burn. A 
south window with sheer curtains to filter the 
light is best, but an east or west window also 
works well.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. Corsage orchids are not 
nearly as sensitive to heat as some orchids, but 
the temperature should not exceed 85°F.
LOW WATER. Give these orchids a good long drink 
once a week. Orchids are sensitive to water qual-
ity and should be irrigated with filtered, rain-, or 
distilled water, rather than tap water. Let tepid 
water flow through the entire root zone until all 
the potting medium is soaked. Let the pot drain 
and air out, then put it back in its place. Mark 
the pot so that your plant is returned to its orig-
inal position every time. Turning your orchid 
causes the flowers to twist and bend to face the 
light, which destroys their elegant arrangement.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer 
or tray of water, making sure the bottom of the 
pot never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a 
humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, orchid 
potting medium like medium orchid bark. Do 
not use garden soil or ordinary potting soil 
because it will kill this epiphytic orchid.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer, 
in either a water soluble or liquid formulation, 
to promote good growth and flowering. Apply at 
one-quarter-strength at least once a week right 
after you water your orchid.
POTTING. Your corsage orchid needs to be 

up-potted every two years or so. Choose a pot 
with a diameter 2 inches larger than the current 
pot. Orchids generally prefer being rootbound 
in smallish pots. Re-pot after flowering is com-
plete and when new growth and new roots start 
to emerge. Corsage orchid roots are thick and 
tough, and they adhere to their pots, especially 
clay pots, like glue. They are easily damaged 
when you rip them off the surface of the pot so 
treat them gently. Be attentive to watering after 
up-potting or re-potting these plants and do not 
allow them to dry out.
PROPAGATION. Corsage orchids are easy to prop-
agate by division of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Cymbidium.

Cymbidium

Cymbidiums are attractive even when not in 
flower—something that cannot be said of many 
orchids. The trouble is, their huge size and need 
for low temperatures make standard cymbidi-
ums (Cymbidium spp.) challenging as house-
plants, and Asian miniature cymbidiums, 
although tiny, require high temperatures to 
thrive. Fortunately, a third kind of cymbidium, 
modern cymbidium hybrids, are intermediate in 
their size and temperature needs. These modern 
hybrids result from hybridization between the 
big standard cymbidiums and the Asian minia-
tures, making them much more easy to grow as 
houseplants than either of their parents. Before 
purchasing a cymbidium for your home, look at 
the label or tag, or ask the grower or store per-
sonnel what kind of cymbidium it is. If you can-
not get an answer to this question, don’t buy 
the plant from that source. Go instead to one 
of the many reliable mail order orchid houses. 
You need to know what kind of cymbidium you 
have to know its temperature requirements. 
Given that basic information, you’ll be able to 
grow it successfully.

Cymbidium orchids have large, rounded 
pseudobulbs that look a bit like pointy green 
baseballs encased by the bases of the plant’s 
numerous leaves. The leaves, 2 to 3 feet long, 
narrow, flexible, and grass-like, arch gracefully 
out and away from the center of the plant. The 
plant’s very short creeping rhizome sprouts new 
pseudobulbs that are closely crowded together. 
Older pseudobulbs shed all their leaves, but 
they still have a vital function, to feed and sup-
port the new growth. Whenever you divide your 
cymbidium, make sure each division has two or 
three of these old pseudobulbs in addition to the 
new growth.

There is a simple trick to get your cymbidi-

ums to bloom again. Give them a cold treatment 

Cymbidium      169

Cymbidium.

170      Orchids and Bromeliads

in the autumn so they can set flower buds. Grow 
them outdoors in summer, or just put them out-
doors at night for a week or two in autumn. 
Don’t let them freeze. But let them have 55°F 
nights, and they will flower again in late winter 
or early spring.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Cymbidiums need a lot of light and 
tolerate a half-day of full sun from an east win-
dow quite well. Too much sun causes leaves to 
turn yellow or even burn, however, so filter the 
light with sheers if that happens.
TEMPERATURE. For standard cymbidiums, pro-
vide daytime temperatures of 65 to 75°F. For 
Asian miniatures, provide daytime temperatures 
of 75 to 85°F. For modern hybrid cymbidiums, 
provide daytime temperatures of 70 to 80°F. 
All three kinds of cymbidiums need nighttime 
temperatures of at least 50 to 55°F in autumn 
to set flower buds, so put your plants outside at 
night for a couple weeks in the fall. Bring them 
indoors in the daytime and whenever frost is 
threatening. You could also leave them outdoors 
in partial shade in the daytime so long as there’s 
no danger of frost.
LOW WATER. Give these orchids a good long 
drink once a week. Orchids are sensitive to 
water quality and should be irrigated with fil-
tered, rain-, or distilled water, rather than tap 
water. Let tepid water flow through the entire 
root zone until all the potting medium is soaked. 
Let the pot drain and air out, then put it back 
in its place. Mark the pot so that your plant 
is returned to its original position every time. 
Turning your orchid causes the flowers to twist 
and bend to face the light, which destroys their 
elegant arrangement.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant often with a spray 

bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a hand-
held mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a humidi-
fier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic potting 
medium designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, 
one that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer, 
in either a water soluble or liquid formulation, 
to promote good growth and flowering. Apply at 
one-quarter-strength at least once a week right 
after you water your orchid.
POTTING. When your orchid needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Cymbidiums are easy to propa-
gate by division of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), spider mites 
(page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Dancing lady

Dancing ladies (Oncidium spp.) are among the 
easiest orchids to grow successfully as house-
plants. The plants are as beautiful as the flow-
ers, and they can be relied on to repeat bloom 
so long as you provide them with the condi-
tions they need. The flowers are small, about 
1 inch long and half as wide. But they’re borne 
by the dozens on every flowering stem, and a 
well-grown dancing lady orchid can have many 
flowering stems all blooming at once. What’s 
more, dancing ladies are in the Odontoglossum/
Oncidium alliance, and the crossing of these 
complex intergenerics is one of the hottest fields 
in orchid breeding today. The result is that large 

Dancing lady      171

you’ll regularly encounter have flowers that are 
yellow with small brown freckles (e.g., Gower 
Ramsey). Their large, frilly, yellow lip does 
indeed look like a can-can or flamenco skirt, and 
the brown and yellow petals look like the arms 
and head of a tiny dancer. Another commonly 
available dancing lady, Sharry Baby, has brick 
red markings on a cream background and smells 
just like chocolate.

The genus Oncidium actually includes 330 
natural species, which are epiphytes in nature, 
and many thousands of hybrids that range in 
size from tiny little guys barely 6 inches tall 
to giants 5 feet tall and wide. Oncidiums have 
glossy, bright yellow-green pseudobulbs, 3 to 5 
inches tall, 2 to 3 inches wide, and up to 1 inch 
thick. Usually shaped like flattened teardrops, 
they function as water storage devices and are 
really quite pretty. The pseudobulbs are clus-
tered together and produced at regular inter-
vals from a creeping rhizome. Grassy, flexible, 
2-foot-long, 1-inch-wide foliage grows from the 
top of each pseudobulb. Flower stalks, 2 to 3 feet 
long, bearing clouds of small flowers, generally 
erupt from the pseudobulb’s base.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light from an 
east window is best for the kinds of danc-
ing ladies prevalent in your local stores, and is 
the key to getting them to rebloom. No direct 
sun. And avoid the heat load of a south or west 
window. Some oncidiums do like full sun and 
high heat, but these are usually available only 
from specialty orchid houses, not your local 
garden center.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
LOW WATER. Give dancing ladies a good long 

Dancing lady (aka oncidium).

numbers of these gorgeous orchids find their 
way to your local supermarkets, big box stores, 
and independent garden centers, at very reason-
able prices. Though flowers occur in red, pink, 
magenta, and white, most dancing lady orchids 

172      Orchids and Bromeliads

drink once a week. Orchids are sensitive to 
water quality and should be irrigated with fil-
tered, rain-, or distilled water, rather than tap 
water. Let tepid water flow through the entire 
root zone until all the potting medium is soaked. 
Let the pot drain and air out, then put it back 
in its place. Mark the pot so that your plant 
is returned to its original position every time. 
Turning your orchid causes the flowers to twist 
and bend to face the light, which destroys their 
elegant arrangement.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, but make absolutely sure the bot-
tom of the pot never sits directly in the water by 
raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Con-
sider putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, orchid 
potting medium such as medium orchid bark. 
Do not use garden soil or ordinary potting soil 
because it will kill this epiphytic orchid.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer, 
in either a water soluble or liquid formulation, 
to promote good growth and flowering. Apply at 
one-quarter-strength at least once a week right 
after you water your orchid.
POTTING. Your dancing lady orchid needs to be 
up-potted every two years or so. Choose a pot 
with a diameter 2 inches larger than the current 
pot. Orchids generally prefer being rootbound in 
smallish pots.
PROPAGATION. Dancing lady orchids are easy to 
propagate by division of the rhizome. Next time 
you need to up-pot your plant cut the rhizome 
into two pieces so that each piece has a decent 
number of roots, pseudobulbs, and leaves.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), scale insects 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Dendrobium

Dendrobium is one of the largest genera of 
orchids, with more than 1,600 species and many, 
many hybrids, offering flowers in every color 
(except true blue). The growing requirements 
for so many different orchids are just as various. 
The specifications given here for growing den-
drobiums successfully in your home are for the 
Jaquelyn Thomas hybrids. These hybrids are 
readily available in big box stores, supermar-
kets, and independent garden centers. Jaquelyn 
Thomas hybrids grow tall, 2 to 4 feet, with long, 
slender, furrowed pseudobulbs called canes. 
The canes stand erect but sometimes need to be 
staked to keep them from flopping over. These 
orchids have a creeping rhizome that gener-
ates new canes regularly. The canes are leafy, 

Dendrobium.

Dendrobium      173

Dendrobium.

especially in the top third, and flower stalks 
appear in the upper leaf axils of the cane and out 
of the very top of the cane. The flower stalks are 
12 inches long and carry a dozen or more flow-
ers in white, pink, and combinations of white 
and pink. Each cane produces several inflores-
cences at a time. The flowers are 2 to 3 inches 
across and long-lived. Plants are epiphytic and 
evergreen, with leaves to 4 inches long, glossy, 
narrow, and pointed at the tip. Canes keep their 
leaves for a couple of years but gradually shed 

them as they age, so that really old canes are 
leafless. If you forget to water your plant and 
allow it to dry out completely, it sheds its leaves.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Dendrobiums need very bright light 
but they can’t take direct sun because their 
leaves cook and burn. A south window with 

174      Orchids and Bromeliads

sheer curtains to filter the light is best, but an 
east or west window also works well. If your 
dendrobium is reluctant to bloom for you, try 
giving it more light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. Dendrobiums are not 
nearly as sensitive to heat as some orchids, but 
the temperature should not exceed 85°F.
MODERATE WATER. When your dendrobium is 
actively growing new roots and canes, or is flow-
ering, give it water twice a week; the rest of 
the year give it a good long drink once a week. 
Orchids are sensitive to water quality and 
should be irrigated with filtered, rain-, or dis-
tilled water, rather than tap water. Let tepid 
water flow through the entire root zone until all 
the potting medium is soaked. Let the pot drain 
and air out, then put it back in its place. Mark 
the pot so that your plant is returned to its orig-
inal position every time. Turning your orchid 
causes the flowers to twist and bend to face the 
light, which destroys their elegant arrangement.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer 
or tray of water, making sure the bottom of the 
pot never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a 
humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, orchid 
potting medium like medium bark or plain ordi-
nary 0.5-inch gravel. Believe it or not, dendrobi-
ums actually like to grow in gravel. This helps to 
keep the plant upright. Many dendrobiums grow 
tall and get quite top-heavy for their ridiculously 
tiny pots. Do not use garden soil or ordinary pot-
ting soil because it will kill this epiphytic orchid, 
and if you choose gravel, be sure to follow the 
fertilizer guidelines.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer, 
in either a water soluble or liquid formulation, 
to promote good growth and flowering. Apply at 

one-quarter-strength at least once a week right 
after you water your orchid.
POTTING. Your dendrobium needs to be up- 
potted every two years or so. Choose a pot with 
a diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. 
Orchids generally prefer being rootbound in 
smallish pots, and dendrobiums are the extreme 
in that regard. Heavy, 2-foot-tall dendrobiums in 
tiny 4-inch pots are commonplace. Re-pot after 
flowering is complete and when new growth and 
new roots start to emerge. Dendrobium roots 
are thin and delicate. They can be easily dam-
aged when you dump the plant out of the pot so 
treat them gently. Be attentive to watering after 
up-potting or re-potting these plants, and do not 
allow them to dry out completely.
PROPAGATION. Dendrobiums are easy to propa-
gate by division of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for failure to flower (page 247), mealy-
bugs (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Earthstar

The commonly cultivated earthstars Cryptan-
thus acaulis and C. zonatus are bromeliads 
grown strictly for their foliage. Their starry, 
wavy-edged and sharply spiny leaves come in 
shades of red, rose, pink, green, and brown—
even nearly black with silver. The stiff leaves 
are longitudinally striped like ribbons in con-
trasting colors (C. acaulis) or are zebra-striped 
(C. zonatus). The flowers, borne in the center of 
the plant, are insignificant (hence Cryptanthus, 
“hidden flower”). Plants flower when they are 
three to five years old and then, like all brome-
liads, they die. But as they die, earthstars make 
pups, new little plants that are clones (identical 
copies) of the mother plant, in the nodes of the 
outermost leaves.

Earthstar      175

Earthstars are terrestrial bromeliads, that is, 

they grow on the ground like ordinary plants, 
unlike their mostly epiphytic cousins. All brome-
liad leaves absorb moisture from the air through 
specialized scales. Most bromeliads have leaves 
that form a “vase” that holds water. In earth-
star, this cup is very shallow because its leaves 
spread flat and wide. In nature, the leaves absorb 
nutrients from anything that falls into the tank 
of water, a feature that makes bromeliads very 
easy to fertilize as houseplants by just spray-
ing the foliage. Some nutrients are absorbed 
immediately by the leaves and some accumu-
late in the tank to be taken up later. Any fertil-
izer that reaches the potting medium is taken up 
by the roots.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Earthstar does well with a 
half-day of full sun from an east or west window 
or really bright filtered light. It loses color and 
goes green if it’s not getting enough light. Too 
much sun, however, burns the foliage. Earthstar 
also does very well under artificial lights.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water your earthstar by pour-
ing a little distilled water or rainwater into the 
plant’s shallow tank. Try to maintain a con-
stant supply of water in the tank and don’t let 

Earthstar (aka chameleon plant, starfish plant, air plant).

176      Orchids and Bromeliads

your plant dry out. At the same time, however, 
do not water so heavily that the potting medium 
becomes saturated and soggy. A little water fre-
quently is the ticket, and too much water can 
easily lead to root rot. Don’t use tap water for 
these plants; they are sensitive to the chemicals 
it contains.
HUMIDITY. Earthstars really like high humid-
ity. Mist your plant daily with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, mak-
ing sure the bottom of the pot never sits directly 
in the water by raising the pot up on pot feet or 
pebbles. Consider putting a humidifier in the 
room or growing your plants in a terrarium.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic potting 
medium designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, 
one that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic 
fertilizer mixed at half-strength and spray it 
on the leaves once a month through the grow-
ing season. In winter, apply fertilizer every 
other month.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it in the spring to a container with a diam-
eter 2 inches larger than the current pot. Use a 
shallow pot, wider than deep, and be gentle; this 
plant has only a few shallow roots. A 5- or 6-inch 
pot is plenty big enough for a mature earthstar.
PROPAGATION. Earthstars are easy to propagate 
by separating the pups from the parent plant. 
When these pups are about one-third the size of 
the parent plant, cut them off and pot them up 
in the same kind of medium as the parent plant. 
Keep them in a clear plastic bag to maintain high 
humidity, and put them in a warm place for a 
month or so until they’re established.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), scale 
insects (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Flaming sword

Flaming sword (Vriesea splendens) is a brome-
liad common in garden centers, supermarkets, 
and big box stores. It’s a popular houseplant 
both for its impressive, bright red inflores-
cence and for its colorful leaves, whose alter-
nating cross-wise bands of maroon and silvery 
green look rather like Pippi’s long stockings. 
Like all bromeliads, the leaves of the flaming 
sword absorb moisture from the air through 
specialized scales. Most bromeliads have leaves 
that form a “vase” that holds water, and in the 
flaming sword this cup (or tank) is substan-
tial because the leaves arch up and out from 
the center of the plant. In nature, the leaves 

Flaming sword (aka painted feather, zebra brome-
liad, vriesea).

Flaming sword      177

absorb nutrients from anything that falls into 
the water tank, a feature that makes bromeliads 
very easy to fertilize by just spraying the foli-
age. Some nutrients are absorbed immediately 
by the leaves and some accumulate in the tank to 
be taken up later. Any fertilizer that reaches the 
potting medium is taken up by the roots.

Flaming sword grows about 20 inches tall 

and 24 inches wide with a dozen stiff, strap-like, 
15-inch-long and 2-inch-wide leaves that overlap 
at their bases, forming the water-holding cup. 
The plant flowers when it’s three to four years 
old, sending a 2-foot-tall spike from the center 
of the water tank. The top half of the spike has 
brilliant scarlet, tightly overlapping bracts that 
make the spike 2 to 3 inches wide. This quill-like 
inflorescence with its colorful bracts lasts for 
months. Small bright yellow flowers peek out 
from between the bright red bracts on the spike. 
Each individual flower is short-lived. The plant 
blooms for months and then it slowly dies a 
long, graceful death over the course of a year. As 
it dies, however, it clones itself by producing one 
or more pups off to one side of the mother plant. 
If your plant is in flower when you purchase it, 
don’t fret when it begins its decline. It will pro-
duce at least one pup, and in another three to 
four years the pup will flower. Most flaming 
swords are sold potted, since that’s the easiest 
way for growers to produce these plants. How-
ever, you could grow this epiphyte on a slab of 
bark, an untreated board, or some other wooden 
perch if you want to.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light is perfect for 
flaming sword. The plant appreciates a daily 
dose of a couple of hours of direct morning sun 
in winter.

178      Orchids and Bromeliads

MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Flaming sword bromeliad has 
a fairly capacious tank, from which it obtains 
most of its water. Empty the tank and refill it 
with fresh distilled water or rainwater every 
two weeks or so. Moisten the potting medium at 
the same time but not so much that it becomes 
saturated and soggy. A little water frequently is 
the ticket, and too much water can easily lead 
to root rot. Don’t use tap water for these plants; 
they are sensitive to the chemicals it contains.
HUMIDITY. Flaming swords like high humidity. 
Mist your plant at least once a week with a spray 
bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a hand-
held mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of 
water, making sure the bottom of the pot never 
sits directly in the water by raising the pot up on 
pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a humidi-
fier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic potting 
medium designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, 
one that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic 
fertilizer mixed at half-strength and spray it 
on the leaves once a month through the grow-
ing season. In winter, apply fertilizer every 
other month.
POTTING. If you are growing flaming sword in a 
pot, up-pot young plants to a container with a 
diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. 
Up-pot them in the spring. Use a shallow pot, 
wider than deep, and be gentle; this plant has 
only a few shallow roots. A 6-inch pot is plenty 
big enough for a mature flaming sword. Once 
it matures it does not need up-potting; and, of 
course, once it flowers it’s going to die.

To grow it on a slab of bark or piece of drift-
wood, gently knock the plant out of its pot and 
shake off most but not all of the potting medium. 
Handle the roots gently and position your plant 

on its side on the slab of bark. Cover the roots 
with a little bit of moist sphagnum moss. Tack 
three or four small nails into the slab all around 
the base of your plant. Wrap plastic-coated wire 
around the head of one of the nails, then wrap 
the wire across the base of your plant over to 
another nail and wrap the wire around that 
nail’s head. Continue wrapping from nail to nail 
until your plant is securely bound to the slab 
with a crisscrossed network of wire. Tuck moist-
ened sphagnum moss all around the roots and 
the wire to hide the wire. Hang the plant in a 
warm, humid, shaded location until it’s estab-
lished on its new perch.
PROPAGATION. Flaming swords are easy to prop-
agate by separating the pup from the parent 
plant when the pup is half grown. Pot up the 
pup in the same kind of medium as the parent 
plant or on its own slab. Keep it in a clear plas-
tic bag in warm temperatures for a month until 
it’s established.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), scale insects 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Guzmania

Floral bracts in a wide array of colors—flaming 
scarlet, red, pink, orange, lavender, or yellow—
form a globular inflorescence that stands above 
the handsome, glossy leaves of this popular bro-
meliad. Guzmania plants (Guzmania lingulata, 
G. sanguinea, and numerous hybrids) are about 
10 inches tall and 12 inches wide, with narrow, 
strap-shaped leaves to 18 inches in length that 
arch up and out from the funnel-shaped rosette 
at the plant’s center. Like all bromeliads, the 
leaves of guzmania absorb moisture from the 
air through specialized scales. Most bromeliads 
have leaves that form a “vase” that holds water, 

Guzmania (aka scarlet star, vase plant).

and in guzmania the overlapping bases of the 
leaves form this watertight cup in its heart. In 
nature, the leaves absorb nutrients from any-
thing that falls into the water tank, a feature 
that makes bromeliads very easy to fertilize by 
just spraying the foliage. Some nutrients are 
absorbed immediately by the leaves and some 
accumulate in the tank to be taken up later. Any 
fertilizer that reaches the potting medium is 
taken up by the roots.

Guzmania blooms when it’s three to four 

years old. The flower spike is taller than the foli-
age and emerges from the center of the water 
tank. The spike has brilliantly colored, pointed 
bracts that flare out wide from the spike’s stalk. 

Guzmania      179

Guzmania.

180      Orchids and Bromeliads

This inflorescence with its colorful bracts lasts 
for a couple of months. Small white flowers peek 
out from between the bracts on the spike. Each 
individual flower is short-lived, but the plant 
blooms for six to eight weeks. After it blooms it 
dies a long, slow, graceful death over the course 
of a year, but like all bromeliads, it clones itself 
as it dies, producing one or two pups around its 
base. If your plant is in flower when you pur-
chase it, don’t fret when it begins its decline. It 
produces at least one pup, and in another three 
to four years the new pup should flower. Most 
guzmanias are sold potted, since that’s the eas-
iest way for growers to produce these plants. 
However, you could grow this epiphyte on a 
slab of bark, an untreated board, or some other 
wooden perch if you want to.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Moderately bright, filtered light 
with no direct sun suits this plant perfectly. It 
also does very well under bright artificial lights.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Guzmania has a fairly capa-
cious tank, from which it obtains most of its 
water. Keep about 1 inch of water in the tank. 
Empty the tank and refill it with fresh distilled 
water or rainwater every two to three weeks or 
so. Moisten the potting medium at the same time 
but not so much that it becomes saturated and 
soggy. A little water frequently is the ticket, and 
too much water can easily lead to root rot. Don’t 
use tap water for these plants; they are sensitive 
to the chemicals it contains.
HUMIDITY. Guzmania likes high humidity. Mist 
your plant at least once a week with a spray bot-
tle of water on a mist setting, or use a handheld 
mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 

making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles. Consider putting a humidifier in 
the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic potting 
medium designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, 
one that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic 
fertilizer mixed at half-strength and spray it 
on the leaves once a month through the grow-
ing season. In winter, apply fertilizer every 
other month.
POTTING. If you grow guzmania in a pot, young 
plants need up-potting to a container with a 
diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. 
Up-pot them in the spring. Use a shallow pot, 
wider than deep, and be gentle; this plant has 
only a few shallow roots. A 6-inch pot is plenty 
big enough for a mature guzmania. These plants 
are top-heavy and tend to tip over, so choose a 
heavy pot for your plant. Once it matures it does 
not need up-potting; and, of course, once it flow-
ers it’s going to die.

To grow it on a slab of bark or piece of drift-
wood, gently knock the plant out of its pot and 
shake off most but not all of the potting medium. 
Handle the roots gently and position your plant 
on its side on the slab of bark. Cover the roots 
with a little bit of moist sphagnum moss. Tack 
three or four small nails into the slab all around 
the base of your plant. Wrap plastic-coated wire 
around the head of one of the nails, then wrap 
the wire across the base of your plant over to 
another nail and wrap the wire around that 
nail’s head. Continue wrapping from nail to nail 
until your plant is securely bound to the slab 
with a crisscrossed network of wire. Tuck moist-
ened sphagnum moss all around the roots and 
the wire to hide the wire. Hang the plant in a 
warm, humid, shaded location until it’s estab-
lished on its new perch.

Guzmania      181

PROPAGATION. Guzmania is easy to propagate by 
separating the pup from the parent plant when 
the pup is 3 inches tall. Pot up the pup in the 
same kind of medium as the parent plant but 
keep it in a loose clear plastic bag in warm tem-
peratures for a month until it’s established.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Lady’s slipper

Although this common name is applied to three 
different genera of orchids, the genus we’ll dis-
cuss here is Paphiopedilum. Paphiopedilums are 
the best of all the lady’s slippers and the ones 
you’ll readily find in your local stores. They are 
among the easiest of all orchids to grow and 
to rebloom in your home. These tropical semi-
terrestrial rhizomatous orchids are adapted to 
low light and warm temperatures, which makes 
them very good household companions.

When you see a lady’s slipper in flower, it’s 
impossible not to do a double take. You have to, 
to take in all the fascinating detail of the blos-
soms. The often somber flower colors include 
mahogany, honey, yellow, white, pink, and green, 
usually with stripes, spots, and warts. The pet-
als are smooth, stiff, waxy, and sometimes 
wavy-edged. The pouchy lip has a glossy lac-
quered look and is surprisingly firm. But none 
of these words conveys the distinctive char-
acter of these flowers. Almost as if they have 
individual personalities, the flowers are com-
manding, charismatic presences that lure you 
in for a closer look. They are borne on tall stalks 
well above the leaves, each stalk usually carry-
ing only one flower, although some hybrids have 
more than one flower per stalk. Each individ-
ual flower can easily last in good condition for 

182      Orchids and Bromeliads

Lady’s slipper (aka Venus’ slipper, paphiopedilum).

two months on the plant, which makes paphs 
among the longest-lived blooms of any house-
plant. The leaves of all forms, whether species or 
hybrid, are rather soft for an orchid and are car-
ried in a basal rosette near ground level. Some 
hybrids have narrow, long, strap-like leaves that 
arch gracefully, while others have shorter, wider 
leaves. Foliage is either solid green or mottled 
like a delicate checkerboard with pale greenish 
white patches.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
LOW LIGHT. Paphiopedilums do not like direct 
sun and do best in bright ambient light from a 
north window or medium filtered light from 
an east or west window. If you’re having trou-
ble getting your paph to rebloom, give it a little 
more light and cooler temperatures for a couple 
of weeks.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 
inch. These orchids are among the few that do 
not have pseudobulbs as water storage struc-
tures and need to be kept moist all the time. 
Orchids are sensitive to water quality and 
should be irrigated with filtered, rain-, or dis-
tilled water, rather than tap water. Let tepid 
water flow through the entire root zone until all 
the potting medium is soaked. Tip the plant back 
and forth to drain all the water out of the crown 
of the plant. Let the pot drain and air out, then 
put it back in its place. Mark the pot so that your 
plant is returned to its original position every 
time. Turning your orchid causes the flowers to 
twist and bend to face the light, which destroys 
their elegant arrangement.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer 
or tray of water, making sure the bottom of the 
pot never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a 
humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic potting 
medium designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, 
one that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer, 

in either a water soluble or liquid formulation, 
to promote good growth and flowering. Apply at 
one-quarter-strength at least once a week right 
after you water your orchid.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Lady’s slippers are easy to propa-
gate by division of the rhizome.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and bacterial leaf spot (page 267).

Lady’s slipper.

Lady’s slipper      183

Moth orchid

Moth orchids are species and hybrids in the gen-
era Phalaenopsis and Doritis, and their interge-
neric cross, ×Doritaenopsis. All are epiphytes 
in nature (they never grow in soil), and any one 
of the many available kinds would be a sophis-
ticated addition to your home. The flowers are 
gorgeous with each of the two huge upper pet-
als making half of a nearly complete circle. The 
little lower lip is brightly colored and very intri-
cately shaped with various horns, teeth, and 
lumps. Flower color varies from virginal white 
or white with a red lip to pink, deep pink, dark 
purple-pink, yellow, orange, or green. Plants 
are compact, with three to five, thick, leath-
ery, paddle-shaped green leaves at their base. 
Long, thin, erect flower stalks arise from below 
the leaves, each bearing from six to 20 or more 
flowers, which last in good condition for many 
weeks. Some plants offer continuous bloom for 
more than six months.

The plants commonly available at big box 

stores or supermarket floral departments are the 
big-flowered standard-sized phals. These are 
big plants with a leaf spread 24 inches wide and 
flower stalks 36 inches tall. Flower size on these 
big boys is an impressive 5 inches across. But it’s 
the elegant disposition of the flowers that is so 
captivating. Each flower stalk grows straight up, 
then arches over toward the light, then angles 
down toward the floor. Each bears a dozen or 
so of the big flowers, but they are arranged one 
above the other like a sophisticated double stair-
case. Each flower presents its flat face to the 
viewer unimpeded by the flower in front of it. 
The large-flowered moth orchids increasingly 
seen at supermarkets offer new and interest-
ing color combinations, such as large deep pur-
ple blotches on white petals or pink stripes on a 
white or pink background.

Aside from the big standard-sized moth 

184      Orchids and Bromeliads

orchids, there are many other species of much 
smaller stature, with smaller, heavier, and wax-
ier flowers in a broader range of colors. Phalae-
nopsis lueddemanniana and others contributed 
golden yellow colors and stripes and spots to 
moth orchid hybrids. We have P. violacea to 
thank for adding violet and intriguing pat-
terns to petals and sepals. Tiny P. equestris has 
intensely dark pink flowers only 1 inch across 
borne in great abundance. The result of all this 
hybridizing activity is that when you see moth 
orchids for sale in your local stores, you’ll find 
small-flowered miniatures with a leaf spread of 
6 inches or less and a flower stalk from 6 to 12 
inches tall. You’ll also find the large-flowered 

Moth orchid (aka moon orchid).

Moth orchid.

standard size, and everything in between. Mod-
ern hybrids have flowers in every color except 
true blue, with or without stripes, spots, or 
blotches in contrasting colors.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
LOW LIGHT. Put moth orchids in a warm north 
window, or put them on a coffee table, a book-
shelf, or a table where the light is nice and bright 
but not sunny. Never expose them to the full 
sun of a south window because the sun burns 
their thick leaves very quickly. Sunburned leaves 
develop large, black, dead patches that are per-
manent. In the right amount of light, leaves are 

a medium olive-green. If your plants are getting 
too much light the foliage turns yellow-green. 
Insufficient light turns the leaves dark green.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F 
year-round, nighttime about 65°F except when 
initiating flowering. In autumn, when outdoor 
temperatures drop, stimulate flower production 
by giving your moth orchids a nighttime temper-
ature of 58°F for 30 days. Plants flower in spring.
AMPLE WATER. Water whenever the top of the 
potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 0.5 
inch. Orchids are sensitive to water quality and 
should be irrigated with filtered, rain-, or dis-
tilled water, rather than tap water. Flood the 
root zone with tepid water. Avoid getting the 
crown of the foliage wet if you can. Let the pot 
drain and air out, then put it back in its place. 

Moth orchid      185

Mark the pot so that your plant is returned to 
its original position every time. Turning your 
orchid causes the flowers to twist and bend 
to face the light, which destroys their elegant 
arrangement. Another method of watering your 
moth orchid is to place two or three ice cubes 
(not of tap water) on top of the potting medium 
once a week and let them melt.
HUMIDITY. Kitchens and baths generate a lot 
of humidity in most homes, and moth orchids 
appreciate the added moisture in the air. 
Another method of increasing humidity is to 
set the pot on top of a tray filled with gravel and 
water. Just be sure the pot is raised up above the 
surface level of the water. Sitting in water will 
kill your plant. Misting your plants midweek 
between waterings with a spray bottle of water 
also helps.
POTTING MEDIUM. Moth orchids grow very well 
in orchid bark and nothing else. Some people 
add a little coarse peat and some perlite to the 
mix, but the plants generally perform well in 
straight Douglas fir bark. Orchid bark comes in 
three grades: coarse, medium, and fine. Use the 
fine bark for small plants like minis and seed-
lings. Use the medium bark for mature full-size 
plants. Do not use garden soil or ordinary pot-
ting soil because it will kill this epiphytic orchid.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer, 
in either a water soluble or liquid formulation, 
to promote good growth and flowering. Apply at 
one-quarter-strength at least once a week right 
after you water your orchid.
POTTING. Your moth orchid needs to be up- 
potted every two years or so. Choose a pot with 
a diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. 
Orchids generally prefer being rootbound in 
smallish pots. The largest plants would grow 
very well in a 6-inch pot and the smallest in a 
4-inch pot.
PROPAGATION. Moth orchids have no rhizomes 
and so cannot be divided. But they do often 

186      Orchids and Bromeliads

produce a keiki on the old flower stalk. When 
the small keiki has two or three leaves and 
several roots, cut it off the mother plant and 
pot it up.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), scale insects 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Neoregelia

These bromeliads are grown primarily for 
their very showy and colorful foliage. Neorege-
lia carolinae is the most commonly cultivated 
species. Plants are 2 feet wide and half as tall, 
flat-topped, with a rosette of 1.5-inch-wide, 
12-inch-long, strap-shaped leaves striped like 
ribbon candy with creamy white. Like all bro-
meliads, neoregelia leaves absorb moisture from 
the air through specialized scales. Most brome-
liads have leaves that form a “vase” that holds 
water, and in neoregelias, a shallow water tank 
is formed by the overlapping bases of the leaves. 
In nature, the leaves absorb nutrients from any-
thing that falls into the water tank, a feature 
that makes bromeliads very easy to fertilize by 
just spraying the foliage. Some nutrients are 
absorbed immediately by the leaves and some 
accumulate in the tank to be taken up later. Any 
fertilizer that reaches the potting medium is 
taken up by the roots.

Neoregelias bloom when they’re three to four 

years old. The leaves around the center of the 
plant’s tank turn bright red as flowering begins 
(that’s why they’re sometimes called blushing 
bromeliads), and the brilliant colors remain for 
the rest of the plant’s life. The flower spike itself 
is very short, and you’d probably never know the 
plant was in bloom if it didn’t colorize the foli-
age so prettily. The violet flowers are not at all 
showy and are tucked down inside the water 

tank. After it flowers, your neoregelia slowly 
dies. It can take a year for this process, during 
which time the plant clones itself. The mother 
plant produces several pups around its base. 
Most neoregelias are sold potted, since that’s the 
easiest way for growers to produce these plants. 
However, you could grow this epiphyte on a 
slab of bark, an untreated board, or some other 
wooden perch if you want to.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.

MEDIUM LIGHT. Neoregelias prosper with 
a half-day of direct sun from an east or 
west window.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Neoregelia obtains most of its 
water from its shallow tank. Keep about 1 inch 
of water in the tank. Empty the tank and refill 
it with fresh distilled water or rainwater every 
two to three weeks or so. Moisten the potting 
medium at the same time but not so much that it 
becomes saturated and soggy. A little water fre-
quently is the ticket, and too much water can 
easily lead to root rot. Don’t use tap water for 

Neoregelia (aka blushing bromeliad, cartwheel plant).

Neoregelia      187

these plants; they are sensitive to the chemicals 
it contains.
HUMIDITY. Neoregelia prefers humidity above 
50%, which can be tricky to provide with a 
half-day of full sun. Mist your plant frequently 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer 
or tray of water, making sure the bottom of the 
pot never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a 
humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic potting 
medium designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, 
one that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic 
fertilizer mixed at half-strength and spray it 
on the leaves once a month through the grow-
ing season. In winter, apply fertilizer every 
other month.

POTTING. If you grow neoregelia in a pot, young 
plants need up-potting to a container with a 
diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. 
Up-pot them in the spring. Use a shallow pot, 
wider than deep, and be gentle; this plant has 
only a few shallow roots. A 6-inch pot is plenty 
big enough for a mature neoregelia. Once it 
matures it does not need up-potting; and, of 
course, once it flowers it’s going to die.

To grow it on a slab of bark or piece of drift-
wood, gently knock the plant out of its pot and 
shake off most but not all of the potting medium. 
Handle the roots gently and position your plant 
on its side on the slab of bark. Cover the roots 
with a little bit of moist sphagnum moss. Tack 
three or four small nails into the slab all around 
the base of your plant. Wrap plastic-coated wire 
around the head of one of the nails, then wrap 
the wire across the base of your plant over to 
another nail and wrap the wire around that 

Neoregelia.

188      Orchids and Bromeliads

nail’s head. Continue wrapping from nail to nail 
until your plant is securely bound to the slab 
with a crisscrossed network of wire. Tuck moist-
ened sphagnum moss all around the roots and 
the wire to hide the wire. Hang the plant in a 
warm, humid, shaded location until it’s estab-
lished on its new perch.
PROPAGATION. Neoregelia is easy to propagate 
by separating the pups after the mother plant 
has died. Pot up the pups in the same kind of 
medium as the parent plant but keep them in a 
loose clear plastic bag in warm temperatures for 
a month until they’re established.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Pansy orchid

Gorgeous, elegant, and sophisticated are the 
adjectives that spring to mind when describ-
ing these lovely orchids, whose popularity has 
exploded in recent years. Well-grown pansy 
orchids (Miltoniopsis hybrids) have long, wiry 
flower stalks that arch up, out, and down from 
the center of the plant and carry as many as a 
dozen 4-inch-long, fragrant flowers perfectly 
arranged one above the other with their flat 
faces presented to the viewer. Flower colors 
vary from red, pink, and lavender to white and 
yellow. The very large lip of these flowers has a 
large dark blotch at the base with dark lines bor-
dered in pure white that radiate down the veins 
of the lip in a waterfall pattern. Really stunning! 
Easy-to-grow modern hybrids are commonly 
available in local garden centers, grocery stores, 
and big box stores everywhere.

Pansy orchids have several 12-inch-long, 
1-inch-wide, V-shaped, rather strap-like and 
flexible leaf-like bracts attached to the base of 

Pansy orchid (aka miltoniopsis).

their pseudobulbs. A single leaf is attached to 
the top of the pseudobulb. The overall effect is 
full and somewhat grass-like, meaning plants are 
attractive even when not in flower. The smooth, 
glossy, light green pseudobulbs, usually small 
flattened teardrops in shape, are about 2 inches 
long and partly hidden inside the sheathing 

Pansy orchid      189

bases of the bracts. As in other orchids, the 
pseudobulbs function as water storage devices 
and are clustered together at the soil line. Pansy 
orchids have a creeping rhizome that produces 
new pseudobulbs at regular intervals. Flower 
stalks generally erupt from the base of the 
pseudobulbs.

To get your pansy orchid to bloom again next 
year, examine the plant frequently after the cur-
rent crop of flowers fades. About two to four 
weeks after the last flowers fade look for new 
growth emerging from the base of the pseudo-
bulb that just flowered. When you see new green 
roots with white growing tips, be diligent about 
keeping your plant well watered and fertilized. 
A pointy, green, new growth emerges along 
with these new roots and it’s going to mature 
into a new pseudobulb that flowers the next 
year. Do not let it dry out and make sure it’s get-
ting bright but indirect light and cool tempera-
tures. Under adverse conditions where the plant 
does not get what it needs in terms of light, tem-
perature, water, and fertilizer, that new growth 
develops but does not flower. A new pseudobulb 
that fails to flower is called a blind growth.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Very bright filtered light from an 
east window is ideal. No direct sun. And avoid 
the heat load of a south or west window.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Give these orchids a good 
long drink twice a week. Orchids are sensitive 
to water quality and should be irrigated with fil-
tered, rain-, or distilled water, rather than tap 
water. Let tepid water flow through the entire 
root zone until all the potting medium is soaked. 
Let the pot drain and air out, then put it back 

190      Orchids and Bromeliads

in its place. Mark the pot so that your plant 
is returned to its original position every time. 
Turning your orchid causes the flowers to twist 
and bend to face the light, which destroys their 
elegant arrangement.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, but make absolutely sure the bot-
tom of the pot never sits directly in the water by 
raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Con-
sider putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, orchid 
potting medium such as medium orchid bark. 
Do not use garden soil or ordinary potting soil 
because it would kill this epiphytic orchid.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer, 
in either a water soluble or liquid formulation, 
to promote good growth and flowering. Apply at 
one-quarter-strength at least once a week right 
after you water your orchid.
POTTING. Your pansy orchid needs to be up- 
potted every two years or so. Choose a pot 
with a diameter 2 inches larger than the cur-
rent pot. Orchids generally prefer being root-
bound in smallish pots. Re-pot after flowering is 
complete and when new growth and new roots 
start to emerge. Miltoniopsis roots are slender, 
small, and easily damaged, so treat them gen-
tly. Be attentive to watering after up-potting or 
re-potting these plants and do not allow them to 
dry out.
PROPAGATION. Pansy orchids are easy to propa-
gate by division of the rhizome. Next time you 
need to up-pot your plant cut the rhizome into 
two pieces so that each piece has a decent num-
ber of roots, pseudobulbs, and leaves.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for accordion-folded leaves (page 246), 
scale insects (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Queen’s tears

Queen’s tears (Billbergia nutans) is so beau-
tiful and so easy to grow, it is no wonder it is 
such a popular houseplant. Plants grow 16 to 
18 inches tall and 30 inches wide and are par-
ticularly attractive in a hanging pot or basket, 
where the cascading flowers can be enjoyed at 
eye level. Leaves arch up and out from a narrow, 
funnel-shaped rosette at the plant’s center; they 
are 1 inch wide and 18 inches long, somewhat 
grass-like but wide and flat with saw-toothed 
edges. Like all bromeliads, the leaves of queen’s 
tears absorb moisture from the air through spe-
cialized scales. Most bromeliads have leaves 
that form a “vase” that holds water, and in 
queen’s tears the densely overlapping bases of 
the numerous leaves form this watertight cup in 
its heart. In nature, the leaves absorb nutrients 
from anything that falls into the water tank, a 
feature that makes bromeliads very easy to fer-
tilize by just spraying the foliage. Some nutri-
ents are absorbed immediately by the leaves and 
some accumulate in the tank to be taken up later. 
Any fertilizer that reaches the potting medium is 
taken up by the roots.

Queen’s tears blooms when it’s three to four 

years old. The first time you see it in bloom, 
prepare to be taken aback by the artistic com-
bination of soft colors in its long and pendu-
lous flower spike. The teardrop-shaped flower 
buds are frosty pink and minty green, edged in 
deep blue-violet. Blue-tipped green petals flare 
out as the flower opens, revealing bright yel-
low stamens. The flowers drip little droplets of 
nectar (hence the common name). Once it flow-
ers your queen’s tears slowly dies. It’s a graceful 
process, this dying, and it takes a year to com-
plete. While it dies, however, your queen’s tears 
clones itself by producing several pups around 
its base. If your plant is in flower when you pur-
chase it, don’t fret when it begins its decline. It 

will produce pups, and then in another three 
to four years the pups flower for you (or the 
friends you’ve shared them with). Most queen’s 
tears are sold potted, since that’s the easiest 
way for growers to produce them. However, you 
could grow this epiphyte on a slab of bark, an 
untreated board, or some other wooden perch if 
you want to.

Queen’s tears (aka friendship plant).

Queen’s tears      191

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Give queen’s tears a half-day of 
bright filtered light from an east or west win-
dow. If you give it a summer vacation outdoors, 
keep it in partial shade.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F, during the summer grow-
ing season. In fall, winter, and early spring keep 
it cool: daytime 60 to 75°F, nighttime 55 to 65°F.
MODERATE WATER. Queen’s tears obtains most 
of its water from its tank. Keep about 1 inch of 
water in the tank. Empty the tank and refill it 
with fresh distilled water or rainwater every 
two to three weeks or so. Moisten the potting 
medium at the same time but not so much that it 
becomes saturated and soggy. A little water fre-
quently is the ticket, and too much water can 
easily lead to root rot. Don’t use tap water for 
these plants; they are sensitive to the chemicals 
it contains.
HUMIDITY. Queen’s tears tolerates dry air better 
than most bromeliads but nevertheless appre-
ciates misting to increase humidity. Mist your 
plant often with a spray bottle of water on a mist 
setting, or use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a 
saucer or tray of water, making sure the bottom 
of the pot never sits directly in the water by rais-
ing the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider 
putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic potting 
medium designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, 
one that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic 
fertilizer mixed at half-strength and spray it 
on the leaves once a month through the grow-
ing season. In winter, apply fertilizer every 
other month.

192      Orchids and Bromeliads

POTTING. If you grow queen’s tears in a pot, 
young plants need up-potting to a container 
with a diameter 2 inches larger than the cur-
rent pot. Up-pot them in the spring. Use a shal-
low pot, wider than deep, and be gentle; this 
plant has only a few shallow roots. A 6-inch pot 
is plenty big enough for a mature queen’s tears. 
Once it matures it does not need up-potting; 
and, of course, once it flowers it’s going to die.
To grow it on a slab of bark or piece of drift-
wood, gently knock the plant out of its pot and 
shake off most but not all of the potting medium. 
Handle the roots gently and position your plant 
on its side on the slab of bark. Cover the roots 
with a little bit of moist sphagnum moss. Tack 
three or four small nails into the slab all around 
the base of your plant. Wrap plastic-coated wire 
around the head of one of the nails, then wrap 
the wire across the base of your plant over to 
another nail and wrap the wire around that 
nail’s head. Continue wrapping from nail to nail 
until your plant is securely bound to the slab 
with a crisscrossed network of wire. Tuck moist-
ened sphagnum moss all around the roots and 
the wire to hide the wire. Hang the plant in a 
warm, humid, shaded location until it’s estab-
lished on its new perch.
PROPAGATION. Queen’s tears is easy to propa-
gate by separating the pups from the parent 
plant. When the mother plant has died back, 
cut it off at the soil line leaving the pups to con-
tinue to grow. Pot up the pups when they are 6 
inches tall in the same kind of medium as the 
parent plant but keep them in a loose clear plas-
tic bag in warm temperatures for a month until 
they’re established.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Spider orchid

A well-grown spider orchid (Brassia gireoudi-
ana) in full flower is an astonishing sight. The 
plant looks like it comes from outer space. 
The flowers are amazing, bizarre, fascinating. 
They’re huge, as much as 1 foot from top to bot-
tom, with extremely skinny and spidery petals 
and sepals. They stand stiffly upright on each 
side of the flower stalk, lined up one behind the 
other in close formation, like a troupe of Cos-
sack dancers with their arms and legs spread 
wide. The long-lasting, fragrant flowers are 
mostly green with large dark brown blotches 
and spots. Spider orchids are closely related to 
some other orchids frequently grown as house-
plants such as dancing ladies, pansy orchids, and 
complex intergeneric hybrids like beallaras and 
alicearas. Hybridizers have been busy crossing 
them all, in every possible combination, to cre-
ate new hybrid genera. Local supermarkets, big 
box stores, and independent garden centers all 
carry large numbers of these gorgeous orchids at 
very reasonable prices, and it is usually very easy 
to spot the influence of Brassia in the hybrids. 
The genes for large, spotted, spidery flowers are 
often transmitted to their offspring.

Spider orchids have one to three, 12- to 

24-inch-long, 2.5-inch-wide, rather strap-like, 
leathery leaves borne atop smooth, glossy green 
pseudobulbs. The large, 6-inch-long pseudo-
bulbs are really quite pretty, usually shaped like 
flattened teardrops, and function as water stor-
age devices. They are clustered together at the 
soil line and produced at regular intervals from a 
creeping rhizome. Flower stalks generally erupt 
from their base. A new pseudobulb begins to 
grow about two to four weeks after the last flow-
ers have faded.

Many people find that their spider orchid 

grows well vegetatively, but fails to flower. 

Spider orchid      193

Spider orchid.

Growers call this a blind growth. You can avoid 
blind growths in your spider orchids by paying 
close attention to their needs for light, water, 
fertilizer, and temperature when the rhizome 
begins to make a new pseudobulb. Look for new 
green roots with white tips emerging from the 
base of the pseudobulb that has just finished 
flowering. The pointed end of a new growing 
point begins to show at the same time as the 
new roots. When you see this new growth of 
roots and foliage be diligent about meeting your 
plant’s cultural needs. That new growth you 
spotted slowly matures into a new pseudobulb, 
which eventually flowers.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light from an 
east window is ideal for spider orchids. No 
direct sun. And avoid the heat load of a south or 
west window.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 60 to 65°F.
LOW WATER. Give these orchids a good long drink 
once a week. Orchids are sensitive to water qual-
ity and should be irrigated with filtered, rain-, or 
distilled water, rather than tap water. Let tepid 
water flow through the entire root zone until all 
the potting medium is soaked. Let the pot drain 
and air out, then put it back in its place. Mark 
the pot so that your plant is returned to its orig-
inal position every time. Turning your orchid 
causes the flowers to twist and bend to face the 
light, which destroys their elegant arrangement.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 
use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer or 
tray of water, but make absolutely sure the bot-
tom of the pot never sits directly in the water 
by raising the pot up on pot feet or pebbles. 

194      Orchids and Bromeliads

Consider putting a humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, orchid 
potting medium such as medium orchid bark. 
Do not use garden soil or ordinary potting soil 
because it will kill this epiphytic orchid.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer, 
in either a water soluble or liquid formulation, 
to promote good growth and flowering. Apply at 
one-quarter-strength at least once a week right 
after you water your orchid.
POTTING. Your spider orchid needs to be up- 
potted every two years or so. Choose a pot with 
a diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. 
Orchids generally prefer being rootbound in 
smallish pots. Re-pot after flowering is com-
plete and when new growth and new roots start 
to emerge. Spider orchid roots are small, slen-
der, and easily damaged, so treat them gently. Be 
attentive to watering after up-potting or re- 
potting these plants and do not allow them to 
dry out.
PROPAGATION. Spider orchids are easy to propa-
gate by division of the rhizome. Next time you 
need to up-pot your plant cut the rhizome into 
two pieces so that each piece has a decent num-
ber of roots, pseudobulbs, and leaves.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Tillandsia

Tillandsia is a large genus of small, primar-
ily rootless wonders that are grown as house-
plants pinned, tied, or glued onto slabs of bark, 
branches, or driftwood, and then hung on a wall 
or suspended in mid-air. The exception is pink 
quill (T. cyanea), which is commonly available 
in pots. Some other species do have a few roots, 
but their primary purpose is to latch tightly onto 

their support, not to absorb water and nutrients. 
Like all bromeliads, tillandsias absorb moisture 
from the air through specialized scales on their 
leaves—one reason many members of this family 
are called air plants. They also absorb nutrients 
through their leaves, like other bromeliads, but 
unlike other bromeliads, they do not form a cup 
or tank in which they can store water.

The slender foliage is the definition of under-

stated, running a small gamut from narrow to 
thread-like. So, when a tillandsia flowers at 
three to four years old, it’s comes as a shock that 
such a tiny bit of gray-green fluff can produce 
such astonishingly large and bright flowers. In 
many tillandsias the inflorescence is flattened 
like a feather, taller than the plant and stand-
ing above it, with bright red or pink bracts. The 
common name pink quill is appropriate because 
its inflorescence does resemble a bright pink 
quill feather used for writing. Purple, violet, or 
blue flowers peek out from between the very 
closely spaced bracts, and the plant can be in 
bloom for months. Of course, like all bromeliads, 
after the plant flowers, it dies a deliciously slow 
death, cloning itself all the while by producing 
several pups around its base. Most pink quill til-
landsias are sold potted, since that’s the easiest 
way for growers to produce them. However, you 
could grow this epiphyte, like all its brethren, on 
a slab of bark, an untreated board, or some other 
wooden perch if you want to.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light from an east 
or west window is best in the summer. In win-
ter they can handle a couple hours of direct sun 
from an east window.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.

Tillandsia (aka air plant, sky plant).

MODERATE WATER. Spray the entire plant with 
filtered, rain-, or distilled water twice a week. 
Make sure the base of the plant does not sit and 
soak in a puddle of water. Also be sure the plant 
dries out within four hours. Your plant rots if 
it’s too wet for too long. Don’t use tap water for 
these plants; they are sensitive to the chemicals 
it contains.
HUMIDITY. Tillandsias are very well adapted 
to dry air and need no supplemental misting 
beyond their regular water spray.
POTTING MEDIUM. For pink quill, use any 
good organic potting medium designed for 

Tillandsia      195

Tillandsia.

semi-terrestrial orchids, one that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes. For all other tillandsias, no 
potting medium is needed.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic 
fertilizer mixed at half-strength and spray it 
on the leaves once a month through the grow-
ing season. In winter, apply fertilizer every 
other month.
POTTING. Once your plant is fastened to its 
wooden perch you won’t have to reposition it. 
After the mother plant dies you’ll probably want 
to reposition the pups. Handle the pup gently 
and position it on its side on the slab of bark. 
Cover the roots, if there are any, with a little bit 
of moist sphagnum moss. Tack three or four 
small nails into the slab all around the base of 
your plant. Wrap plastic-coated wire around 

the head of one of the nails, then wrap the wire 
across the base of your plant over to another nail 
and wrap the wire around that nail’s head. Con-
tinue wrapping from nail to nail until your plant 
is securely bound to the slab with a crisscrossed 
network of wire. Tuck moistened sphagnum 
moss all around the base of the tillandsia and the 
wire to hide the wire. Hang the plant in a warm, 
humid, shaded location until it’s established on 
its new perch.
PROPAGATION. Tillandsias are easy to propa-
gate by separating the pups after the mother 
plant has died and fastening them to a 
wooden support.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

196      Orchids and Bromeliads

Urn plant

Urn plant (Aechmea fasciata) is a big (2 to 3 feet 
tall and 2 feet wide), bold, extremely attrac-
tive bromeliad with an astonishingly bright, 
shocking pink inflorescence. Its numerous 18- 
to 36-inch-long, 2-inch-wide, stiff and leathery 
leaves are silver with gray-green bands. Some 
cultivars have creamy stripes on the edges of the 
leaves, and some are brushed with purple. The 
waxy leaves are edged with black spines and are 
spiny at the tips. Like all bromeliads, urn plant’s 
leaves absorb moisture from the air through spe-
cialized scales. Most bromeliads have leaves that 
form a “vase” that holds water, and in urn plant 
the overlapping bases of the leaves form this 
watertight cup in its heart. In nature, the leaves 
absorb nutrients from anything that falls into 
the water tank, a feature that makes bromeliads 
very easy to fertilize by just spraying the foli-
age. Some nutrients are absorbed immediately 
by the leaves and some accumulate in the tank to 
be taken up later. Any fertilizer that reaches the 
potting medium is taken up by the roots.

Urn plant blooms in the spring when it’s 

three to four years old. The spectacular inflores-
cence, which grows up out of the central tank, 
is taller than the leaves. It is a bright, frosty pink 
with a large number of bright pink bracts at the 
tip of the stalk that form a rounded ball. Violet 
flowers peek out from between the pink bracts, 
and the plant blooms for months. The violet 
flowers turn red as they age. Once your plant 
has flowered, it slowly dies over the course of a 
year. As it dies, however, it clones itself by pro-
ducing two or three pups around its base. If your 
plant is in flower when you purchase it, don’t 
fret when it begins its decline. It will produce 
pups, and in another three to four years the pups 
flower. Most urn plants are sold potted, since 
that’s the easiest way for growers to produce 
them. However, you could grow this epiphyte on 

Urn plant (aka silver vase plant).

Urn plant      197

pot. Up-pot them in the spring. Use a shallow 
pot, wider than deep, and be gentle; this plant 
has only a few shallow roots. An 8-inch pot is 
plenty big enough for a mature urn plant. Once 
it matures it does not need up-potting; and, of 
course, once it flowers it’s going to die.

To grow it on a slab of bark or piece of drift-
wood, gently knock the plant out of its pot and 
shake off most but not all of the potting medium. 
Handle the roots gently and position your plant 
on its side on the slab of bark. Cover the roots 
with a little bit of moist sphagnum moss. Tack 
three or four small nails into the slab all around 
the base of your plant. Wrap plastic-coated wire 
around the head of one of the nails, then wrap 
the wire across the base of your plant over to 
another nail and wrap the wire around that 
nail’s head. Continue wrapping from nail to nail 
until your plant is securely bound to the slab 
with a crisscrossed network of wire. Tuck moist-
ened sphagnum moss all around the roots and 
the wire to hide the wire. Hang the plant in a 
warm, humid, shaded location until it’s estab-
lished on its new perch.
PROPAGATION. Urn plant is easy to propagate by 
separating the pups after the mother plant has 
died. When the pups are 6 inches tall pot them 
up in the same kind of medium as the parent 
plant but keep them in a loose clear plastic bag 
in warm temperatures for a month until they’re 
established. Alternatively, attach the pups to a 
wooden perch as just described.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for brown leaf tips (page 246), scale 
insects (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

a slab of bark, an untreated board, or some other 
wooden perch if you want to.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of 
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Bright filtered light from an east 
or west window is best for urn plant.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Urn plant obtains most of 
its water from its tank. Keep about 1 inch of 
water in the tank. Empty the tank and refill it 
with fresh distilled water or rainwater every 
two to three weeks or so. Moisten the potting 
medium at the same time but not so much that it 
becomes saturated and soggy. A little water fre-
quently is the ticket, and too much water can 
easily lead to root rot. Don’t use tap water for 
these plants; they are sensitive to the chemicals 
it contains.
HUMIDITY. Urn plant prefers moderate humidity. 
Mist your plant occasionally with a spray bot-
tle of water on a mist setting, or use a handheld 
mister. Put the pot in a saucer or tray of water, 
making sure the bottom of the pot never sits 
directly in the water by raising the pot up on pot 
feet or pebbles. Consider putting a humidifier in 
the room if the air in your home is very dry.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic potting 
medium designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, 
one that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic 
fertilizer mixed at half-strength and spray it 
on the leaves once a month through the grow-
ing season. In winter, apply fertilizer every 
other month. 
POTTING. If you grow urn plant in a pot, young 
plants need up-potting to a container with 
a diameter 2 inches larger than the current 

198      Orchids and Bromeliads

Cacti and Succulents

Urn plant      199

Agave

Three of the approximately 450 species of aga-
ves, many of them very attractive specimens, are 
often grown as houseplants. Parry’s agave (Agave 
parryi), like all its cousins, is an evergreen suc-
culent perennial. It has stiff, thick, 12-inch-long 
steel-blue leaves shaped like broadswords and 
tipped with long, ebony-black spines. The edge 
of each leaf is saw-toothed with small black 
spines. The overlapping leaves grow into a per-
fect ball, like a giant artichoke 2.5 feet tall and 
wide. On the back side of each leaf, lace-like 
whitish patterns left by the older leaves add 
interest. Queen Victoria agave (A. victoriae- 
reginae) makes a lovely, very long-lived 

houseplant, growing slowly to only 10 inches 
high and wide. The white marks on the backs of 
its leaves stand out in contrast to the dark green 
color. Agave americana matures at an impressive 
4 feet tall and wide, way too big for the average 
home, but fortunately this slow-growing species 
can be enjoyed as a houseplant for years while it 
is young.

It is unlikely any agave grown indoors as a 
houseplant could ever have enough energy to 
produce a flower stalk. Be sure to locate spiny 
specimens where admirers and passersby will 
not get stabbed in the ankles or knees. Also, the 
sap of agaves irritates some people, causing con-
tact dermatitis.

Agave (aka American aloe, century plant, maguey, mescal).

200      Cacti and Succulents

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Agaves need full direct sun to pros-
per in the home environment. In winter give 
them a south window that cools off at night.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F. In winter grow them ten degrees 
cooler, day and night.
LOW WATER. During the growing season, water 
whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches. Water less 
frequently in winter.
HUMIDITY. Agaves are adapted to very dry, des-
ert conditions and do not need supplemental 
humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
fast-draining, cactus and succulent potting soil 
that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son. Do not feed these plants in winter.
POTTING. Agaves grow extremely slowly and 
need to be up-potted only every three years or 
so. When your plant needs up-potting, shift it to 
a container with a diameter 2 inches larger than 
the current pot. Choose a heavy, shallow pot to 
help keep your agave from falling over. Re-pot 
every few years or so. Agave species and hybrids 
vary enormously in mature size, so your final 
pot size varies according to the mature size of 
your plant.
PROPAGATION. Agaves are propagated by seed or 
by potting up pups.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for shrunken, wrinkled leaves (page 255), 
mealybugs (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Aloe

All the approximately 400 species and hybrids 
in Aloe are excellent container specimens, 
with showy, tubular flowers in brilliant reds, 
oranges, and yellows. But only a few of these 
desert-dwelling succulents make good house-
plants. Of these, A. vera is the most popular. Oth-
ers to consider as houseplants are A. aristata 
(lace aloe) and A. humilis (spider aloe) at 8 to 
10 inches tall, and A. variegata (tiger aloe), with 
zebra-striped leaves, to 12 inches tall.

Aloe vera grows 1 to 2 feet tall and 6 to 12 

inches wide with rosettes of stiff, thick, fleshy 
leaves. The leaves are 18 inches long, gray-green, 

Aloe (aka Barbados aloe, burn plant, Chinese aloe, 
first aid plant, Indian aloe, medicinal aloe, true aloe).

Aloe      201

Spider aloe.

spotted with whitish flecks, and armed with 
whitish teeth all along the edges. It is a tropical, 
evergreen perennial that produces pups, new 
little clones of itself, all around its base. When 
three to four years old, A. vera blooms in the 
summer with clusters of small, tubular yellow 
flowers on 3-foot-tall stalks. It needs good light 
to flower. If aloe does not flower for you, try giv-
ing it more light. If you put it outdoors for the 
summer, hummingbirds will be sure to find the 
flowers and delight you with their antics. Aloe 
vera has been used medicinally for millennia and 
is a common ingredient in commercial cosmet-
ics, skin creams, and sunburn lotions. Cutting or 
breaking a leaf in half releases the healing, muci-
laginous sap, which can then be rubbed directly 
onto the skin.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. This succulent likes very bright, fil-
tered light and grows well in a south, east, or 
west window. It tolerates direct sun very well as 
long as you acclimate it to the intense light and 
heat slowly over a period of a couple of weeks. 
The leaves turn orange at the tips in full sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 
1 inch and try to keep the leaves dry. Water very 
sparingly in winter.
HUMIDITY. Like most cacti and succulents, aloe 

202      Cacti and Succulents

tolerates the dry air of our homes very well.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
fast-draining, cactus and succulent potting soil 
that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son. When your plant goes dormant in winter, 
stop feeding it.
POTTING. When aloe needs up-potting, shift it to 
a container with a diameter 2 inches larger than 
the current pot. Aloe grows slowly and needs 
re-potting only occasionally.
PROPAGATION. Aloes are easy to propagate by 
carefully separating the pups from their mother.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), scale insects 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Ball cactus

Most of the time when you find a cactus labeled 
“ball cactus,” it will be one of the 25 or more 
Parodia species. As youngsters, all ball cacti 
are indeed round as a ball, but as they age they 
become columnar. They have deep furrows 
between raised longitudinal ribs and variously 
colored hairs and spines on the tops of the ribs. 
In addition to their pretty flowers, the patterns 
and shadows formed by the ribs and spines add 
visual interest to these little guys. Place them 
where they invite close inspection all year long. 
All produce pups around their base.

When young, balloon cactus (Parodia mag-
nifica) is less than 10 inches tall and wide. As it 
ages it elongates, growing 18 inches tall and 3 
to 6 inches thick, with deep furrows between 
raised longitudinal ribs or ridges. The tops of 
the ribs are covered with long, flexible, golden 
spines that are thin and hair-like. Flowers are 2 

Ball cactus.

inches wide, borne on the top of the plant, and 
are pale, almost translucent, sulfur-yellow.

Lemon or golden ball cactus (Parodia lening-
hausii) starts out as a small ball well armed with 
soft, long, yellow spines. It earns another com-
mon name, yellow tower cactus, with age, reach-
ing 3 feet tall and 5 inches thick. Its stems are 
heavily ribbed, hairy on the top of the ribs, and 
spiny. It flowers reliably every summer, even 
while it is still very small, bearing numerous 
2-inch-wide, funnel-shaped yellow flowers with 
whitish stigmas on its crown.

Silver ball cactus (Parodia scopa) has showy 

white hairs in tufts at the base of clusters of long 
yellow spines. The white hairs give the whole 
top of the plant a silvery look. This one also 

Ball cactus      203

Balloon cactus.

204      Cacti and Succulents

has yellow flowers clustered on its crown, each 
with a bright red central stigma. Like the previ-
ous two species, it is a small ball when young, 
growing to a 20-inch-tall, 4-inch-thick column 
with age.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Give your ball cactus bright filtered 
light, not full sun, from a south or west window 
all winter long. In summer move it outdoors 
where it will be in partial shade during the heat 
of the afternoon.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. In winter grow it five 
degrees cooler, day and night.
MODERATE WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. In winter, 
water much less and wait till the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Ball cactus tolerates the dry air of our 
homes very well, like most cacti and succulents.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
fast-draining, cactus and succulent potting soil 
that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal 
fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son. When it goes dormant in winter, stop feed-
ing it.
POTTING. When ball cactus needs up-potting, in 
two to three years, shift it to a container with a 
diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Ball cactus is easy to propagate 
from seed or by potting up pups.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), scale insects 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Barrel cactus

Golden barrel cactus (Echinocactus grusonii) is 
the most widely grown houseplant cactus. It is 
a sculptural plant of great character and beauty, 
deeply furrowed and strongly ribbed. Dense 
golden spines on the tops of the ribs are long and 
straight, sometimes slightly curved, and occa-
sionally white instead of the usual yellow. The 
plant forms a perfect ball when young, becom-
ing more oval in age. Really old plants can get 5 
feet tall and 3 feet wide. When they are about 20 

Barrel cactus.

Barrel cactus      205

years old, plants bear small, 1- to 2-inch-wide, 
yellow flowers in a ring around the top of the 
plant. This cactus readily produces pups around 
its base.

Young plants of compass barrel cactus 

(Ferocactus cylindraceus) occasionally make 
good houseplants. This species is a ball when 
young and grows very slowly into a cylindrical 
shape. In nature, specimens lean to the south, 
facing the sun, with the lower half of the plant 
lying flat on the ground (hence the common 
name). Flowers are 3 inches wide, bell-shaped, 
yellow-orange, and borne in a ring on the top of 
the barrel. The barrel itself is deeply ribbed and 
densely clothed in red spines that turn gray as 
they age. The compass barrel is formidably spiny 
even when young, so careful placement in your 
home is paramount to avoid lacerating ankles 

Golden barrel cactus (aka mother-in-law’s cushion).

206      Cacti and Succulents

and knees of human residents. Fishhook bar-
rel cactus (F. wislizeni) is very similar, except 
that the flowers are red, red with yellow edges, 
orange, or just plain yellow. It has viciously 
hooked stout spines (ouch!) and also needs care-
ful placement in the home.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. All three barrel cacti need full sun. If 
you have just acquired one, however, it may not 
have been grown in full sun; you’ll have to accli-
mate it carefully so that it doesn’t get sunburn.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches. 
In winter water even less but don’t let the plant 
dry out completely.
HUMIDITY. These cacti tolerate dry air extremely 
well so no additional humidity is necessary.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son. Do not feed these plants in winter.
POTTING. Every year in spring, when your young 
barrel cactus needs up-potting, shift it to a con-
tainer with a diameter 2 inches larger than the 
current pot. Older plants need re-potting every 
two to three years. Be sure to wear gloves and 
handle it carefully.
PROPAGATION. Barrel cacti are easy to propagate 
from seed or by potting up pups.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leggy growth (page 251), mealybugs 
(page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Cereus cactus

Cereus cactus (Cereus repandus) is generally 2 
to 4 feet tall when grown as a houseplant. Its 
short but sharp spines are borne on columnar 
blue-green stems. Only large, older specimens 
will flower, but when they do, it is a show. The 
flowers are huge, 6 to 8 inches long, and spec-
tacular. They’re white, they open only at night, 
and each lasts only a single night, but the plant 
continues to flower over several months in sum-
mer. The 2.5-inch-round, purplish red and yel-
low fruits, known as Peruvian apples, have tasty 
white flesh and tiny crunchy seeds. The stems of 
‘Monstrosus’ twist and swirl into exotic sculp-
tural shapes. Another common cultivar, ‘Ming 
Thing Blue’, also with fantastically shaped 
stems, is especially appealing because of its 
blue-green jade color. You’ll want to place any 
cereus cactus carefully, to avoid painful jabs by 
its spines.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Cereus cactus grows best in full, 
direct sunlight but will also do well in very 
bright, filtered light. When you acquire yours, 
find out if it has been grown in full sun or in fil-
tered light. If the latter and if you want yours 
in full sun you’ll need to acclimate it so that it 
doesn’t sunburn.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. In winter grow it ten 
degrees cooler, day and night.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches. 
Water even less often in winter but don’t let the 
plant dry out completely. When its stems get 
slightly spongy, water it.
HUMIDITY. This cactus is adapted to dry air and 
no misting is required.

Cereus cactus (aka column cactus, giant club cactus, hedge cactus, Peruvian apple cactus, Peruvian torch).

Cereus cactus      207

POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month until the plants go dormant 
in winter.
POTTING. When your cereus needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Up-pot young 
plants in spring, older plants only when neces-
sary. Large cereus cacti are quite top-heavy, so 
choose a heavy pot to keep them from toppling 
over. And wear gloves to protect yourself from 
the spines.
PROPAGATION. Cereus cactus is easy to propagate 
from seed and stem tip cuttings, or by potting 
up pups.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Chin cactus

Most popular varieties of chin cactus (Gym-
nocalycium mihanovichii) have an odd appear-
ance. They look like a spiny, bright red baseball 
stuck on top of a green stick. The red balls are 
natural mutants that have no green chloro-
phyll in their tissues. The whole plant is bright 
red, pink, orange, or yellow, and, since it is not 
green at all, it is impossible for it to manufacture 
food for itself through photosynthesis. It has 
to be grafted to a different plant or it will die. 
The green “stick” it’s grafted to is almost always 
a queen of the night (Hylocereus triangularis) 
cactus, but it could be any number of differ-
ent green cacti. The “stick” must make enough 
food to keep the mutant red cactus ball alive 
and healthy. These colorful mutants are quite 

208      Cacti and Succulents

Chin cactus (aka blondie, hibotan, hibotan nishiki, moon 
cactus, red cap cactus, red-top cactus, ruby ball).

common and readily available as grafted plants 
in garden centers and even in big box stores. 
In ‘Hibotan Nishiki’, a newer mutation, bright 
red sectors alternate with green on the same 
plant. Because these plants are partially green 
they can make their own food and grow on their 
own roots, so they don’t have to be grafted. 
Both ‘Hibotan Nishiki’ and the non-mutant 
green species of chin cactus are available from 
specialist suppliers.

Chin cactus.

Chin cactus      209

The wild form of chin cactus is a small, green 

flattened ball about 4 inches tall and 5 inches 
wide that produces abundant pups all around 
its base. The colorful mutants retain this abil-
ity, and you’ll often see grafted plants with mul-
tiple, brightly colored pups. Flowers of the wild 
species are yellow with orangey brown tints at 
the base and tips of the petals. The flowers of the 
colorful mutants are pink. Chin cactus flowers 
don’t open wide and flat as so many cacti do. The 
flowers remain narrowly tubular even when fully 
mature. If successfully pollinated (unlikely for a 
houseplant), small purplish red berries result.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. The colorful mutant cactus on top of 
the green “stick” burns if it gets too much light. 
And yet the green cactus understock must have 
sufficient light to make enough food to supply 
itself and the mutant. Finding the right balance 
can be tricky, so bright filtered light with no 
direct sun is best for this plant.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. In winter give them 55 to 
65°F, day and night.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches. 
If your cactus starts to feel soft and spongy give 
it a little more water. In winter water less but 
don’t let the plant go totally dry.
HUMIDITY. Chin cactus does not need supple-
mental humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic fer-
tilizer. Apply at half-strength once a month. Do 
not feed this plant in winter.

210      Cacti and Succulents

POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Re-pot every couple 
of years.
PROPAGATION. Chin cactus is tricky to propagate. 
Its pups are easily separated from the mother 
plant but, since they are not green, they must be 
grafted to an appropriate understock.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), spider mites 
(page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Christmas cactus

Christmas cacti (Schlumbergera russelliana, S. 
×buckleyi, and S. truncata) are true cacti, like 
their desert-dwelling cousins, but unlike them 
they are tropical evergreens. These leafless, 
spineless, shrubby epiphytes have jointed, flat-
tened, leaf-like stems. Each joint of the stem is 
a flat, 1.5-inch-long pad with soft, pointed teeth 
or scallops on the edges. With age plants get 2 
feet high and 3 feet across. Forty years of faith-
ful bloom is not uncommon. The stems are eas-
ily separated at the joints and will readily root 
to make new plants. Gorgeous, tubular flow-
ers appear in fall and winter, making these cacti 
holiday favorites. Flowers are about 3 inches 
long and can be white, scarlet, pink, orange, yel-
low, or purple. Hundreds of cultivars have been 
developed by breeders, and these usually appear 
in abundance in garden centers and supermar-
kets between Thanksgiving and Christmas.

These cacti are stimulated into flowering by 
the cool temperatures and short days (or more 
precisely, long nights) of fall and winter. Com-
mercial growers force them into flower for the 
holidays by controlling daylength and tempera-
ture. At home, you can force your plant to flower 
at any time by putting it in a dark closet where it 

will get no light at all for eight days or so. Bring 
it back into the light, and it will bloom in about 
six weeks. You can also stimulate blooming by 
lowering the thermostat at night to 55°F.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Christmas cactus does best in 
bright filtered light. It does not tolerate full sun 
and is easily burned by it. Keep your plant in an 
east window but protect it with gauzy sheers if 
the joints start to turn red—a symptom of too 
much light. If it isn’t getting enough light then 
it will not be able to flower very well, so finding 
the correct balance is important.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F 
from spring to the end of summer, 55 to 60°F in 
autumn and winter. To stimulate flowering keep 
nighttime temperature at 55°F.
LOW WATER. Christmas cactus is more drought 
tolerant than many houseplants—after all, it’s 
a cactus. During the growing season, spring 
through summer, keep the potting medium 
lightly moist by watering sparingly but fre-
quently. Water once a week, just enough so that 
the water begins to come out the drainage hole 
in the bottom of the pot. Stop and give it no 
more till next week. In fall and winter, water 
about once a month. Never keep your plants in 
soggy soil because overwatering will kill them.
HUMIDITY. Christmas cactus likes high humidity 
and will appreciate some additional humidity if 
your home is dry. You can help it out by misting 
it a couple times a week with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. You can also set the pot on top of a tray filled 
with gravel and water. Just be sure the pot is 
raised up above the surface level of the water.
POTTING MEDIUM. Christmas cactus will grow 
well in ordinary organic potting soil mixed 

Christmas cactus      211

Christmas cactus (aka Thanksgiving cactus, crab cactus, 
holiday cactus).

Christmas cactus, flower.

50/50 with sand to improve drainage. The 
growing medium needs to be free-draining but 
humus-rich. Some garden centers sell a mix of 
soil specifically designed for cacti. It’s mostly 
sand and works well for regular cacti, but not for 
your Christmas cactus. However, it works well if 
mixed 50/50 with ordinary organic potting soil, 
to increase its water-holding capacity.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic fer-
tilizer. Apply at half-strength every other week 
in spring and summer, once a month in fall 
and winter.
POTTING. Christmas cactus do not need large 
pots to grow and bloom well. They seem to be 
happiest, flowering every year, when their roots 

212      Cacti and Succulents

are a bit crowded. Early summer is the best time 
for re-potting. As your plant ages you will need 
to up-pot it every two to three years. However, 
you’ll probably never need a pot larger than 12 
inches in diameter.
PROPAGATION. You can easily create as many 
Christmas cactus plants as you want by breaking 
or twisting off pieces of stems with at least three 
or four joints or pads to use as stem cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), aphids (page 
260), and root rot (page 272).

Crown-of-thorns

This sprawling, succulent, woody shrub hails 
from Madagascar. So, although its common 
name is picturesque and accurately describes its 
densely spiny stems, crown-of-thorns (Euphor-
bia milii) was not the plant used in the crucifix-
ion of Christ. Crown-of-thorns gets 2 feet tall, at 
most, indoors in a pot. Its actual flowers are so 
tiny you can barely see them, but they’re borne 
in a small cluster that is flanked by two, much 

larger and brighter petal-like bracts. These 
bracts are typically brilliant red but can also be 
pink, white, or pale yellow. They contrast beau-
tifully with the bright green leaves, which are 
2.5 inches long and 0.5 inch wide. Even though 
the clusters and colorful bracts are small, they’re 
borne in great numbers and make this easy plant 
very showy in bloom. Stems, armed with thick, 
black, 0.5-inch-long spines, are hard and woody 
near the base of the plant and softer and more 
succulent toward the tips. Stems have lots of 
small leaves in their upper reaches, especially 
on new growth. Plants shed older leaves from 
the lower stems and branches and get leggy 
with age.

 Site this plant in an out-of-the-way place, 

and use gloves when working on it. Sensitive 
people develop skin rashes from contact with 
its milky sap, and the sap is toxic to people and 
pets when ingested, causing severe irritation of 
the mouth and gastrointestinal tract, swelling 
about the eyes and mouth, excessive salivation, 
and vomiting. Should these occur, call your local 
emergency hotline, poison control center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Very bright, filtered light, or 
direct sun for three or four hours daily, serves 
this plant well.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. In winter, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Crown-of-thorns tolerates dry air very 
well and does not need to be misted.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cactus 

Crown-of-thorns      213

Crown-of-thorns (aka Christ plant, Christ thorn, Siamese 
lucky plant, silverthorn).

and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertil-
izer. Apply every two weeks until the plants 
go dormant. In winter, apply at half-strength 
once a month.
POTTING. When crown-of-thorns needs up- 
potting, in late winter or early spring, shift it to 

a container with a diameter 4 inches larger than 
the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Crown-of-thorns is easy to propa-
gate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), scale insects 
(page 262), and gray mold (page 268).

Crown-of-thorns, yellow form.

214      Cacti and Succulents

Donkey tail

Super easy and low maintenance, donkey 
tail (Sedum morganianum) makes a delight-
fully odd companion because its long, dan-
gling stems really do look like the thick tails of 
some animals—except that they’re gorgeous, 
waxy, and blue-green. The stems are clothed 
in hundreds of small, 0.75-inch-long, fleshy, 
blue-green, teardrop-shaped leaves. Because of 
the way the leaves overlap, stems also resem-
ble braided tresses or thick ropes. The lax, trail-
ing stems, 3 feet long and 1 inch thick, are often 
seen in hanging basket combinations. The one 
drawback of this houseplant is that the pretty 
leaves fall off with every bump or touch, leaving 
bare, ratty-looking stems behind. It is very frag-
ile and needs extra careful handling. In summer, 
well-grown specimens produce clusters of small 
pink to red flowers at the tips of their cascading 
stems. ‘Burrito’ has shorter stems and smaller 
leaves that are packed more tightly together. It is 
also distinctly bluer than the typical species.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Donkey tail prefers really bright 
light, even full sun, but it will suffer in extreme 
heat. A half-day of sun from an east window 
works well. South windows work if protection 
from afternoon heat is possible. It’s probably 
best to avoid west windows. If you take it out-
doors for the summer, give it morning sun with 
partial shade in the afternoons; it will sunburn 
badly unless gradually acclimated to the intense 
light and heat of a summer afternoon.
LOW TEMPERATURE. Daytime 65 to 75°F, night-
time 55 to 65°F. In winter give them 55 to 65°F, 
day and night.
MODERATE WATER. In the summer, water 

Donkey tail (aka burro’s tail, lamb’s tail, horse’s tail).

whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch, and keep the 
potting medium lightly moist but never soggy. 
In winter, water whenever the top of the potting 
medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. This succulent tolerates dry air very 
well; however, it does not like drafts and will 
throw its leaves on the ground in protest.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cactus 

Donkey tail      215

Donkey tail.

216      Cacti and Succulents

and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month until the plant goes dor-
mant in winter. Stop feeding in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
carefully shift it in spring to a container with a 
diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot. 
Mature plants that fill their pots are very fragile; 
they tend to lose their leaves and fall apart when 
handled. Propagate new plants from stem tip 
cuttings when re-potting becomes difficult.
PROPAGATION. Donkey tail is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings and leaf cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), aphids (page 
260), and root rot (page 272).

Easter cactus

Easter cacti (Hatiora gaertneri, H. rosea, and 
their cross, H. ×graeseri) are true cacti, but they 
do not live in the desert. Like orchids and bro-
meliads, these tropical evergreens are shrubby 
epiphytes, and in nature they live on tree 
branches, high in the cool, moist rainforest can-
opy. The funnel-shaped flowers of H. gaertneri 
are brilliant scarlet, 1.5 to 2 inches long and 1.5 
to 3 inches wide. The flowers of H. rosea (pink) 
and H. ×graeseri (brilliant pink to red) are simi-
lar. In all kinds, the flowers are borne at the tips 
of dangling stems and open flat, as they do in 
most cacti. Plants have a sprawling habit, with 
jointed, flattened, leaf-like green branches hang-
ing around all sides, which makes them won-
derful candidates for hanging baskets. Each 
stem segment is 1.5 to 3 inches long and 1 inch 
wide, with little notches on the margins. Like 
Christmas cactus, Easter cactus’s stems can be 

Easter cactus (aka Whitsun cactus).

broken off at the joints and easily rooted to make 
new plants.

To form flower buds, Easter cacti need a cold 
treatment in November, December, and January. 
Flowers open in late spring, as their common 
name suggests. Oval, red fruits form after the 
flowers fade, if they have been pollinated. If you 
spot these fruits developing, pinch them off so 
your plant wastes no energy making fruits filled 
with seeds. It will bloom better next year if you 
remove the fruits.

Easter cactus      217

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Bright filtered light with no direct 
sun is best.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. In November, December, 
and January give them 45 to 55°F nights to initi-
ate flower buds.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth of 
1 inch. Strive for consistently moist (but not 
soggy) soil. This plant starts to shed stem seg-
ments if it gets too much or too little water. 
Taper off on the watering when the plant has 
finished blooming and resume normal watering 
when it starts into active growth again.
HUMIDITY. Easter cactus likes high humidity and 
will appreciate some additional humidity if your 
home is dry. Mist it a couple times a week with 
a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or use 
a handheld mister. You can also set the pot on 
top of a tray filled with gravel and water. Just be 
sure the pot is raised up above the surface level 
of the water.
POTTING MEDIUM. Easter cactus grows well in 
ordinary potting soil mixed 50/50 with sand 
to improve drainage. The growing medium 
needs to be free-draining but humus-rich. Some 
garden centers sell a mix of soil specifically 
designed for cacti. It’s mostly sand and works 
well for regular cacti, but not for your Easter 
cactus. However, it works well if mixed 50/50 
with ordinary organic potting soil, to increase its 
water-holding capacity.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic fer-
tilizer. Apply at half-strength every other week 
in spring and summer, once a month in fall  
and winter.
POTTING. Easter cacti do not need large pots to 
grow and bloom well. They seem to be happiest 

218      Cacti and Succulents

when their roots are a bit crowded. Up-pot every 
two to three years to a container with a diam-
eter 2 inches larger than the current pot. You’ll 
probably never need a pot larger than 12 inches 
in diameter.
PROPAGATION. You can easily create as many Eas-
ter cacti as you want if you make stem cuttings 
by breaking or twisting off pieces of the jointed 
stems with at least three or four joints or pads.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for flower bud drop (page 248), mealy-
bugs (page 262), and soft rot (page 274).

Gold lace cactus

Gold lace cactus (Mammillaria elongata) is 
deceptively small. It begins life in your home 
with individual stems that look like fingers, each 
about 6 inches long and 1 inch thick. Soon it 
begins to produce pups around the base of the 
stem. These produce more pups until this dimin-
utive cactus becomes a densely packed cluster 
of hundreds of cylindrical stems, filling up and 
dangling over a 12-inch pot. Each stem is cov-
ered in harmless 0.5-inch-long, golden yellow, 
coppery brown, or white radial spines. Clusters 
of spines grow from tiny nipples that cover the 
body of this cactus in an attractive double spi-
ral pattern. The spines radiate sideways, making 
them a flat starburst that can’t stab you. A few 
cultivars of this very popular and easy-to-grow 
species have a couple of straight central spines 
poking out of the middle of the clusters that can, 
and do, stab you.

Starry, 0.5-inch-long and -wide flowers in 
very pale yellow, sometimes tinged with pink, 
bloom in spring. They are borne in a ring at the 
tips of the stems, but they open sequentially, 
one or two, sometimes three at a time. Small 
pink, berry-like fruits that turn red when mature 

Gold lace cactus (aka golden star cactus, golden lace, ladyfinger cactus, ladyfinger).

follow the flowers. Brown seeds fill these fruits. 
Unusual variants of or hybrids involving this 
species include ‘Cristata’ (brain cactus) and oth-
ers like it. In these cristate (crested) forms, the 
stems grow flat and wide, losing their cylindri-
cal shape and becoming fan-like. A well-grown 
cluster of a cristate variety becomes a round, 
undulating mass of interlocking fans that really 
does look like a brain.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Give gold lace a half-day of direct 
sun from an east or west window.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F. In winter grow it ten degrees 
cooler, day and night.

Gold lace cactus      219

LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches. 
Give it less water in winter but don’t let it dry 
out completely.
HUMIDITY. This desert-adapted cactus tolerates 
dry air quite well and needs no supplemental 
humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation. Apply at 
half-strength once a month through spring and 
summer. Do not feed your cactus in winter.
POTTING. When gold lace cactus needs up-potting, 
every two to three years or so, shift it to a con-
tainer with a diameter 2 inches larger than the 
current pot. Use a shallow pot, wider than deep.
PROPAGATION. Gold lace cactus is easy to propa-
gate from seed or by potting up the pups.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Haworthia

These striking little plants are choice succulents 
that are easy to grow, low maintenance, and 
almost indestructible. Haworthias look like min-
iature aloes with zebra stripes; the most desir-
able species for growing indoors are Haworthia 
attenuata, H. bolusii, H. fasciata, and H. maxima. 
These stemless, evergreen perennials have thick, 
very tough, pointed leaves in a basal rosette. 
The dark green leaves are variously marked 
with pure white bands, stripes, and dots that 
are raised up above the surface of the leaf. Some 
haworthias have white markings only on the 
underside of the leaf and some have them on 

220      Cacti and Succulents

Haworthia (aka pearl plant, zebra plant).

both sides. Cultivars are available with variously 
colored leaves from purplish bronze to bronzy 
orange, even yellow and chartreuse. Individual 
plants grow about 3 inches tall and wide, but 
they get wider by producing a few pups around 
the base of the mother plant, forming clusters. 
Plants flower in the winter. A 16-inch-long, wiry 
stalk emerges from the center of the plant and 
bears tiny white flowers. You can cut the flower 
stalk off when the flowers fade.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Give your haworthias very bright 
indirect light all year long. They are very 

tolerant of full sun, but you’ll have to acclimatize 
them to it gradually or they will sunburn.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. In winter give them 60°F 
days if possible.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. No supplemental humidity is 
necessary.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply at half-strength once a month through 
spring and summer. Do not feed your plants in 
fall and winter.
POTTING. This plant sheds some of its older roots 
in the spring so, every year or two, re-pot them 
in spring. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Choose a wide, shal-
low pot for these shallow-rooted beauties.
PROPAGATION. Haworthia is easy to propagate by 
potting up the pups.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Hedgehog cactus

Grapefruit- to peanut-sized, these ball-shaped 
cacti with sharp spines have comparatively 
huge, outstandingly beautiful flowers. Peanut 
cactus (Echinopsis chamaecereus) has cylindri-
cal stems about 0.5 inch thick and 2 to 3 inches 
long that resemble peanuts in the shell. The 
tiny plants produce improbably large, bright 
scarlet flowers, to 3 inches long and half as 
wide, in late spring and early summer. A large 

number of pups grow around the base of the 
mother plant, eventually making a large clus-
ter of crowded stems to 12 inches wide. The lit-
tle stems fall off the plant easily, especially when 
you’re up-potting the cluster, but these can be 
rooted and grown into another plant. Easter 
lily cactus or sea urchin cactus (E. oxygona) has 
curved, 1-inch-long spines. It grows as a round 
ball, like a green softball or grapefruit, and even-
tually gets as large as 12 inches tall. It too pro-
duces lots of pups around its base, forming large 
clusters to 2 feet wide over time. Its gorgeous, 
imposingly large pink or white flowers are pro-
duced sporadically all summer. The flowers, 
borne from the sides of the plant’s body, are 6- to 
8-inch-long tubes with a flattened starburst of 
radial petals at the top of the tube. Each flower 
opens just before sunrise and lasts a single day, 
but a large, well-grown plant in full bloom can 
open as many as 50 or more flowers at once—a 
spectacular sight. Many hybrids have been cre-
ated between these and other species of Echi-
nopsis. These hybrids, with flowers ranging from 
white, pink, red, and scarlet to magenta, orange, 
and yellow, are very popular houseplants and are 
widely available in garden centers everywhere.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of e 
ach recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Give these cacti a summer vaca-
tion outdoors in filtered light. Bring them 
indoors fall through spring—they’re not frost 
tolerant—and give them bright light. Indoors or 
outdoors, they can take a half-day of full sun but 
be careful to acclimate them if they’ve not been 
exposed to the intense light and heat of direct 
sunlight before.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. In winter give them 55 to 
65°F, day and night, to set flower buds.

Hedgehog cactus      221

Hedgehog cactus.

222      Cacti and Succulents

MODERATE WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. In winter, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. These plants are adapted to dry air 
and do not need supplemental humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertil-
izer. Apply once a month through the grow-
ing season. Do not feed these plants in late fall 
and winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Hedgehog cacti are easy to propa-
gate by potting up the pups.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Hen and chicks

Numerous species and hybrids in the genus Ech-
everia are called hen and chicks, including E. 
elegans and E. secunda. These little evergreen 
beauties are easy to grow and very low mainte-
nance. They make splendid potted plants, with 
a basal rosette of leaves that looks more like 
a bright green lotus flower than a stem with 
leaves. The thick, waxy leaves also come in lav-
ender, rose-red, very dark reddish purple, silvery 
blue, powder blue, and mauve. Some varieties 
have markings or blushings of pink, red, bronze, 
or purple that can intensify when plants get suf-
ficient sunlight. Leaves can also be variously 
frilled, crimped, or waved. They are imbricate: 

Hen and chicks (aka echeveria).

the longest leaves are on the bottom of the 
rosette and the shortest leaves are on the top, so 
that no leaf completely shades out another. The 
rosettes, from 4 to 6 inches across, are borne on 
short stems that generate lots of pups. These 
“chicks” can easily be separated from the mother 
“hen” and potted up to make new plants. Small, 
nodding, bell-shaped flowers are borne on tall, 
branched stalks that arise from the center of the 
rosette; flowers are pink, lined with either yel-
low, orange and yellow, or red and yellow. Many 
growers just nip off the flower stalks as soon as 
they start to form so that the perfect symmetry 
of the foliage is not disturbed.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Give these succulents very bright 
light all year long. Give them a half-day of direct 
sun in summer but be careful to acclimate them 
slowly to the full intensity of the light.

Hen and chicks      223

MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. Water less 
often in winter.
HUMIDITY. These plants do not require supple-
mental humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in 
either a powder or liquid formulation. Apply 
at half-strength every two weeks through the 
growing season, once a month in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
every two years or so, shift it to a container with 
a diameter 2 inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Hen and chicks is easy to prop-
agate by potting up the chicks and from leaf 
cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Jade plant

A handsome small tree with multiple trunks, 
sturdy limbs, and succulent leaves, the jade plant 
(Crassula ovata) is a beloved and common sight 
in homes everywhere, as well as in offices, pub-
lic buildings, and shopping malls. Sometimes 
sculpted and almost bonsai-like, these plants 
develop great character with age. They are also 
easy to grow, quite low maintenance, and so easy 
to propagate, you can give new plants away to 
your friends. Jade plant rarely gets more than 2 
feet tall as a houseplant. It’s a winter-flowerer, 
bearing clusters of small, inconspicuous pink or 

224      Cacti and Succulents

white flowers at its branch tips, but it doesn’t 
bloom until it’s ten or more years old. That’s 
okay, because thick trunks and branches with 
their shiny green leaves are the real beauty of 
this plant. The 2-inch-long, thick, oval leaves of 
jade plant are a rich jade green that often devel-
ops red tints in high light situations.

When you receive or purchase a jade plant 

you may find that there are as many as five 
plants crowded into the pot. Growers pot up 
that many cuttings in order to give the pot a 
fuller look. In the spring, take the plants out of 
their pot and separate them. Pot each one in its 
own pot. Not only will each grow better and be 
healthier, but the tree-like character of the plant 
will be better displayed.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. A half-day of filtered light from 
an east or west window is a perfect site for 
jade plant.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to  
80°F, nighttime 60 to 70°F. If you have a  
large, older plant and you’d like it to bloom,  
give it 55 to 60°F, day and night, for six weeks  
in winter.
LOW WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches and water 
even less in winter. If the plant starts dropping 
leaves, then it’s not getting enough water so up 
the ante a bit. Try watering it when the medium 
is dry to 1.5 inches. Be careful though; jade plant 
quickly succumbs to root rot if it’s overwatered. 
Monitor the potting medium closely to make 
sure it is never soggy. Do not let the pot stand in 
water in its saucer.
HUMIDITY. Jade plant is well adapted to dry air 
and needs no supplemental humidity.

Jade plant (aka friendship plant, friendship tree, lucky plant, money tree).

POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply at half-strength every two weeks from 
spring through fall. Do not feed your jade plant 
in winter.
POTTING. Up-pot young plants in the spring. 
Choose pots with a diameter 2 inches larger 

than the current pot. Re-pot older, mature plants 
every two to three years.
PROPAGATION. Jade plant is easy to propagate 
from 3-inch-long stem tip cuttings and leaf 
cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for leaf drop (page 249), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Jade plant      225

Kalanchoe

Kalanchoes (Kalanchoe blossfeldiana) are attrac-
tive little plants that appear in full bloom by the 
thousands every winter holiday season. They 
have very large clusters of very small flowers 
in brilliant shades of red, pink, orange, white, 
and yellow. Some people choose to treat kalan-
choe as a temporary holiday decoration and dis-
card it as soon as it’s finished blooming. But 
this herbaceous evergreen perennial is easy to 
grow, will bloom again fairly easily, and lives 

for at least three years, if you care for it. And 
since it’s a pretty plant even when not in flower, 
it is well worth keeping around for an encore. 
Well-grown, mature specimens grow slowly 
into bushy, rounded mounds, 18 inches tall and 
20 inches wide. The thickish succulent leaves, 
2 to 4 inches long, are bright green with red, 
slightly scalloped edges. The plant covers itself 
with flamboyant flowers in winter, and the 
flowers last a long time, putting on a good show 
for weeks.

Kalanchoe (aka flaming Katy, Christmas kalanchoe, florist kalanchoe, Madagascar widow’s-thrill).

226      Cacti and Succulents

To set flower buds, kalanchoe needs to have 

a light treatment, then a cold treatment, and 
finally, a dark treatment of 14-hour nights for 30 
consecutive days. Making this happen is easier 
than it sounds. Put your plant outdoors for the 
summer so it’s exposed to long summer days. In 
autumn it will naturally be exposed to cool tem-
peratures sufficient to meet its need for the cold 
treatment. Just be sure to bring it back inside 
before the temperature drops below 40°F. Then 
put it where it won’t be able to “see” any arti-
ficial light at night. If you handle it this way, 
it’ll be back in bloom in January and February. 
If you’d like your kalanchoe back in full glori-
ous bloom in time for the winter holiday season, 
cover it with a lightproof cover every night for 
the month of September.

 All parts of this plant are toxic to people 
and pets, including the water in a vase of the 
flowers. The plant contains cardiac glycosides, 
which directly interfere with the electrolyte 
balance within the heart muscle, causing nau-
sea, drooling, vomiting, dilated pupils, tremors, 
seizures, abnormal heart rhythm and rate, and 
life-threateningly high potassium levels. If any-
one ingests this plant, call your local emergency 
hotline, poison control center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Indoors, kalanchoe does very well 
with full, direct sun from a south, east, or west 
window. Outdoors, in summer, provide filtered 
or dappled shade.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, 
nighttime 65 to 75°F. In winter give it 60 to  
70°F, day and night. In autumn give it cool  
temperatures outdoors, 55 to 65°F, to initiate 
flower buds.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 

the potting medium becomes dry to a depth 
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Kalanchoe does not need supplemen-
tal humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, 
general-purpose potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once a month through the growing sea-
son. Do not feed the plants in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, in 
early summer, shift it to a container with a diam-
eter 2 inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Kalanchoe is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for failure to flower (page 247), spider 
mites (page 263), and stem rot (page 275).

Living stone

“Bizarre,” “unbelievable,” and “amazing” are 
some of the things people say when they first 
see a living stone (Lithops spp.). It looks noth-
ing like a plant but does look exactly like a 
stone, or pair of stones, actually. Two rounded 
leaves, separated by a slit, nestle close together 
at ground level, disguised as pebbles. That’s 
all you see until, surprise, the thing produces 
a flower. And it’s a big flower too, considering 
the tiny size of the plant. Some 300 different 
types of living stones are in cultivation—
some are species but many more are cultivars, 
whether selections or hybrids. Colors are vari-
ous, from cream, gray, brown, and red-brown 
to green, and the size, though always small, 
varies as well. In general, the whole plant is 
about 1.5 inches wide. All forms store water in 
their leaves, which allows these succulents to 

Living stone      227

Living stone (aka pebble plant, flowering stone).

persist under extremely inhospitable environ-
mental conditions.

These crazy little plants have virtually no 

stems. Any tiny bit of stem that the plant has is 
underground. The top of each thick leaf is flat 
and either smooth or pebbled in texture. Each 
spring, the plant grows a single pair of new 
leaves, which slowly emerge through the fissure 
between the two older leaves. As the two new 
leaves grow larger, the old leaves shrink, even-
tually disappearing altogether. Occasionally, the 

228      Cacti and Succulents

plant produces two new sets of leaves instead of 
just one, and becomes double-headed. As time 
goes by, the double-heading process continues, 
and each plant eventually forms a colony. Flow-
ers are often larger than the plant itself, with 
many thin, strap-like petals, in yellow or white. 
The flowers, one for each pair of leaves, emerge 
from the slit between the two leaves each fall, 
opening wide in the afternoon and closing up 
tight at night; some are sweetly fragrant.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Living stones prefer a half-day 
of full sun, preferably from an east window dur-
ing the cool of the day. The intense heat and 
light of full afternoon sun from a west window 
should be filtered a bit to moderate the heat load 
because the plants suffer from sunburn when 
exposed to full sun and high heat.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F. In fall, winter, and spring, grow 
them ten degrees cooler, day and night.
LOW WATER. Proper watering is the key to suc-
cess with these plants. In summer, and again in 
winter, give them almost no water at all. Give 
them a tiny drink only if they become badly 
wrinkled. There are two times a year when liv-
ing stones actually need a little water. The first 
time is in the spring after the new leaves have 
developed and the old leaves have shriveled. 
The second time is in the fall when the flowers 
appear. During these times, water whenever the 
medium is dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Living stones do not need supplemen-
tal humidity and will, in fact, suffer if humidity 
is too high. They do not do well in terrariums, 
for example.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes and mix it 50/50 with sand.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply once in spring when the new leaves are 
growing, and once in fall when flowering begins.
POTTING. When this very slow growing plant 
needs up-potting, every five years or so, shift it 
to a container with a diameter 2 inches larger 
than the current pot. Choose a pot deep enough 
to accommodate its taproot.
PROPAGATION. Sometimes a plant develops 

multiple heads and can then be divided. Living 
stones are easy to propagate from seed, but your 
plant makes seeds only if you hand-pollinate its 
flowers with pollen from a second, genetically 
different plant.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), spider mites 
(page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Mother of 
thousands

Mother of thousands (Bryophyllum daigre-
montianum) has thick, evergreen, succulent 
“leaves”—actually leaf-like structures called 
cladodes—6 to 8 inches long and 3 inches wide. 
They are blue-green on the upper surface, 
blotched with purple on the undersurface, and 
have saw-toothed, sometimes purple edges. The 
teeth are not sharp and won’t cut you. What’s 
interesting is that in the notches between the 
teeth, teensy little plantlets form. These clones 
develop roots while still attached to their 
mother. Then they fall off, land on the ground, 
take root, and grow. By the thousands, in every 
single pot of all the nearby houseplants. Hence 
the common name. In many countries, this plant 
is ranked as a noxious, invasive weed. You can 
probably guess why. The main stems of this 
plant get 2.5 to 3 feet tall and often need to be 
staked to remain upright. They produce lateral 
roots as high as 6 inches from ground level. Tall, 
old plants tend to lean sideways and when the 
lateral roots touch the ground, they too begin 
to grow. Eventually they develop stems and 
become a clone of the original. This playful suc-
culent very rarely flowers indoors, but if it ever 
does you will see small, smoky lavender-pink, 

Mother of thousands      229

bell-shaped flowers. They’re borne in large clus-
ters on 12-inch-tall stalks that develop on the 
tips of the main stems. After it flowers the plant 
generally dies, leaving behind countless copies 
of itself.

Mother of thousands (aka alligator plant, alligator’s 
tongue, devil’s backbone, Mexican hat plant, mother  
of millions).

230      Cacti and Succulents

 All parts of this plant are toxic to peo-

ple and pets, including the water in a vase of 
the flowers. The plant contains bufadienolides, 
chemicals that react with blood sugar to form 
cardiac glycosides, which in turn interfere with 
the heart muscle’s electrolyte balance, causing 
nausea, drooling, vomiting, dilated pupils, trem-
ors, seizures, abnormal heart rhythm and rate, 
and life-threateningly high potassium levels. If 
anyone ingests this plant, call your local emer-
gency hotline, poison control center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. This plant tolerates full, direct sun 
and the heat load of a south or west window 
very well. It also does well in bright, filtered or 
dappled light.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches. 
Water less in winter.
HUMIDITY. Mother of thousands is well adapted 
to dry air and needs no supplemental humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply at half-strength once every three months.
POTTING. In the spring, when your plant needs 
up-potting, shift it to a container with a diame-
ter 2 inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Mother of thousands is easy to 
propagate by planting the little plantlets.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for plant sprawl (page 253), spider mites 
(page 263), and root rot (page 272).

Orchid cactus

There are more than 7,000 named hybrids 
and species in this cactus group, all with huge, 
stunningly gorgeous flowers in every shade of 
purple-red, red, pink, orange, apricot, yellow, 
white, and multicolor blends. Orchid cacti are 
mainly Epiphyllum species and their selections 
but also intergeneric hybrids involving Diso-
cactus, Pseudorhipsalis, or Selenicereus. Those 
derived from artificial crosses are sometimes 
called ×Disophyllum (even though not all are 
hybrids between Disocactus and Epiphyllum). 
Orchid cactus is not a desert-dweller; in nature, 
it is an epiphyte that lives on branches high 
in the canopy of tropical rainforests. Its stems 
are 2 to 4 inches wide, flattened, green, spine-
less, and leaf-like with irregularly saw-toothed 

Orchid cactus (aka epiphyllum hybrid, epicactus, epi, 
leaf cactus).

edges. The stems arch up, out, and down, in 2- to 
3-foot-long cascades on all sides of the pot, mak-
ing these plants superb candidates for hanging 
baskets. The flowers are borne in spring at the 
tips or sides of the stems. The funnel-shaped 
flowers open flat and wide, at the tops of long 
tubes. They are usually 4 to 6 inches in diame-
ter but can be 9 to 12 inches across. Many of the 
old-fashioned types bloom only at night, with 
flowers that last a single night. Modern hybrids 
tend to be day-blooming with flowers that last 
two to three days.

For orchid cactus to set flower buds and 
bloom in the spring, make sure that it is not 
exposed to any source of light at night in the 
winter. No desk lamps, night-lights, streetlights, 
etc. It needs long nights of complete darkness to 
set buds. It also needs cooler temperatures dur-
ing this dark treatment. Keep nighttime tem-
perature around 50°F, no warmer than 57°F, 
through the winter. Give it those long nights 
and cool temperatures, and this houseplant will 
reward you generously with its spectacular flow-
ers in spring.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Give your orchid cactus bright fil-
tered morning light from an east window. Pro-
tect it from afternoon heat and light. Give it long 
nights of total darkness in winter.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. In winter give them 50 to 
57°F nights.
MODERATE WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. In winter, 
water just enough to keep the soil slightly moist.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
with a spray bottle of water on a mist setting, or 

Orchid cactus      231

use a handheld mister. Put the pot in a saucer 
or tray of water, making sure the bottom of the 
pot never sits directly in the water by raising the 
pot up on pot feet or pebbles. Consider putting a 
humidifier in the room.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic potting 
medium designed for semi-terrestrial orchids, 
one that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the second number (phosphorus) is a lot 
higher than the other two to promote flower-
ing. Apply every two weeks through the growing 
season. Do not fertilize in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
every three to four years, shift it to a container 
with a diameter 2 inches larger than the current 
pot. Up-pot or re-pot this plant right after it fin-
ishes blooming.
PROPAGATION. Orchid cactus is very easy to 
propagate from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for flower bud drop (page 248), scale 
insects (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Panda plant

Super easy to grow and tolerant of benign 
neglect, panda plant (Kalanchoe tomentosa) is 
among the most forgiving of all houseplants. It 
is a succulent, with thick, water-storing leaves, 
so it doesn’t need much water, and it’s very well 
adapted to the dry air of most homes. Panda 
plant gets 1 to 2 feet tall and has a stout stem 
with numerous side branches that give it a 
tree-like, almost bonsai character. Side branches 
tend to grow erect at their tips with dense clus-
ters of vertical leaves, whereas leaves near the 
base of stems are perpendicular to the stems. 
The densely hairy leaves are oval to egg-shaped 

232      Cacti and Succulents

and 1 to 3 inches long. These furry, silvery-velvet 
leaves are as soft as kitten’s ears. With their dark 
rust-red edges, they are panda plant’s most dis-
tinguishing feature and the primary reason to 
grow it in your home. The small, fuzzy, yellow-
ish green, bell-shaped flowers are rarely pro-
duced indoors.

 Because it is closely related to kalanchoe 

and mother of thousands, panda plant is pre-
sumed toxic to people and pets in all its parts, 
including the water in a vase of its flowers. 
Those plants contain bufadienolides, chemi-
cals that react with blood sugar to form car-
diac glycosides, which in turn interfere with the 
heart muscle’s electrolyte balance, causing nau-
sea, drooling, vomiting, dilated pupils, tremors, 
seizures, abnormal heart rhythm and rate, and 
life-threateningly high potassium levels. If any-
one ingests this plant, call your local emergency 
hotline, poison control center, or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Give this plant full sun from a south 
window, or really bright filtered light. A half-day 
of sun from an east or west window will also 
work well. Be careful to acclimatize the plant to 
full sun slowly.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Water whenever the top of 
the potting medium becomes dry to a depth  
of 1 inch.
HUMIDITY. Panda plant does not need supple-
mental humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic 

Panda plant (aka chocolate soldier, cocoon plant, panda bear plant, plush plant, pussy ears).

Panda plant      233

fertilizer. Apply at half-strength once a month 
through the growing season. Don’t feed the 
plant in the winter.
POTTING. When this slow-growing plant needs 
up-potting, shift it to a container with a diame-
ter 2 inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Panda plant is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings and leaf cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Prickly pear

Prickly pear (Opuntia spp.) is the familiar cactus 
with flat pads that look like the ears on a Mickey 
Mouse hat. You’ve probably seen it in dozens of 
cowboy movies and western landscape paint-
ings. The origin of the common name is obvi-
ous: both the plant and its vaguely pear-shaped 
fruits are covered with vicious spines and/or 
extremely fine, needle-like hairs (glochids), 
which penetrate human skin before you even 
know they’re there. The prickly pears you’re 

Prickly pear.

234      Cacti and Succulents

likely to find as container plants include beaver-
tail prickly pear (O. basilaris), Indian fig prickly 
pear (O. ficus-indica), and purple prickly pear 
(O. macrocentra). They’ll range in size from 20 
to 36 inches tall as potted houseplants, and all 
have flat, ping-pong-paddle-like, jointed stems. 
The stems are dotted with round spots (areoles), 
and the spines and glochids grow in tufts on 
these. The flat pads (nopales in Mexican cuisine) 
are edible, but you have to remove the spines 
and glochids before you can eat them, and you 
should wear heavy gloves to do so. They have a 
slightly mucilaginous texture and taste a little 
like green beans. Spineless cultivars have been 
developed specifically for eating. Showy flowers 
of yellow, purple, red, orange, or white are borne 
on the top edge of the pads. They open wide, 2 
to 3 inches in diameter, with lots of petals, and if 
successfully pollinated, they’ll develop fruit. But 
again, before you can eat these delicious, tropi-
cally flavored fruits, you must first remove all 
the spines and glochids. Wear heavy gloves and 
use pliers to pull the big spines off.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Prickly pears demand all the light 
you can provide. Full sun all day from a south 
window is best, especially if you’d like your plant 
to flower. Place outdoors in full sun every spring 
and summer to ensure regular flowering.
HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F. Prickly pears enjoy high heat 
loads but will also tolerate more moderate 
temperatures.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Prickly pears do not need supplemen-
tal humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cactus 

and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply at half-strength once a month through the 
growing season. Do not fertilize in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 4 inches 
larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Prickly pear is easy to propagate 
from seed or by rooting whole pads.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for failure to flower (page 247), scale 
insects (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Rat tail cactus

This is another epiphytic cactus, but unlike 
Christmas cactus, Easter cactus, and orchid cac-
tus, rat tail cactus (Disocactus flagelliformis) is 
spiny, and vehemently so. The shallowly ridged, 
cylindrical stems are so densely clothed in whit-
ish, orange-brown, or golden yellow spines 
that sometimes you can barely see any green on 
them. The spines, though small (0.1 inch long), 
are sharp and abundant, so err on the side of 
caution and wear heavy gloves when potting 
or working with this plant. This fast-growing 
cactus produces multiple stems, 0.5 to 1 inch 
thick and as much as 4 to 5 feet long, form-
ing large clumps that look like ropes cascading 
from their pot or hanging basket. The tubular 
flowers are 2 to 4 inches long and wide, bright 
pinkish violet-red, and borne in abundance 
from the tips and sides of the dangling stems in 
spring. Each flower lasts two to three days and 
flowers are produced for about two months. 
Hybrids with other species are available, and 
many are less demanding of high sunlight. They 
also have larger flowers, and a broader range 

Rat tail cactus      235

MODERATE WATER. During the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. In winter, 
water much less frequently, just enough to keep 
the potting medium from drying out completely.
HUMIDITY. Rat tail cactus does not need supple-
mental humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Rat tail cactus will grow well 
in ordinary potting soil mixed 50/50 with sand 
to improve drainage. The growing medium 
needs to be free-draining but humus-rich. Some 
garden centers sell a mix of soil specifically 
designed for cacti. It’s mostly sand and works 
well for regular cacti, but not for your rat tail 
cactus. However, it works well if mixed 50/50 
with ordinary organic potting soil, to increase its 
water-holding capacity.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced liquid organic  
fertilizer. Apply at half-strength every two 
weeks through the growing season. Do not  
fertilize in winter.
POTTING. Re-pot annually when the plant has 
finished flowering. When your plant needs 
up-potting, shift it to a container with a diame-
ter 2 inches larger than the current pot.
PROPAGATION. Rat tail cactus is easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for failure to flower (page 247), mealy-
bugs (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Snake plant

We’ve grown this plant, our mothers grew it, 
and so did our grandmothers. It’s been very pop-
ular for a long time. And deservedly so, because 
it is a handsome plant with a pronounced ver-
tical presence; and it is both easy to grow and 
low maintenance. In fact, snake plant (Sanse-
vieria trifasciata) seems almost indestructible, 

Rat tail cactus.

of flower colors including bright orange, pink, 
and purple. The stems of these hybrids are dark 
green with much deeper ridges and furrows 
than the species.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Rat tail cactus really wants full, 
direct sun all day from a south window in order 
to do its best and flower well. It will tolerate a 
half-day of sun from an east or west window, or 
really bright filtered light, but it may not flower 
well. Given low light it won’t flower at all.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. In winter, when the plant 
is resting, give it 55 to 65°F days, and don’t let 
the temperature drop below 45°F.

236      Cacti and Succulents

Snake plant (aka bowstring hemp, golden bird’s nest, good luck plant, Saint George’s sword).

tolerating a very wide range of light, tempera-
ture, and water conditions.

Snake plant has no aboveground stems. Its 
leaves arise directly in a basal rosette from a 
thick, underground, creeping rhizome, and since 
the plant doesn’t flower indoors, foliage is the 
primary reason to grow this plant. The stiffly 
erect, stout leaves feel almost artificial, they’re 

so hard. Each sword-shaped leaf is sharply 
pointed. Leaves are dark green, with transverse 
bands of silvery gray-green, much like a snake’s 
skin, and they are sometimes edged with a nar-
row ribbon of yellow or white, depending on 
the cultivar. Indoors the leaves rarely exceed 36 
inches tall and they are usually 2 to 2.5 inches 
wide. Some cultivars are much shorter and more 

Snake plant      237

compact, with wider leaves. In all the many cul-
tivars, leaves are glossy, with a waxy sheen, and 
strongly vertical.

 This plant is toxic to people and pets and 
should be kept in an out-of-the-way place. All 
parts of this plant contain saponins, chemical 
compounds with soap-like properties which 
have historically been used as fish poisons and 
in shampoos. Clinical symptoms are nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhea. If you suspect a person 
or pet has ingested parts of this plant, call your 
local emergency hotline, poison control center, 
or vet.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
MEDIUM LIGHT. Give snake plant bright filtered 
light. No direct sun.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F. Don’t let the temperature 
drop below 60°F.
MODERATE WATER. Through the growing season, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. In winter, 
water whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Snake plant does not need supplemen-
tal humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.
FERTILIZER. Use any balanced organic fertilizer. 
Apply at half-strength once a month through 
the growing season. Do not feed your plant 
in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Use a heavy pot 
to help prevent these tall plants from falling 

238      Cacti and Succulents

over, or add pebbles to the bottom of the pot to 
increase its weight.
PROPAGATION. Snake plant is easy to propa-
gate by division of the rhizome and from leaf 
cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for sunburn (page 256), mealybugs (page 
262), and root rot (page 272).

Tiger jaws

The most widespread and commonly avail-
able tiger jaws is Faucaria tigrina, with F. felina 
a close second. The name of the genus comes 
from the Latin fauces (“animal mouth”), and 
the leaves, borne in opposite pairs, do indeed 
look like the gaping maw of an animal’s mouth, 
or even tiger jaws. What’s more, both species 
have up to ten large, soft, whitish teeth, standing 
erect along the edges of their succulent, trian-
gular leaves. In F. tigrina the teeth are long and 
recurved, and the 2-inch-long leaves are thin-
ner. In F. felina the teeth are shorter, and the 
3-inch-long leaves are thicker. Both species have 
daisy-like yellow flowers, to 1 inch wide in F. tig-
rina and 2 inches wide in F. felina. They bloom 
in the autumn, and the flowers have numerous, 
very thin petals that have a glossy, satiny sheen. 
Tiger jaws get about 6 inches tall and spread to 
form clumps 6 to 8 inches wide.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. During the growing season give 
these plants a full day of sun. This much light 
helps them bloom well in the fall. The plants do 
best in a south window. A half-day of light from 
an east or west window also works well.

Tiger jaws (aka cat chap, cat jaws, shark jaws, wolf mouth).

HIGH TEMPERATURE. Daytime 75 to 85°F, night-
time 65 to 75°F. Give them cooler temperatures 
in winter but don’t let it get below 60°F.
LOW WATER. Water whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches. 
Water even less in winter.
HUMIDITY. Mist your plant several times a week 
in winter with a spray bottle of water on a mist 
setting, or use a handheld mister. During the 
growing season the plant needs no supplemen-
tal humidity.
POTTING MEDIUM. Use any good organic, cac-
tus and succulent potting soil that incorporates 
organic fertilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other 
beneficial microbes.

FERTILIZER. Use any organic fertilizer, in either 
a powder or liquid formulation. Apply once a 
month through the growing season. Do not feed 
the plants in winter.
POTTING. When your plant needs up-potting, 
shift it to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. Use broad, shallow 
pots for these shallow-rooted plants.
PROPAGATION. Tiger jaws is easy to propagate by 
division and from stem tip cuttings.

COMMON PROBLEMS
Watch for failure to flower (page 247), mealy-
bugs (page 262), and root rot (page 272).

Tiger jaws      239

Culinary herbs

What a delight it is to harvest fresh herbs from 
pots lining your kitchen windowsills. No won-
der then that so many people grow certain 
herbs as houseplants, even if only as temporary 
ones. All, including many scented-leaf gerani-
ums (page 96), have scented, aromatic foliage 
that is used in a variety of ways to create dishes 
and drinks that delight the palate. Some culi-
nary herbs are also used medicinally or are sim-
ply valued for their fragrance, but for seasoning 
your food there’s really nothing better than your 
own, homegrown organic herbs, freshly gath-
ered. Indoors, the best way to keep culinary 
herbs healthy is to make sure they have plenty 
of air and space. Place a small fan nearby that 
blows gently across their leaves. They’ll thank 
you for it.

Basil (Ocimum basilicum) is an annual with doz-
ens of available varieties—lemon basil, purple 
basil, Thai basil—but the typical variety you find 
at the grocer’s is Genovese basil. Buy bags of fresh 
Genovese basil from the supermarket, trim the 
ends off the stems, put them in water, and set the 
jar on a windowsill. Harvest fresh leaves when-
ever you need them. As time goes by, many of the 
stems grow roots. Pot these up in 4-inch pots.

Bay laurel (Laurus nobilis) is a very pretty, 
slow-growing, evergreen tree that is quite happy 
potted and can be grown in a container for many 
years. To use the leaves, harvest a few and dry 
them in the sun. The flavor is better from dried 
leaves, and once dried they’ll keep for a year. 
But discard them after a year because they start 
to lose flavor. Dry some more fresh leaves to 
replace them.

summer. And of course, it dies after it goes to 
seed. It does best and lasts longest in the cooler 
temperatures of winter, and in the light of an 
east window. Because it’s an annual you need 
to start it from seed or buy young plants at the 
nursery in order to keep it around.

Chives (Allium schoenoprasum) is a very pretty, 
almost grass-like perennial that gets 6 to 12 
inches tall. The tasty leaves are round and hol-
low and have a mild onion flavor. Harvest by cut-
ting leaves off 2 to 3 inches above the soil line. 
Chop the leaves for use as a garnish. The pink 
flowers are also edible.

Cilantro (Coriandrum sativum) is an annual 
that, like chervil, quickly flowers, goes to seed, 
and dies in summer’s heat. Because it’s an 
annual you must either grow cilantro from seed 
every year, or buy young plants from the nurs-
ery to have it available year-round. Cilantro 
does double duty as a culinary herb because its 
leaves have one flavor profile and its ripe seeds 
are ground into coriander, a spice with an alto-
gether different flavor. Cilantro often features in 
Mexican and Chinese cuisines, but note: when 
the plant begins to develop a flower stalk, the 
leaves change flavor. Some people love their fla-
vor in every stage of growth; others relish only 
the fresh young leaves.

Marjoram (Origanum majorana) is a somewhat 
shrubby perennial closely related to oregano 
that grows in a clump with upright, branched 
stems and small, oval, gray-green leaves. Out-
doors, marjoram spreads aggressively to 18 to 
24 inches tall and wide. It will be much smaller 
when confined to a pot in the house (and it can’t 
get away from you either).

Chervil (Anthriscus cerefolium) is an annual that 
quickly flowers and goes to seed in the heat of 

Mint is a perennial in the mint family. Spear-
mint (Mentha spicata) is a favorite for a lovely, 

240      Culinary herbs

Rosemary.

Culinary herbs      241

ice cold mojito at the end of the day. Pepper-
mint (M. ×piperita) is more strongly flavored, 
sharper, almost peppery, thus its epithets. Both 
these mints spread aggressively out in the gar-
den so keep them under control in pots. Indoors, 
of course, they can’t escape and that’s a good 
thing. Mints root very easily and quickly in a 
glass of water.

Thyme.

242      Culinary herbs

Oregano (Origanum vulgare) is a perennial that 
spreads by underground rhizomes. Its small, 
gray-green to bright green leaves are strongly 
aromatic and familiar to most people as a prin-
cipal flavoring of pizza sauce. Oregano flowers 
in summer with clusters of small pink flowers. 
There are numerous cultivars and named vari-
eties with different leaf colors and flavors. Taste 
before you buy to be sure you like the one you 
bring home.

Parsley (Petroselinum crispum) is a biennial, 
which means that it will grow leaves in its first 
year and, in its second year it will flower, set 
seed, and die. To enjoy it indoors, then, you have 
to start it from seed or purchase starts from the 
nursery. Flat-leaf and curly-leaf parsley have 
very different flavors. Try one of each to see 
which you’d like to grow.

Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis), a long- 
lived evergreen shrub with numerous culti-
vars, will thrive for years as a potted houseplant. 
Keep it small (under 2 feet) and bushy by snip-
ping off the twigs to use its abundantly pro-
duced, unmistakably flavored leaves in cooking.

Sage (Salvia officinalis), another long-lived ever-
green shrub, gets 1 to 2 feet tall depending on 
the cultivar. Some cultivars have purple leaves; 
others are tricolor with creamy white, purple, 
and green foliage; and some are variegated with 
golden blotches. The large, gray-green leaves of 
‘Berggarten’, a favorite cultivar, often find their 
way into chicken soups and stews.

Tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus) is an her-
baceous perennial that grows from an under-
ground rhizome to 2 feet tall. Indoors it 
performs best in an east window and will remain 
green all winter. Harvest fresh leaves for their 
delicate anise-like flavor. If you find an offer of 

tarragon seeds don’t bother with them. They are 
of Russian tarragon (A. dracunculoides), which 
does not have the distinctive flavor and aroma 
of true tarragon. True tarragon rarely produces 
viable seeds and is almost exclusively propa-
gated by division and cuttings.

Thymes are diminutive evergreen shrublets 
only 8 to 12 inches tall with tiny but strongly 
aromatic leaves. The numerous cultivars of com-
mon garden thyme (Thymus vulgaris) include 
English thyme and French thyme. Cultivars of 
T. ×citriodorus include lemon thyme, orange 
thyme, and lime thyme. All forms grow hap-
pily in 4- to 6-inch pots. Many other species of 
thyme (woolly thyme, creeping thyme, mother 
of thyme) widely used as outdoor groundcovers 
are not culinary herbs.

OPTIMUM HOUSEHOLD 
ENVIRONMENT
Read the Introduction for the specifics of  
each recommendation.
HIGH LIGHT. Herbs need full sun. Except as noted 
(at chervil and tarragon), the all-day-long light 
or very bright indirect light of a south window 
is best. A half-day of light from an east or west 
window also works well, but if your plant starts 
to get leggy give it more light. Many herbs, espe-
cially low-growing ones, do well under artificial 
lights for 14 hours a day. Keep the lights 6 inches 
above the leaves.
MODERATE TEMPERATURE. Daytime 70 to 80°F, 
nighttime 60 to 70°F.
MODERATE WATER. Most herbs should be watered 
whenever the top of the potting medium 
becomes dry to a depth of 1 inch. Exceptions are 
bay laurel, rosemary, sage, and thyme, which 
should be watered whenever the top of the pot-
ting medium becomes dry to a depth of 2 inches.
HUMIDITY. Herbs generally adapt quite well to 
the dry air of most homes and don’t normally 

require misting. If the air in your home is exces-
sively dry, mist herbs occasionally with a spray 
bottle of water on a mist setting, or use a hand-
held mister.
POTTING MEDIUM. For most culinary herbs, use 
any good organic, general-purpose potting soil 
that incorporates organic fertilizer, mycor-
rhizal fungi, and other beneficial microbes. 
For bay laurel, rosemary, sage, and thyme use 
a well-drained, organic, cactus and succulent 
potting soil. If you can’t find an organic cac-
tus potting soil that incorporates organic fer-
tilizer, mycorrhizal fungi, and other beneficial 
microbes, you can make one by mixing sand 
50/50 with a general-purpose medium that has 
all these healthy ingredients.
FERTILIZER. Use any liquid organic fertilizer 
where the first number (nitrogen) is higher than 
the other two. Apply at half-strength once a 
month. Stop feeding herbs in winter.
POTTING. When herbs need up-potting, shift 
them to a container with a diameter 2 inches 
larger than the current pot. You’ll generally 
move them from a 4-inch pot to a 6-inch pot. 
Most of the time you don’t need pots larger than 
6 inches. If you choose to, and you have the 
space for it, you could grow bay laurel, rosemary, 
and sage in pots up to 12 inches in diameter.
PROPAGATION. With the exceptions of chervil, 
chives, cilantro, and parsley, which are grown 
from seed, all other herbs are easy to propagate 
from stem tip cuttings. Most people find root-
ing herbs in water is simple and easy. When the 
cuttings have plenty of roots, pot them up into 
4-inch pots. You can also root cuttings in potting 
mix by using rooting hormones.

COMMON PROBLEMS 
Watch for leggy growth (page 251), aphids (page 
259), and powdery mildew (page 272).

Culinary herbs      243

Organic Solutions to 
Common Problems

COMMON GROWING  
CONDITION PROBLEMS

Every plant portrait lists the most common 
problems that occur for each plant. However, 
you may encounter less common problems 
as well. If something is not quite right with 
your plants and you’ve ruled out a pest or dis-
ease, look at the photos and read the descrip-
tions in this section to find a diagnosis and safe, 
organic solutions.

Accordion-folded leaves. New, young leaves 
of certain orchids (alicearas, beallaras, danc-
ing ladies, pansy orchids, spider orchids) tend 
to stick together as they grow when the humid-
ity is too low or the plant doesn’t have enough 
water. Leaves that are stuck together can-
not free themselves, but they keep trying to 
grow. As a result, the leaf becomes pleated and 
folded. Accordion-folded leaves will not out-
grow this condition. Although unsightly, it is 
not life-threatening to your plant. Correct the 
growing conditions, and subsequent leaves will 
grow normally.

If low humidity is the trouble, raise it by mist-

ing your orchids with a spray bottle of water 
on a mist setting, or use a handheld mister. To 
determine how often to mist, look at the humid-
ity needs of your plant in its plant portrait. Set 
your orchid in a saucer or tray of water with 
the pot sitting on pot feet or pebbles to raise it 
up above the water. Group your houseplants 
together to raise the humidity. Put a humidi-
fier in the room. Avoid blasts of hot air from 
heat registers.

If you believe the humidity is adequate, then 

insufficient water may be the trouble. Water 
your orchids more frequently, especially if the 
air in your home is unusually warm and dry. 
If humidity is adequate and your frequency of 
watering is appropriate, check to see if your 

246      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Accordion-folded leaves.

orchid needs to be up-potted and the potting 
medium refreshed.

Brown leaf tips. The tips of the leaves die and 
turn brown. The cause is low humidity and/or 
insufficient water. As this condition progresses, 
leaf edges may also turn brown and die. If tiny 
black dots develop in the dead brown areas, your 
plant has a leaf spot fungus infection (page 269).

If low humidity is the trouble, raise it by 

misting your houseplants with a spray bottle of 
water on a mist setting, or use a handheld mis-
ter. To determine how often to mist, look at the 
humidity needs of your plant in its plant por-
trait. Set your plant in a saucer or tray of water 

(top left and right) Brown leaf tips.

(above) Accordion-folded leaves.

with the pot sitting on pot feet or pebbles to 
raise it up above the water. Group your house-
plants together to raise the humidity. Put a 
humidifier in the room. Avoid blasts of hot air 
from heat registers.

For insufficient water, check to see if your 
plant’s pot is too small for it. If so, your plant 
needs to be up-potted. Make sure that you pro-
vide your plant with all the water it needs.

a disease or a pest, and is not life-threatening, 
but leaves that have already developed edema 
are going to stay that way. To prevent edema 
from occurring on new leaves, reduce the fre-
quency and quantity of watering. Increase light 
and temperature to allow more rapid transpira-
tion. Make sure the potting medium drains ade-
quately and that your plant is not suffering from 
soggy soil.

Edema. Plants develop tiny brown bumps on 
the leaves. These bumps are firmly attached and 
cannot be rubbed off with your thumbnail. The 
bumps are rough to the touch, because they’re 
composed of cork tissue that the leaves pro-
duce in response to overwatering. Edema is not 

Failure to flower. Sometimes houseplants that 
should produce flowers don’t. There are several 
reasons why a plant fails to flower but the most 
common are lack of chilling, insufficient light, 
and lack of long nights. Each of these factors 
applies to specific houseplants, as follows.

Common Growing Condition Problems       247

Edema.

Leaf drop.

Lack of chilling: amaryllis, Easter cactus, 
florist azalea, jasmine, kalanchoe, orchid cac-
tus, and spring bulbs all require a cold treat-
ment in order to set flower buds. The details for 
each plant’s required cold treatment (when, for 
how long, at what temperature) are given in the 
plant portraits.

Insufficient light: dendrobium, hibiscus, 
prickly pear, rat tail cactus, tiger jaws, and 
wax plant all require sufficient levels of light 
(whether high or, in the case of wax plant, 
medium) to have enough energy to produce 
flowers. Plants that fail to flower because they 
don’t receive enough sun need to be moved to a 
higher light situation. Alternatively, when cur-
tains are responsible for low light intensity, they 
can be left open or removed. Increase sunlight 
carefully and acclimate your plants slowly to 
avoid sunburn.

Lack of long nights: Christmas cactus, jas-

mine, orchid cactus, and poinsettia all require a 
period of darkness in order to set flower buds. 

248      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

See their plant portraits for details of when and 
how to provide these long nights, and the dura-
tion of this blackout treatment. When you bring 
your plant out into daylight make sure it cannot 
“see” light sources at night such as streetlamps, 
headlights, or electric lighting in your home.

Flower bud drop. Many houseplants drop 
their flower buds. Gardenia is notoriously fin-
icky and tosses its flower buds on the ground for 
a variety of reasons. Usually it’s because of its 
requirement for acid soil. Make sure the organic 
fertilizer you use is designed for acid-loving 
plants. Gardenias also love coffee grounds, as 
their portrait notes. If you are certain the soil 
pH is correct, yet your gardenia (or any other 
houseplant) still drops its buds, then check to 
make sure it isn’t too cold and that it’s getting 
enough light. For all houseplants, be sure you’re 
not overwatering, as this is a frequent cause of 
bud drop. Many orchids also drop their flower 
buds, but the cause is unknown.

Leaf drop.

Leaf drop. Leaves of all plants have a finite lifes-
pan. As a rule plants shed their oldest leaves 
a few at a time. This is totally normal and not 
cause for concern. However, when plants drop a 
lot of leaves all at once, this is not normal. Many 
plants drop their leaves if overwatered. Have 
another look at the plant portrait to check the 
plant’s water needs.

False aralia, weeping fig, and others drop 
their leaves if you move them to a new loca-
tion. Put them in a permanent location and 
leave them there. Do not put them outdoors 
for the summer.

Boston fern, hare’s foot fern, and jade plant, 

among others, tend to be drought deciduous and 
drop their leaves if they get too dry. Recheck the 
plant portraits for their water needs.

Donkey tail and lipstick plant are just two 

plants that drop their leaves if they get too cold. 
Consult the plant portraits to determine the cor-
rect temperature range.

Leaves changing color. Plants with colorful or 
variegated foliage sometimes begin to lose their 
bright yellows, whites, reds, or pinks. Leaves can 
revert to plain green, or just fade and turn pale. 
Too much or too little sunlight causes the foliage 
of certain plants to change color.

Arrowhead plant, coleus, and Swedish ivy are 
all examples of plants with colorful foliage that 
fades and loses vibrancy with too much sunlight. 
Move these plants to a lower light situation. Or, 
instead of moving your plant, add more curtains 
to reduce light intensity.

Chinese evergreen, croton, polka dot plant, 

pothos, and variegated cultivars of cast-iron 
plant and ivy are all examples of plants with col-
orful, variegated leaves that tend to turn plain 
green with too little sunlight. Move these plants 
to a higher light situation. Or, instead of mov-
ing your plant, remove some of the curtains on 
your windows. Acclimate your plants slowly 
to avoid sunburn.

Common Growing Condition Problems       249

(top) Leaves on croton begin to lose their bright colors.

(above) Leaves on pothos turn plain green.

250      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Leaves turning brown. Leaves turn brown 
for a variety of reasons, some of which are per-
fectly normal and not cause for concern. For 
example, old leaves in the process of being dis-
carded by your plant often turn brown before 
they drop. Caladium, Cupid’s bow, and Rieger 
begonias, among others, have a pronounced 
dormant period in which all the plant’s leaves 
turn brown as the plant prepares to go to sleep. 
This is also normal, and new leaves will grow 
when the dormant period is over. But leaves of 
some plants turn brown because they are sen-
sitive to chemicals or water quality, others to 
low humidity. These conditions are not normal 
and are correctible.

Bird’s nest and davallia ferns are just two 

examples of plants that are sensitive to chemi-
cals. Do not spray such plants with insecticides, 
fungicides, or leaf polishes. Insecticidal soap is 
safe to use if you need to, but avoid all others.
Many plants (peacock plant, spider plant, 

orchids, bromeliads) are sensitive to water qual-
ity and should be irrigated with filtered, rain-, or 
distilled water, rather than tap water.

Raise the humidity for maidenhair fern or any 

plant that has begun to brown by misting it, set-
ting the pot on a tray of water filled with peb-
bles, or putting a humidifier in the room.

Leaves turning brown.

Leggy growth. All plants eventually shed their 
oldest leaves. As the plant grows taller and as the 
leaves near its base are shed, the stems or trunk 
of the plant is revealed. When your plant starts 
to look like a collection of sticks, each topped by 
a dust mop of foliage, it has become leggy. Keep 
in mind that for some plants this look is per-
fectly normal. Legginess can also occur when 
plants are grown in too much shade and become 
tall and spindly as they reach for light.

Plants that have become leggy because they 
have dropped older leaves need a bit of correc-
tive pruning. Prune them back by about a third 

Leaves turning brown.

Common Growing Condition Problems       251

to force side branches to grow out and make 
the plants bushier. Alternatively, pinch out the 
growing tips of the stems while the plants are 
still small to avoid legginess from the outset.
Plants that are tall and spindly and have 
not dropped their older leaves are not get-
ting enough light. Either move these plants to 
a higher light location or remove curtains that 
filter the light. As always, slowly and carefully 
acclimate your plants to higher light intensity to 
avoid sunburn.

Leggy growth.

252      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Loss of vigor. The flowers of spring bulbs and 
the smaller, more colorful calla lilies are smaller, 
and the plants less vigorous than they were in 
their first year.

Make certain your plant has the proper light 
regime. Remember, light is food. Also, be sure to 
provide fertilizer regularly through the grow-
ing season and none at all during dormancy. You 
want the plant to store as much food and nutri-
ents as possible in its underground rhizomes 
so that it has abundant resources to mobilize 
the next time it flowers. The more energy it has 
available from its stores the more vigorous it will 
be. When the plant is completely dormant put it 
in a cool place out of the hot sun. Cool tempera-
tures help it conserve stored energy. Treat these 
plants right and they should reward you with 
ample flowers every year for years to come.

Needle drop. Norfolk Island pine tends to drop 
needles on the floor. As with any plant, drop-
ping the oldest leaves (or needles) is normal and 
to be expected. However, when Norfolk Island 
pine drops large quantities of its needles, it is 
experiencing some sort of environmental stress. 
Although it can grow new needles, it cannot 
replace ones that have been lost. Norfolk Island 
pine needs cool temperatures, high humidity, 
and moderate water to do its best. If the temper-
ature goes too high, the humidity too low, or the 
plant gets too dry it becomes stressed and starts 
dropping needles. Avoid putting this plant near 
sources of hot air like furnace registers, space 
heaters, or fireplaces. Check the plant portrait 
for specific requirements.

Plant collapse. All plants wilt, of course, but 
plant collapse is very dramatic. Nerve plant, 
in particular, needs ample water, high humid-
ity, and filtered light to stay healthy. It is noto-
rious for having hissy fits and fainting if its 
potting medium gets too dry, the humidity gets 

Plant sprawl.

Plant sprawl. Certain plants tend to lean dra-
matically to one side as they grow larger because 
their stems don’t have the strength to hold them 
upright. This tendency to lean is exaggerated 
if the light source always comes from one side, 
forcing the plant to lean into the light. Pinch-
ing off the growing tips of the stems while these 
plants are young forces them to become bush-
ier and therefore stronger and able to stand 
straighter. Tying the plant to a bamboo pole 
or stake also helps it keep its shape. Give the 
plant a quarter turn every week to keep it grow-
ing symmetrically and prevent it from leaning 
into the light.

Smaller, more colorful calla lilies are less vigorous in their 
second year.

too low, or the light too bright. The plant wilts 
very quickly if it runs out of water. It will rehy-
drate if watered, but if it’s been too dry too long 
(more than a couple of hours) it won’t recover. 
Just make sure it also has good drainage because 
soggy soil can be lethal.

Post-repotting collapse. Up-potting and 
re-potting is a fairly traumatic experience for 
any plant. Even using the most careful tech-
nique, roots get broken or trimmed, stems and 
leaves are jostled and pruned, and water sup-
ply is interrupted. Most plants recover quickly, 

Common Growing Condition Problems       253

but tree ivy is notorious for collapsing com-
pletely after re-potting. Give all plants some TLC 
in a post-repotting recovery room, with a bit 
of shade and cooler temperatures to minimize 
water loss while they recover. Gently reintro-
duce them to their proper light and temperature 
regimes once they have perked up again.

Premature dormancy. Many houseplants have 
a definite dormant period at some point in the 
year. Drought often acts as a trigger for a plant 
to enter dormancy. Thus, allowing your plant to 
go dry can cause it to go dormant sooner than 
it should. False shamrock is especially suscep-
tible to this phenomenon. The leaves of plants 
other than cacti and succulents turn yellow, then 
brown, and then drop. In many cases the above- 
ground plant parts disappear completely. It is 
not dead, just sleeping, and will resume growth 
at the appropriate time. When cacti and succu-
lents go dormant in winter they’re far more sub-
tle about it—they just stop growing.

Maintain the proper moisture levels to keep a 
plant active and healthy until the right time for 

Post-repotting collapse.

Post-repotting collapse.

254      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

it to go dormant. Check the plant portraits for 
guidance on frequency and quantity of water for 
the plant in question.

Salt burn. Leaves that turn brown around the 
edges, stunted plants, wilted plants, and roots 
that die at their tips are symptoms of salt burn. 
The salts show up as a white crust around the 
edge of the pot or on the surface of the potting 
medium, especially in dry weather. Any plant 
can suffer from salt burn due to accumulated 
fertilizer salts in the potting medium, or salts 
in the water supply. Common table salt, sodium 
chloride, is only one kind of salt. Other kinds of 
salt include mineral nutrients like potassium, 
phosphorus, and calcium from fertilizer.

Do not use your tap water for your plants if 

you have hard water with a high mineral content 
or if you have a water softening system that uses 
table salt. Instead, use rainwater, bottled water, 
or distilled water. Whether you have hard water 
or not, the best practice is to flush fertilizer salts 
out of the pots once a month by pouring rain-
water, bottled water, or distilled water onto the 
potting medium. Give it a thorough soaking. 
Then let the pot drain.

Shrunken, wrinkled leaves. All succulents 
(e.g., agave and aloe) and some orchids (e.g., 
moth orchids) store water in their thick fleshy 
leaves. Leaves of these plants become shrunken 
and wrinkled when plants dry out too much. As 
soon as you notice this problem, mist and water 
the plant lightly, but do not soak it. The next day 
water it lightly again. Wait a couple of days and 
then water lightly a third time. Shortly there-
after the leaves should have fattened up nicely. 
Always avoid making the potting medium soggy 
because the roots of these kinds of plants do not 
tolerate much water and will quickly succumb 
to root rot fungus.

Common Growing Condition Problems       255

Salt burn.

Salt burn.

Sunburn.

Sunburn. Leaves develop large black and brown 
dead patches wherever they have been exposed 
to too much sunlight. Intense, direct, hot sun-
light literally cooks the cells of the leaf and kills 
them. Your plant will grow healthy new leaves 
but the dead patches on the old leaves are per-
manent. Sunburn frequently occurs when a 
houseplant is moved outdoors for a summer 
vacation and is inadequately acclimated to its 
new environment. Solve this common problem 
by moving the plant to a shadier location. Filter 
and soften the light by installing sheer curtains 
or Venetian blinds. Acclimate your plant when-
ever you move it to a higher light situation.

Whitish spots on leaves. These spots typically 
show up as lines or rings of pale tissue on the 
upper surface of the leaves of African violets, 
gloxinias, and other furry-leaved gesneriads. 
The spots develop when cold water is dripped 
onto the leaves. Use a watering can with a nar-
row spout so you can apply tepid water directly 
to the potting medium while keeping the leaves 
dry. You might also try setting the pot in a saucer 
full of water for 30 minutes. This is called water-
ing from the bottom. Be careful if you try this 
because it is very easy to forget the plant and 

256      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

allow it to sit in water too long, which drastically 
increases the risk of root rot and gray mold.

Wilting. Any plant that cannot move water 
up to its leaves will wilt. The leaves dan-
gle and become flaccid. The growing tips of 
the stems droop and point to the ground. The 
whole plant suffers and, if the situation is not 
reversed, your plant will die. Wilting is a serious, 
life-threatening condition that results from  
four causes.

The most frequent cause of wilting is that 
you forgot to water your plant. If you find to 
your horror that your plant has wilted because 
you forgot to water it, give it water immediately. 
Most plants will rehydrate quickly and suffer 
no consequences. If the potting medium is com-
pletely dry it may be reluctant to absorb water 
so immerse the entire pot in a bucket of water 
until it is completely saturated, then let it drain. 
Your plant should recover within a few hours. If 
it does not recover, it’s dead.

If your plant has wilted even though you’ve 

watered it regularly and the potting medium 
has ample moisture, suspect root rot, the second 
most frequent cause of wilting. Gently extract 
the plant from its pot without breaking stems 

Whitish spots on leaves.

Wilting.

or roots. Inspect the root system. If roots are 
mushy, and gray, black, or dark brown, then the 
root system has been invaded by a pathogenic 
fungus that has killed and eaten the roots. See 
root rot page 272.

A third cause for wilting is that your plant 
is in a pot that is too small for it. If your plant 
has wilted, and you’re certain you’ve watered 
it properly, and you’ve checked the root system 
and found it to be alive and healthy, your plant is 
most likely in too small a pot (rootbound). Plants 
that are rootbound have essentially filled their 
container with roots and there is not enough 
moisture-holding medium left in the pot. The 
roots run out of water shortly after watering and 
the plant wilts again. You need to do one of two 
things. Either up-pot your plant to a larger con-
tainer with fresh potting medium, or re-pot your 
plant after trimming away excess roots.

A less frequent but nevertheless impor-

tant cause of wilting is hot moving air, as from 
a heat vent or space heater, sucking the water 
out of the leaves faster than the plant can han-
dle. If your plant wilts and you know it has suf-
ficient water, does not have root rot, and it is not 

rootbound, then check for sources of hot moving 
air. Usually a heat vent from a forced air furnace 
or an electric space heater will be the culprit. 
But any plant is likely to wilt when it sits in an 
open window, in full sun, on a hot afternoon, 
with the wind blowing.

Yellowing leaf edges. Usually this is perfectly 
normal and is not actually a problem, though it 
can be worrisome to the grower. It occurs on the 
oldest leaves. As your plant grows and makes 
new leaves the oldest leaves begin to turn yellow, 
then brown, and then they die. This is a normal 
part of the aging process for any leaf. Just prune 
the dead leaves away.

Yellowing leaves. Yellowing occurs for many 
reasons. It’s a bit like having a fever: it tells you 
something is wrong, but it doesn’t tell you what. 
If yellowing leaves have tiny black dots or spots, 
then you have a fungal or bacterial infection. 
Have a look at Common Disease Problems on 
page 266. There may also be colonies of insect 
pests on the undersides of the leaves. If so, turn 
to Common Pest Problems on page 259. Yellow 

Common Growing Condition Problems       257

Yellowing leaf edges.

leaves can also indicate nutritional deficiencies. 
Check the Introduction and plant portraits, and 
fertilize your plants in need.

If dots, spots, or insects are absent, and you’re 
certain the nutrient status is adequate, then yel-
low leaves are diagnostic for too much hot after-
noon sun, need for acidic soil, or overwatering. 
Recheck plant portraits to verify that you are 
not overwatering any plant. Also make sure the 
drainage is good. Pay special attention to angel 
wing begonia, asparagus fern, and gardenia. Use 
an acid fertilizer for gardenias to acidify the pot-
ting medium. Keep asparagus fern out of hot, 
afternoon sun.

Yellow patches on leaves. Yellow blotches or 
patches in the middle of the leaf blade, in the 
absence of tiny brown or black spots or insect 
infestations, are due to nutritional deficiency. 
Besides the usual nitrogen, phosphorus, and 
potassium, your plant needs the secondary min-
eral nutrients of calcium, magnesium, and sul-
fur, and the micronutrient iron. Feed your plant 

258      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Yellowing leaves.

Yellowing leaves.

Yellow patches on leaves.

Yellow patches on leaves.

with liquid organic kelp fertilizer to correct the 
nutritional deficiency. Spray a liquid preparation 
directly on the leaves. The leaves should turn 
green again within a couple of weeks.

If the leaves do not turn green again after 
applying liquid kelp, and small brown spots 
appear in the yellow patches, you are dealing 
with leaf spot fungus infection (page 269); if no 
small brown spots develop in the yellow patches, 
you are dealing either with an insect infestation 
of some sort (see next section) or with a virus 
infection (pages 267, 270, and 271).

COMMON PEST PROBLEMS

Every plant portrait lists the most common 
problems that occur for each plant. However, 
you may encounter less common problems as 
well. If something is not quite right with your 
plants and you’ve ruled out improper cul-
ture or disease, look at the photos and read the 
descriptions in this section to identify the cul-
prit (and the symptoms it causes) and solve the 
problem, safely and organically. Some pests 
are quite common, while others are not. If you 

give your houseplants a summer vacation out-
doors, you may find that ants, earwigs, leafhop-
pers, slugs, snails, and thrips accompany the 
plants back inside.

The first thing you should do if you have 
heavy insect infestations is to prune, pick, or 
break off any part of the plant that is badly 
affected. Then use other remedies as needed, 
remembering that even organic solutions can be 
toxic to people and pets. Take a moment to read 
and follow all product labels carefully. Clean 
tools and wash your hands thoroughly with hot 
soapy water before handling any healthy plants. 
Be sure to use soap, not detergent, because 
detergent can burn foliage.

Ants. You are likely well aware of what an ant 
looks like, and they actually do little damage to 
your houseplant. But they can be unwelcome in 
the house; and some bite. Some species bring 
aphids, mealybugs, and scale insects to plants so 
that the ants can “milk” them for their honey-
dew while the pests feed on your plant (honey-
dew is actually sweet, sticky insect excrement); 
sounds yucky, but it’s actually kind of fascinating 
to watch. If ants infest your plants, put the pots 

Common Pest Problems      259

Ants and aphids on citrus.

on pebbles in a tray of water, because ants can-
not swim. Alternatively, use sticky bands (which 
work like old-fashioned fly-paper) or spray with 
insecticidal soap.

Aphids.

Aphids. These tiny, green, woolly-gray, black, 
or brown, soft-bodied, pear-shaped insects clus-
ter on the undersides of leaves. Look for two 
tubes on their rear ends to be sure you’ve spot-
ted aphids. They’re hard to see, but if you look 
closely or with a hand lens, you’ll see the tubes. 
Other symptoms you might see: the tips of stems 
or branches curl, cup, or deform; or you find 
a sticky, clear, varnish-like residue on leaves 
or stems. These pests are very common. Wash 
aphids off the plant using plain water, soapy 
water, or rubbing alcohol. Alternatively, spray 
with insecticidal soap or horticultural oil.

Earwigs. These small brown and black pests 
have two pincers on their rear ends. They hide 
during the day and come out at night to eat holes 

Earwig.

260      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Earwigs and damage.

Leafhopper.

in tender, young leaves. They are uncommon on 
houseplants but may have hitched a ride into 
your home on a plant you had outdoors for the 
summer. You can pick these pests off by hand, 
but the simplest earwig trap is a moist, rolled-up 
newspaper. Roll it fairly loosely and secure it 
with a rubber band. Moisten it slightly and lay 
it on the potting media in the evening. The ear-
wigs hide in there overnight. Retrieve the paper 
in the morning, close up the ends, and roll the 
paper tightly so that earwigs cannot escape. Seal 
it, along with its hidden earwigs, in a plastic bag 
and put that in the garbage. Alternatively, spray 
with spinosad.

Leafhoppers. Another uncommon pest on 
houseplants, leafhoppers are fast fliers and may 
disappear before you get a good look. The first 
sign you’ll see are tiny white specks stippling 
the leaves. Leaf edges might turn yellow, and 
then brown. If you do get a glimpse of the bug, 
it is wedge-shaped, greenish blue or brownish 
gray, and up to 0.5 inch long. These insects may 

Leafhopper damage.

Common Pest Problems      261

enter your home if you’ve put a plant outside for 
awhile. They transmit serious bacterial and viral 
diseases to plants. Solve this pest problem by 
spraying with insecticidal soap, neem oil, or hor-
ticultural oil.

Mealybugs. These pests are very common 
on houseplants. Your first hint is fluffy gray-
ish white lumps suddenly appearing on the 
undersides of leaves and where leaves attach to 
stems. These insects cannot fly. They coat the 
surface of leaves and stems with clear, sticky, 
varnish-like honeydew. A gray-black coating 
(sooty mold) that easily rubs off may grow on 
the honeydew. Wash mealybugs off the plant 
using plain water, soapy water, or rubbing alco-
hol. Alternatively, spray with insecticidal soap  
or horticultural oil.

Scale insects. Small, gray-white, reddish brown, 
yellow, or black lumps stick to the surfaces 
of leaves, or to stems. You can easily remove 
them with your thumbnail. Like mealybugs and 
aphids, these buggers coat the upper surfaces 
of leaves with clear, sticky, varnish-like honey-
dew. Sooty mold—a gray-black coating that eas-
ily rubs off—forms on the honeydew. Scale is 
very common on houseplants. Pick pests off by 
hand, or spray with insecticidal soap or horticul-
tural oil.

Slugs and snails. You’ll rarely see these two 
mollusk pests inside, but they do hitchhike on 
summer vacationing houseplants. Since both 
of these critters hide during the day, the first 

Mealybugs.

Scale on citrus leaf.

262      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Slug.

Scale on citrus stem.

hint you may have is large irregular holes in the 
leaves. If you spot slime trails, then you know 
slugs or snails are the culprits. Pick them off by 
hand, or trap them by creating hiding places, 
like a small overturned pot, so that the critters 
seek refuge at night beneath them. Then you 
can easily find and destroy the slugs or snails, 
or move them back outside where they belong. 
Alternatively, sprinkle iron phosphate on top of 
the potting medium.

Spider mites. Although a very common pest on 
houseplants, you’ll probably never see a spider 
mite (unless you have bionic eyes). You will see 
that leaves are stippled with tiny pale dots that 
sometimes turn the whole leaf bronze-colored. 

Slug or snail damage.

Fine webbing, like spider silk, covers leaves and 
stems over time. Badly infested leaves turn yel-
low or red and drop off the plant. Wash mites off 
the plant using plain water, soapy water, or rub-
bing alcohol. Alternatively, spray with insecti-
cidal soap or horticultural oil.

Common Pest Problems      263

Spider mite webbing.

264      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Thrips. You will probably have problems with 
thrips only if you’ve given your plants a trip to 
the patio. Thrips are very tiny yellowy orange 
insects, and you’ll likely never see them. They 
congregate on flower petals and leaves. The 
symptoms you might see include silvery leaves, 
slivery streaks on leaves, or damaged leaves 
that roll up and drop off. Wash thrips off the 
plant using plain water, soapy water, or rubbing 
alcohol. Alternatively, spray with insecticidal 
soap or spinosad.

Whiteflies. You see small, bright white insects 
fly away when you disturb your plant. Large 
colonies on the undersides of leaves deposit 
patches of white residue. These insects, which 
are very common on houseplants, coat the upper 
surfaces of leaves with clear, sticky, varnish-like 
honeydew. Sooty mold—a gray-black coating 
that easily rubs off—forms on the honeydew. 
Wash these pests off the plant using plain water, 
soapy water, or rubbing alcohol. Alternatively, 
spray with insecticidal soap or horticultural oil.

Spider mite damage.

Thrips damage on citrus fruitlets.

Whiteflies.

Common Pest Problems      265

COMMON DISEASE PROBLEMS

Every plant portrait lists the most common 
problems that occur for each plant. However, 
you may encounter less common problems as 
well. If something is not quite right with your 
houseplant and you’ve ruled out improper cul-
ture or pests, look at the photos and read the 
descriptions in this section to find a diagno-
sis and safe, organic solutions. Remember, even 
organic remedies can be toxic to people and 
pets, so be sure to read and follow all product 
labels carefully. Diseases on plants are harder 
to deal with than either adverse cultural condi-
tions or pests. The good news is—diseases are 
much rarer. If it is a disease, 80% of the time it is 
caused by a fungus.

There is no cure for bacterial or virus infec-
tions on plants, so prevention is, as always, the 
most effective thing you can do. Buy plants 
from a reliable source and always inspect 
plants before you buy them. Keep new plants in 
another room away from all your other house-
plants for 14 days; use the same strategy to iso-
late sick plants. Do not overwater and make sure 
your plant is in the right-sized pot. Sanitize by 
removing any infected plant parts swiftly; throw 
infected plant tissue in the garbage, not your 
compost pile. Sadly, with all virus infections and 
rot diseases, you may have no other option but to 
get rid of the infected plant.

Anthurium blight. This disease is caused by a 
lethal bacterial pathogen, Xanthomonas camp-
estris pv. dieffenbachiae. The earliest symptom 
is the appearance of water-soaked spots on the 
leaves. Then the spots dry out, turn reddish 
brown, and develop yellow haloes. When the 
spots enlarge and invade leaf veins, the disease 
becomes systemic and life-threatening to your 
plant. It may be found on any aroid (see sidebar) 
but commonly infects Chinese evergreen, dumb 

266      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Anthurium blight.

Bacterial leaf spot.

A to Z of Aroids
arrowhead plant / bird’s nest philodendron / blushing philodendron / calla lily / Chinese ever-
green / dumb cane / flamingo flower / heartleaf philodendron / peace lily / pothos / selloum / 
split-leaf philodendron / Zanzibar gem

cane, and flamingo flower. Sanitize by remov-
ing infected plant parts, sterilize your tools, and 
keep the foliage dry.

Bacterial leaf spot. Spots that have discrete, 
rounded edges appear on leaves. At first they 
are translucent, like grease spots on paper. 
As they increase in size they become angular 
because the infection is confined by leaf veins. 
This disease can infect any houseplant but is 
most common on staghorn ferns and lady’s 
slipper orchids. Sanitize by removing infected 
plant parts, sterilize your tools, and keep the 
foliage dry.

Cymbidium mosaic virus. This virus infec-
tion is systemic and can occur on any orchid, 
not just cymbidiums. It rarely kills plants but 

can disfigure them. Symptoms are variable 
and include tiny yellowish, whitish, or brown, 
irregular-shaped spots that enlarge. These spots 
are sometimes sunken, sometimes not. Unfor-
tunately, an orchid can be infected and have no 
symptoms at all. Because it is systemic, all parts 
of the plant—leaves, stems, roots, flowers—carry 
the disease. Pruners, knives, and scissors carry 
the virus from plant to plant. Interestingly, this 
virus has never been found in the wild. It exists 
only in cultivated orchids and is found in col-
lections worldwide. An ELISA (Enzyme-linked 
Immunosorbent Assay) test positively identifies 
any infected orchid, but kits are expensive and 
the sample you take must be sent to a lab.

Isolate sick plants or quarantine new plants 
for 14 days. A symptomless but infected orchid 
can easily infect all your other orchids if you 

Bacterial leaf spot.

Bacterial leaf spot.

Common Disease Problems      267

Cymbidium mosaic virus.

fail to sterilize your tools. If possible, clone 
your orchid to grow a new specimen that is free 
of the virus.

Gray mold. Gray mold is an infection caused 
by the fungus Botrytis cinerea, a pathogen with 
a very wide range of victims from houseplants 
to wine grapes. It starts out as wet, brown spots 
on leaves or flowers. The plant tissue seems 
to melt and eventually becomes covered with 
gray-brown fuzz. That fuzz is composed of mil-
lions of spores that float in the air to start new 
infections on healthy plants. Nip this disease in 
the bud by removing any infected plant parts 
swiftly. To prevent new infections, use baking 
soda spray or spray with a bacterial fungicide 
(Bacillus subtilis).

Leaf gall. Leaf gall is a fungus disease caused 
by the pathogen Exobasidium vaccinii. Among 
houseplants this fungus infects only florist aza-
lea. In the garden it also infects blueberries, 
huckleberries, and cranberries, which can trans-
mit the disease to your azalea. Infections occur 
on leaves and sometimes on flowers and stems. 

268      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Cymbidium mosaic virus.

Gray mold on Rieger begonia.

Gray mold on geranium.

The infected tissue becomes greatly swollen, 
inflated, and pale green to white, pink, or pale 
brown. This disease is airborne and spreads via 
spores. Remove any infected plant parts swiftly. 
To prevent new infections, use baking soda 
spray or spray with a bacterial fungicide (Bacil-
lus subtilis).

Leaf spot fungus. Small (pinprick- to 
matchhead-sized) brown or black spots that 
look a bit like freckles develop on the leaves. 
Often, but not always, the leaf begins to turn 
yellow where the spots are located, and/or the 
spots may develop yellow haloes. The spots 
are sometimes surrounded by a narrow purple 
band. The spots are almost always round, not 
angular, because these fungi are capable of eat-
ing their way through the veins of the leaf. As 
time goes by, the spots get larger and the leaf 
becomes more yellow. These symptoms are 
caused by one of several different fungal patho-
gens that infect the foliage of houseplants. All 
produce spores that drift through the air to land 
on healthy leaves. The spores germinate and the 
fungus attacks your plant. These leaf spot fungi 

Leaf gall.

Leaf gall.

Common Disease Problems      269

Leaf spot fungus.

disfigure your plants and they spread to other 
plants, but they are only lethal when plants are 
already weak. Remove any infected plant parts 
swiftly. To prevent new infections, use baking 
soda spray or spray with a bacterial fungicide 
(Bacillus subtilis).

Mosaic virus. Mosaic viruses are a very large 
group that includes tobacco mosaic virus, 
cucumber mosaic virus, common bean mosaic 
virus, and many others. Most of these viruses 
were named for the plant they were first discov-
ered on, for example, tobacco mosaic or TMV. 
It does not mean that TMV infects only tobacco 
and nothing else. In fact, TMV is worldwide and 
infects more than 150 different kinds of plants, 
including some houseplants. The symptoms of a 
mosaic virus are irregular zig-zag yellow streaks 
and patches of yellow mottles or specks on oth-
erwise green leaves. Like the orchid viruses, 
plants can be infected with a mosaic virus and 
remain symptomless. Mosaic viruses are sys-
temic and are transmitted from plant to plant by 
pruners and scissors. Be sure to sterilize tools. 

270      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Mosaic virus.

Mosaic virus.

Isolate sick plants or quarantine new plants for 
14 days. If possible, clone your plant to grow a 
new specimen that is free of the virus.

Ringspot virus. This systemic virus infection 
can occur on any plant but is most common on 
orchids. It rarely kills plants but does disfigure 
them. Symptoms are variable and include spots 
on leaves and off-color streaks on the flower 
petals. The leaf spots are often concentric yel-
low rings with brown centers. Unfortunately, 
a plant can be infected and have no symptoms 
at all. Still worse, a symptomless but infected 
plant can easily infect all your other plants if you 
fail to sterilize your pruners. Because it is sys-
temic, all parts of the plant—leaves, stems, roots, 
flowers—carry the disease. Pruners, knives, and 
scissors carry the virus from plant to plant. An 
ELISA (Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay) 
test positively identifies any infected plant, but 
kits are expensive and the sample you take must 
be sent to a lab.

Mosaic virus on holly fern.

Ringspot virus.

Ringspot virus on corsage orchid roots.

Common Disease Problems      271

Isolate sick plants or quarantine new plants 
for 14 days. A symptomless but infected orchid 
can easily infect all your other orchids if you 
fail to sterilize your tools. If possible, clone your 
orchid to grow a new specimen that is free of 
the virus.

Powdery mildew. Symptoms of this fungus 
include grayish white patches growing on the 
leaves, stems, and flowers. Your plant looks like 
it’s been dusted with flour that rubs off easily. 
Leaves eventually develop dead, brown patches 
and become deformed. Powdery mildew is a 
disease caused by a number of different patho-
genic fungi. All these different fungi have white 
mycelium that grows on the surface of the leaves 
and all produce airborne spores. Remove any 
infected plant parts swiftly. To prevent new 
infections, use baking soda spray or spray with a 
bacterial fungicide (Bacillus subtilis).

Root rot. If your plant has wilted even though 
the potting medium is wet, pull the plant out of 
its pot. If the roots are gray, dark brown, or black 
rather than whitish, and mushy rather than firm, 
your plant has root rot. Root rot is an insidious 

Powdery mildew.

Powdery mildew.

272      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Root rot.

Mushy, dead roots.

but preventable disease that can kill your plant 
before you even know that something is wrong. 
It’s a soilborne fungus disease caused by a num-
ber of different pathogenic fungi. Some of these 
fungi are opportunistic pathogens that are able 
to invade the root system only after the roots 
have been broken or cut, or drowned by over-
watering. Some are aggressive enough to invade 
a perfectly healthy root system. All thrive in 
soggy, waterlogged soil and most disperse their 
spores in water, not air. In most cases prevention 
is the only cure for root rot. If your plant is very 

valuable and long-lived you might try to save it, 
but the prognosis is poor. Remove diseased root 
tissue, and then: discard potting medium, steril-
ize the pot and all tools, and spray the roots with 
Actinovate, an organic fungicide. To prevent 
new infections, do not overwater and make sure 
plants are in the right-sized pot, i.e., that the pot 
is not too big.

Rust fungus. If your plant develops spots on 
the upper surface of its leaves, flip an affected 
leaf over and look at the underside. If there are 

Common Disease Problems      273

raised bumps on the undersurface right below 
each of the spots on the upper surface, and if 
the raised bumps have colorful, powdery spores, 
then your plant has one of the many rust fungi. 
The approximately 5,000 species of rust fungus 
are host-specific—that is, the rust fungus that 
infects your flowering maple is not the same one 
that infects your snapdragons. The spores are 
airborne and usually rusty red in color. Remove 
any infected plant parts swiftly. To prevent 
new infections, spray with a bacterial fungicide 
(Bacillus subtilis) or sulfur.

Soft rot. Fleshy stems, including rhizomes, 
develop mushy, rotted areas that ooze slime 
and often smell bad. This is caused by the bac-
terial pathogen Erwinia carotovora. This is a 
life-threatening disease that kills plants, but 
the prognosis is not as grim as it is for root rot. 
Remove infected plant parts. Remove the plant 
and discard infected potting medium. Sterilize 
the container and all your tools. Repot the plant 
in fresh medium.

Rust fungus.

Rust fungus.

Rust fungus.

Soft rot on stems.

274      Organic Solutions to Common Problems

Stem rot.

Stem rot on prickly pear.

Stem rot. The stem of your plant turns brown 
or black at the soil line and becomes soft and 
mushy. It does not smell bad and doesn’t ooze 
slime. The plant’s roots may also become 
infected. This is a serious, life-threatening dis-
ease, caused by some of the same fungi that 
cause root rot. The disease is preventable with 
proper watering, but a cure is doubtful and the 
prognosis poor. Remove infected plant parts. 
Remove the plant and discard infected potting 
medium. Sterilize the container and all your 
tools. Repot the plant in fresh medium.

Common Disease Problems      275

Soft rot on pseudobulb.

Soft rot on spring bulb.

Recommended Resources

Agrios, George N. 2005. Plant Pathology. 5th ed. Elsevier Academic Press.
Deardorff, David, and Kathryn Wadsworth. 2009. What’s Wrong With My Plant? (And How Do I Fix 

It?). Timber Press.

Gardening Solutions, University of Florida, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences. gardeningso-

lutions.ifas.ufl.edu/plants/houseplants/.

Missouri Botanical Garden. missouribotanicalgarden.org.
Pleasant, Barbara. 2005. The Complete Houseplant Survival Manual. Storey Publishing.
University of Hawaii, CTHAR Cooperative Extension Service. ctahr.hawaii.edu/Site/ExtHG.aspx.

276      

Useful 
Conversions

Inches      Centimeters

Feet          Meters

  ¼ . . . . . . 0.6
  ½  . . . . . .1.25
  ¾  . . . . . .1.9
  1  . . . . . . 2.5
  1¼  . . . .  3.1
  1½  . . . .  3.8
  1¾  . . . .  4.4
  2  . . . . . . 5.0
  3  . . . . . . 7.5
  4  . . . . . . 10
  5  . . . . . . 12.5
  6  . . . . . . 15
  7  . . . . . . 18
  8  . . . . . . 20
  9  . . . . . . 23
10  . . . . . . 25
12  . . . . . . 30
15  . . . . . . 38
18  . . . . . . 45
20  . . . . . . 50
24  . . . . . . 60
30  . . . . . . 75
32  . . . . . . 80
36  . . . . . . 90

  1  . . . . . . 0.3
  1½  . . . .  0.5
  2  . . . . . . 0.6
  2½  . . . .  0.8
  3  . . . . . . 0.9
  4  . . . . . . 1.2
  5  . . . . . . 1.5
  6  . . . . . . 1.8
  7  . . . . . . 2.1
  8  . . . . . . 2.4
  9  . . . . . . 2.7
10  . . . . . . 3.0
12  . . . . . . 3.6
15  . . . . . . 4.5
18  . . . . . . 5.4
20  . . . . . . 6.0
25  . . . . . . 7.5

Temperatures
°C = 0.55 × (°F–32)
°F = (1.8 × °C) + 32

     277

278      

Acknowledgments

how many ways can we find to thank our wise agent and counselor, Regina Ryan? Let us count the 
ways. There are so many we lost count. To all the gang at Timber Press, you go above and beyond: 
Tom Fischer, Andrew Beckman, Besse Lynch, Brian Ridder, and everyone else who works so hard to 
produce our beautiful books and let people know about them. Thanks to our writer’s group who help 
steer us onto the right track, especially Rebecca Cantrell and Ben Haggard. We are very grateful to 
all those who led us to photo ops or took photos for this book: Judith Heath, Roger Heath, Barbara 
Ansley-Vensas,  the  Meyers  sisters,  Brian  and  Jeanne  Glaspell,  Ruth  Murphy,  Ned  Ryan,  and  Camy, 
Patty, and Jose at Henery’s Garden Center, among many, many others. And, as always, thank you dear 
readers, students, friends, and family for your support and inspiration.

     279

280      

Photo Credits

Barbara Ansley-Vensas, pages 59 and 119.

Aquiya / Dollar Photo Club, page 144.

Nino Barbieri / Wikimedia Commons, page 86.

Elder Salles / Dollar Photo Club, page 191.

Farm Life Tropical Foliage, page 43.

Floradania.dk, page 112.

gsx750 / Dollar Photo Club, page 228.

Ruth Hartnup, page 91.

Judith Heath, pages 14 (bottom), 22 (left), and 

185.

Roger Heath, pages 33, 51, 56, 64, 73, 152, 180, 188, 

200, 205, 219, and 234.

ksena32 / Dollar Photo Club, page 207.

maljalen / Dollar Photo Club, page 231.

Nada’s Images / Dollar Photo Club, page 217.

ots photo / Dollar Photo Club, pages 97 and 118.

scphoto48 / Dollar Photo Club, page 158.

Jeff Walls, page 109.

All other photos are by the authors.

     281

282      Index

Index

Aaron’s beard, 90–92
Abutilon darwinii, 60
Abutilon ×hybridum, 60–62
Abutilon pictum, 60
accordion-folded leaves, 246
achimenes, 155–156
Achimenes erecta, 155–156
Achimenes longiflora, 155–156
Adiantum, 148–149
Adiantum capillus-veneris, 148–149
Adiantum hispidulum, 148–149
Adiantum raddianum, 148–149
Aechmea fasciata, 197–198
Aeschynanthus radicans, 99–100
African evergreen, 123–124
African violet, 13, 15, 17, 19, 24, 25, 27, 

78–79, 256

agave, 13, 200–201, 255
Agave americana, 200–201
Agave parryi, 200–201
Agave victoriae-reginae, 200–201
aglaonema, 87–88
Aglaonema commutatum, 87–88
Aglaonema modestum, 87–88
Aglaonema pictum, 87–88
air filtration, 10, 11
air layering, 29
airplane plant, 116–117
air plant, 175–177, 194–196
Algerian ivy, 128–130
Aliceara Marfitch, 165

aliceara orchids, 165–166, 246
alligator plant, 229–230
alligator’s tongue, 229–230
Allium schoenoprasum, 240
Aloe (aloe), 201–203, 255
Aloe aristata, 201–203
Aloe humilis, 201–203
Aloe variegata, 201–203
Aloe vera, 201–203
altar lily, 83–85
aluminum plant, 79–80
amaryllis, 152–153, 248
ambient light, 11, 13–15
American aloe, 200–201
American evergreen, 123–124
anchor philodendron, 115–116
angel wing begonia, 80–82, 113, 258
angel wings, 153–155
Anthriscus cerefolium, 240
Anthurium (anthurium), 93–94
Anthurium amnicola, 93–94
Anthurium andraeanum, 93–94
anthurium blight, 266–267
Anthurium crystallinum, 93–94
Anthurium scherzerianum, 93–94
ants, 259–260
Aphelandra squarrosa, 75–76
aphids, 259, 260
apple geranium, 95–96
Arabian jasmine, 131
Arabian violet, 159–160

aralia ivy, 71–72
Araucaria heterophylla, 66–68
areca palms, 33
areole, 235
Argyroneura Group (nerve plant),  

103

aroid palm, 120–121
aroids, 83, 103, 132, 155, 266, 267
arrowhead philodendron, 123–124
arrowhead plant, 11, 28, 123–124, 249, 

267

arrowhead vine, 123–124
Artemisia dracunculoides, 243
Artemisia dracunculus, 242–243
artificial light, 15
arum lily, 83–85
Asparagus aethiopicus, 140–141
Asparagus densiflorus, 140–141
 
asparagus fern, 140–141, 258
Aspidistra elatior, 85–86
Asplenium nidus, 141–143
Australian native monstera, 132–133
azalea, florist, 11, 157–158, 248

‘Myersii’, 140

baby rubber plant, 106–107
Bacillus subtilis, 268, 269, 270, 272, 

274

bacterial infections, 25, 257, 262, 

266–267

bacterial leaf spot, 266, 267

     283

ball cactus, 203–205
balloon cactus, 203–205
bamboo, 101
bamboo palm, 45–47
banana, 16, 34–35
banjo fig, 59–60
banyan, 68–70
Barbados aloe, 201–203
bark media, 19
barrel cactus, 13, 205–206
barroom plant, 85–86
basics of houseplants. See 
houseplant basics

basil, 240
basket vine, 99–100
bay laurel, 240, 243
beallara orchids, 165–166, 246
Beallara Tahoma Glacier, 165
bear’s paw fern, 145–146
beaucarnea, 47–48
Beaucarnea recurvata, 47–48
beavertail prickly pear, 234–235
begonia, 27
Begonia aconitifolia, 80
Begonia coccinea, 80
Begonia ×corallina, 80–82
Begonia cucullata, 160
Begonia ×hiemalis, 160–162
Begonia masoniana, 113
Begonia rex, 80–82, 113
 
Begonia ×tuberhybrida, 160
begonia vine, 127–128
Belgian evergreen, 101–102
Belmore sentry palm, 43–44
Benjamin fig/tree, 74–75
bifoliate, 167
Billbergia nutans, 191–192
bird’s nest fern, 141–143, 251
bird’s nest philodendron, 11, 82–83, 

‘Arthur Mallet’, 80–81

267

blind growth, 194
blondie, 208–210
blushing bromeliad, 186–189
blushing philodendron, 11, 124–126, 

267
bonsai, 54
Boston fern, 143–144, 249

284      Index

Boston swordfern, 143–144
botanical wonder, 71–72
Botrytis cinerea, 268
bottle palm, 47–48
bowstring hemp, 236–238
boy flower, 93–94
“boy” leaf (African violet), 78
bract, 108
brain cactus, 218–220
Brassia gireoudiana, 193–194
broadleaf lady palm, 44–45
bromeliad growing tips, 10, 25, 251
bromeliad tree, 10
Broughtonia, 167
Broughtonia sanguinea, 168
browning leaves, 251
brown leaf tips, 246–247
Bryophyllum daigremontianum, 

229–230

bud drop, 248
bug infestations. See pest problems
bulbs, spring, 162–163, 248, 252, 275
burn plant, 201–203
burro’s tail, 215–217
bush lily, 88–89
butterfly palm, 33

cabbage palm, 50–51
cabbage palm fern, 145–146
cachepot, 21, 22–23
cacti
 

growing tips, 10–11, 16, 17, 19, 25, 

28

  premature dormancy, 254
cactus mix, 120
caladium, 11, 25, 153–155, 251
Caladium bicolor, 153–155
calathea, 105–106
Calathea lancifolia, 105–106
Calathea makoyana, 105–106
Calathea rufibarba, 105–106
Calathea zebrina, 105–106
calcium oxalate crystals, 39
calla lily, 11, 25, 83–85, 252, 253, 267
candy-corn plant, 98–99
cane begonia, 80–82
cane palm, 33
Cape jasmine/jessamine, 62–63

Cape primrose, 117–119
cartwheel plant, 186–189
cast-iron plant, 25, 85–86, 249
cat chap/jaws, 238–239
Cattleya, 167
Cattleya alliance, 167
Cattleya coccinea, 168
Cattleya labiata, 168
centipede Tonga vine, 132–133
century plant, 200–201
ceramic pots, 21–22
cereus cactus, 207–208
Cereus repandus, 207–208
‘Ming Thing Blue’, 207
 
 
‘Monstrosus’, 207
ceriman, 133–135
CFUs (colony-forming unit), 19
Chamaedorea elegans, 45–47
Chamaedorea seifrizii, 45–47
Chamaerops humilis, 41–42
chameleon plant, 175–177
cheese plant, 133–135
chervil, 240, 243
China rose, 63–65
chin cactus, 208–210
Chinese aloe, 201–203
Chinese bell flower, 60–62
Chinese evergreen, 11, 87–88, 249, 

266, 267

‘Variegatum’, 116
‘Vittatum’, 116–117

Chinese fan palm, 35–36
Chinese fountain palm, 35–36
Chinese hibiscus, 63–65
Chinese jasmine, 130–132
Chinese lantern, 60–62
Chinese water bamboo, 101–102
chives, 240
Chlorophytum comosum, 116–117
 
 
chocolate soldier, 232–234
Christmas cactus, 210–212, 248
Christmas kalanchoe, 226–227
Christmas star, 108–109
Christ plant/thorn, 213–214
cilantro, 240
Cissus alata, 127–128
Cissus antarctica, 127–128
Cissus discolor, 127–128

citron, 53
Citrus (citrus), 53–54
Citrus maxima, 53
Citrus medica, 53
Citrus reticulata, 53
climbing fig, 126–127
climbing philodendron, 124–126
Clivia miniata (clivia), 88–89
clone, 175
closet plant, 103–105
cocoon plant, 232–234
Codiaeum variegatum, 56–57
coleus, 89–90, 249
collapse, 252–253
column cactus, 207–208
Columnea gloriosa, 98–99
comfort root, 54–56
common problems. See plant 

problems

compass barrel cactus, 205–206
containers, 21–22 16–17
conversion table, 277
coontie, 54–56
Cordyline fruticosa, 50–51
Coriandrum sativum, 240
corn plant, 11, 37–38
cornstalk dracaena, 37–38
corsage orchid, 166–169, 271
crab cactus, 210–212
Crassula ovata, 224–225
creeping Charlie, 135–136
creeping fig/ficus, 126–127
creeping rockfoil, 90–92
creeping rubber plant, 126–127
creeping saxifrage, 25, 28, 90–92
creeping thyme, 243
cristate, 219
crocus, 162–163
croton, 56–57, 249, 250
crown-of-thorns, 213–214
Cryptanthus acaulis, 175–177
Cryptanthus zonatus, 175–177
cucumber mosaic virus, 270–271
culinary herbs, 11, 26, 240–243
Cupid’s bow, 155–156, 251
Cupid’s bower, 155–156
curly bamboo, 101–102
curly palm, 43–44

cuttings, 26–28
cycad, 54
Cycas revoluta, 70–71
Cymbidium (cymbidium), 19, 169–171
cymbidium mosaic virus, 25, 

267–268

Cyrtomium falcatum, 146–147

daffodil, 162–163
dancing lady orchid, 171–173, 246
Davallia canariensis, 144–145
Davallia fejeensis, 144–145
davallia fern, 144–145, 251
Davallia trichomanoides, 144–145
deer’s foot fern, 144–145
delta maidenhair, 148–149
Dendrobium (dendrobium), 173–175, 

248

Dendrobium Jaquelyn Thomas, 173
devil’s backbone, 229–230
devil’s ivy, 132–133
Dieffenbachia amoena, 39–41
Dieffenbachia seguine, 39–41
dioecious, 54
diseases
 
 
 

anthurium blight, 266–267
bacterial leaf spot, 267
cymbidium mosaic virus, 25, 

267–268

gray mold, 268
leaf gall, 268–269
leaf spot fungus, 269–270

ringspot virus, 25, 271–272
root rot, 272–273
rust fungus, 273–274
soft rot, 274–275
stem rot, 275

 
 
 
  mosaic virus, 270–271
  powdery mildew, 272
  prevention, 24–25, 266
 
 
 
 
 
Disocactus, 231–232
Disocactus flagelliformis, 235–236
×Disophyllum, 231–232
divisions, 25–26
dolphin plant, 98–99
donkey tail, 215–217, 249
×Doritaenopsis, 184–186
Doritis, 184–186

dracaena, 37–38
Dracaena braunii, 101–102
Dracaena fragrans, 37–38
Dracaena reflexa var. angustifolia, 

38–39

dragon tree, 11, 38–39
dragon-wing begonia, 80–82
drainage, 17
driftwood plantings, 10, 178–179
dumb cane, 11, 23, 39–41, 266–267
dwarf apple trees, 11
Dwarf Cavendish banana, 34
dwarf umbrella tree, 72–74
Dypsis lutescens, 33

earthstar, 175–177
earwigs, 260–261
Easter cactus, 217–218, 248
Easter lily cactus, 221–223
echeveria, 223–224
Echeveria elegans, 223–224
Echeveria secunda, 223–224
Echinocactus grusonii, 205–206
Echinopsis chamaecereus, 221–223
Echinopsis oxygona, 221–223
edema, 247
elatior hybrid, 160–162
elephant ears, 153–155
elephant’s foot, 47–48
ELISA (Enzyme-linked 

Immunosorbent Assay) test, 
267, 271

elkhorn fern, 148, 150
emerald fern, 140–141
English thyme, 243
ensete, 34–35
Ensete ventricosum, 34–35
entire leaf edges, 81
epi/epicactus, 231–232
Epiphyllum, 231–232
epiphyllum hybrid, 231–232
epiphyte, 150
Epipremnum aureum, 132–133
Erwinia carotovora, 274
eternity plant, 120–121
Euphorbia milii, 213–214
Euphorbia pulcherrima, 108–109
European fan palm, 41–42

Index      285

Exacum affine, 159–160
Exobasidium vaccinii, 268

‘Variegata’, 66

‘Annemieke’, 72
‘Variegata’, 72

failure to flower, 247–248
false aralia, 58–59, 249
false castor oil plant, 65–66
false shamrock, 92–93, 254
fancy-leafed begonia, 113–115
fat boy, 120–121
fat-headed Lizzy, 71–72
fatshedera, 71–72
×Fatshedera lizei, 71–72
 
 
fatsia, 65–66
Fatsia, 71
Fatsia japonica, 65–66
 
Faucaria felina, 238–239
Faucaria tigrina, 238–239
fern growing tips, 9, 25
Ferocactus cylindraceus, 205–206
Ferocactus wislizeni, 205–206
fertilizer, 20–21
fiber banana, 34–35
Ficus benjamina, 74–75
Ficus elastica, 68–70
ficus/ficus tree, 74–75
Ficus lyrata, 59–60
‘Ivonne’, 59
 
 
‘Little Fiddle’, 59
Ficus pumila, 126–127
fiddle-leaf fig, 29, 59–60
fig, 68–70
fig leaf palm, 65–66
finger aralia, 58–59
first aid plant, 201–203
fishbone fern, 143–144
fishhook barrel cactus, 205–206
Fittonia albivenis, 102–103
flame nettle, 89–90
flaming Katy, 226–227
flamingo flower, 11, 93–94, 267
flamingo lily, 93–94
flaming sword, 177–179
Florida arrowroot, 54–56
florist azalea, 157–158, 248, 268
florist gloxinia, 97–98

286      Index

florist kalanchoe, 226–227
flower, failure to, 247–248
flower bud drop, 248
flowering maple, 60–62
flowering stone, 227–229
fluorescent lightbulbs, 15
Fortunella, 53
fountain palm, 35–36
freckle face, 110
freesia, 158–159
Freesia corymbosa, 158–159
Freesia laxa, 158–159
Freesia refracta, 158–159
French thyme, 243
friendship bamboo, 101–102
friendship plant, 191–192, 224–225
friendship tree, 224–225
fruit salad plant, 133–135
fungal infections/diseases, 257, 259, 

268–270, 272–275

garden croton, 56–57
garden geranium, 95–96
gardenia, 62–63, 248, 258
Gardenia jasminoides, 62–63
Genovese basil, 240
gentian, 159
geranium, 95–96, 269
German violet, 159–160
gesneriads, 78, 256
giant club cactus, 207–208
“girl” leaf (African violet), 78
glochid, 234
glossy leaved paper plant, 65–66
gloxinia, 25, 27, 97–98, 256
Goddess of Mercy plant, 101–102
golden ball cactus, 203–205
golden barrel cactus, 205–206
golden bird’s nest, 236–238
golden cane palm, 33
golden lace, 218–220
golden polypody, 145–146
golden pothos, 132–133
golden serpent fern, 145–146
golden star cactus, 218–220
goldfish plant, 98–99
gold-foot fern, 145–146
gold lace cactus, 218–220

good luck plant, 236–238
good luck tree, 50–51
goosefoot plant, 123–124
grape hyacinth, 162–163
grape ivy, 127–128
gray mold, 268
growing tips/problems. See 

houseplant basics; plant 
problems

grow lights, 15
guppy plant, 98–99
guzmania, 179–182
Guzmania lingulata, 179–182
Guzmania sanguinea, 179–182
Gymnocalycium mihanovichii, 

208–210
gymnosperm, 54
Gynura aurantiaca, 112–113
Gynura procumbens, 112–113

hardy banana, 34–35
hare’s foot fern, 145–146, 249
Hatiora gaertneri, 217
Hatiora ×graeseri, 217–218
Hatiora rosea, 217
Hawaiian rose, 63–65
Hawaiian ti, 50–51
Hawaii birdnest fern, 141–143
haworthia, 220–221
Haworthia attenuata, 220–221
Haworthia bolusii, 220–221
Haworthia fasciata, 220–221
Haworthia maxima, 220–221
heartleaf philodendron, 11, 124–126, 

267

‘Needlepoint’, 130
‘Needlepoint Miniature’, 130

heart of Jesus, 153–155
Hedera, 71
Hedera algeriensis, 128–130
Hedera colchica, 128–130
Hedera helix, 95–96, 128–130
 
 
Hedera hibernica, 128–130
Hedera nepalensis, 128–130
Hedera pastuchovii, 128–130
Hedera rhombea, 128–130
hedge cactus, 207–208
hedgehog cactus, 221–223

hedge nettle, 107–108
hen-and-chickens, 116–117
hen and chicks, 223–224
herbs, 11, 26, 240–243
herringbone plant, 111–112
heterophylla, 67
hibiscus, 63–65, 248
Hibiscus rosa-sinensis, 63–65
hibotan, 208–210
hibotan nishiki, 208–210
Hindu rope plant, 137–138
Hippeastrum (hippeastrum), 

152–153

Hippeastrum aulicum, 152–153
Hippeastrum leopoldii, 152–153
Hippeastrum pardinum, 152–153
Hippeastrum puniceum, 152–153
Hippeastrum reginae, 152–153
Hippeastrum vittatum, 152–153
holiday cactus, 210–212
holly fern, 146–147, 271
honeydew, 259, 262
honey plant, 137–138
horse’s tail, 215–217
hot water plant, 155–156
houseplant basics
benefits, 10–11
 
 
containers, 21–22
 
fertilizer, 20–21
  history, 9
  humidity, 17–18
 
  potting media, 18–19
  potting tips, 23–24
  propagation, 24–29
 
  watering, 16–17
Howea belmoreana, 43–44
Howea forsteriana, 43–44
Hoya carnosa (hoya), 137–138
humidity requirements, 17–18, 25, 26
hunter’s robe, 132–133
hyacinth, 162–163
Hylocereus triangularis, 208
Hypoestes phyllostachya, 110

temperature regulation, 15–16

light requirements, 11–15

imbricated leaf arrangement, 78, 223
inch plant, 136–137

Indian aloe, 201–203
Indian fig prickly pear, 234–235
Indian mallow, 60–62
Indian rubber bush, 68–70
insect problems. See pest problems
inverse square law, 12
Irish ivy, 128–130
Irish shamrock, 92–93
iron cross, 113–115
ivy, 128–130, 249
ivy arum, 132–133
ivy geranium, 95–96

jade plant, 28, 224–225, 249
Japanese aralia, 65–66, 71
Japanese banana, 34–35
Japanese holly fern, 146–147
Japanese ivy, 128–130
Japanese net-vein holly fern, 

146–147

Japanese sago palm, 70–71
jasmine, 130–132, 248
Jasminum polyanthum, 130–132
Jasminum sambac, 131

kalanchoe, 226–227, 248
Kalanchoe blossfeldiana, 226–227
Kalanchoe tomentosa, 232–234
kangaroo vine, 127–128
keiki, 25–26
Kentia palm, 43–44
king begonia, 113–115
king sago, 70–71
kumquat, 53

lace aloe, 201–203
lace fern, 140–141
laceleaf, 93–94
lacy-tree philodendron, 115–116
ladyfinger cactus, 218–220
lady palm, 44–45
lady’s slipper, 15, 19, 182–183
Lady Washington geranium, 95–96
lamb’s tail, 215–217
Laurus nobilis, 240
layering, 28–29
leaf cactus, 231–232
leaf color changes, 249, 250

leaf cuttings, 27–28
leaf drop, 249
leaf gall, 268–269
leafhoppers, 261–262
leaf problems
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

accordion-folded leaves, 246
bacterial leaf spot, 266, 267
brown leaf tips, 246–247
color changes, 249, 250
leaf drop, 249
leaf gall, 268–269
leaf spot fungus, 246, 259, 269–

270

leaves turning brown, 251

shrunken, wrinkled leaves, 255
sunburn, 256

yellow edges, 257
yellowing, 257–258
yellow patches, 258–259

 
  needle drop, 252
 
 
  whitish spots on leaves, 256
 
 
 
leaf spot fungus, 246, 259, 269–270
LED lights, 15
leggy growth, 251–252
lemon, 53–54
lemon ball cactus, 203–205
lemon basil, 240
lemon geranium, 95–96
lemon thyme, 243
lightbulbs/light systems, 15
light requirements, 11–15
lily of the Nile, 83–85
lime, 53–54
lime thyme, 243
lipstick plant/vine, 99–100, 249
Lithops, 227–229
living Christmas tree, 66–68
living stone, 227–229
Livistona chinensis, 35–36
lobsterplant, 108–109
loss of vigor, 252
love plant, 92–93
lucky bamboo, 101–102
lucky plant, 224–225
lucky shamrock, 92–93

Madagascar dragon tree, 38–39
Madagascar palm, 33

Index      287

‘Cristata’, 219

Madagascar widow’s-thrill, 226–227
magic flower, 155–156
maguey, 200–201
maidenhair fern, 148–149, 251
Mallet Canes begonias, 80–82
Mammillaria elongata, 218–220
 
mandarin, 53
maranta, 111–112
Maranta leuconeura, 111–112
var. erythroneura, 111–112
 
 
var. kerchoviana, 111–112
marginata, 38–39
marjoram, 240
mealybugs, 259, 262
measles plant, 110
medicinal aloe, 201–203
Mediterranean fan palm, 41–42
Mentha ×piperita, 242
Mentha spicata, 240, 242
mescal, 200–201
metric conversions, 277
Mexican breadfruit, 133–135
Mexican flameleaf, 108–109
Mexican hat plant, 229–230
Meyer lemon, 53
micro-miniature rosette, 78
Miltoniopsis, 189–190
miniature cattleyas (mini-catts), 167
miniature date palm, 49–50
miniature roses, 11, 15–16
miniature rosette, 78
mint, 240–242
misting, 18
money plant, 38–39, 132–133, 135–136
money tree, 38–39, 224–225
Monstera deliciosa (monstera), 

133–135

monster fruit, 133–135
moon cactus, 208–210
moon orchid, 184–186
mosaic plant, 102–103
mosaic virus, 270–271
mother-in-law plant, 39–41
mother-in-law’s cushion, 205–206
mother of millions, 229–230
mother of thousands, 229–230
mother of thyme, 243

288      Index

moth orchid, 15, 184–186, 255
Musa acuminata, 34
Musa balbisiana, 34
Musa basjoo, 34–35

Narcissus papyraceus, 162–163
Natal lily, 88–89
neanthe bella palm, 45–47
needle drop, 252
Nematanthus wettsteinii, 98–99
Neomortonia nummularia, 98–99
neoregelia, 186–189
Neoregelia carolinae, 186–189
Nepal ivy, 128–130
Nephrolepis exaltata, 143–144
 
‘Bostoniensis’, 143
nephthytis, 123–124
nerve plant, 102–103, 252–253
nest fern, 141–143
nitrogen (N), 20, 21
nolina, 47–48
nopales, 235
Norfolk Island pine, 66–68, 252
nutritional deficiencies, 257–259

obake, 93
Ocimum basilicum, 240
octopus tree, 72–74
Odontoglossum/Oncidium alliance, 

165, 171

Sharry Baby, 172

okolehao, 50
Oncidium, 171–173
  Gower Ramsey, 172
 
opposite, 100
Opuntia, 234–235
Opuntia basilaris, 234–235
Opuntia ficus-indica, 234–235
Opuntia macrocentra, 234–235
orange, 53
orange thyme, 243
orchid cactus, 231–232, 248
orchid pansy, 155–156
orchids
 
  problems and diseases, 25, 246, 
251, 255, 267–268, 271–272

growing tips, 15, 17, 18, 19, 25

oregano, 242

organic potting media, 19
organic solutions. See plant 

problems

Origanum majorana, 240
Origanum vulgare, 242
ovate, 89
Oxalis corniculata, 92
Oxalis triangularis, 92–93

painted drop tongue, 87–88
painted feather, 177–179
painted flamingo, 93–94
painted leaf, 89–90
painted-leaf begonia, 113–115
painted net leaf, 102–103
painted nettle, 89–90
painter’s palette, 93–94
palmate leaves, 35
palm growing tips, 9, 14, 15, 25
palm lily, 50–51
panda bear plant, 232–234
panda plant, 232–234
pansy orchid, 189–190, 246
paper-white daffodil, 162–163
Paphiopedilum (paphiopedilum), 

182–183

paradise palm, 43–44
parlor maple, 60–62
parlor palm, 45–47
Parodia, 203–205
Parodia leninghausii, 203–205
Parodia magnifica, 203–205
Parodia scopa, 203–205
Parry’s agave, 200–201
parsley, 242
peace lily, 11, 103–105, 267
peacock plant, 105–106, 251
peanut cactus, 221–223
pearl plant, 220–221
peat moss, 19
pebble plant, 227–229
peduncle, 88
pelargonium, 95–96
Pelargonium (pelargonium), 95–96
Pelargonium capitatum, 95–96
Pelargonium crispum, 95–96
Pelargonium ×domesticum, 95–96
Pelargonium graveolens, 95–96

Pelargonium ×hortorum, 95–96
Pelargonium odoratissimum, 95–96
Pelargonium peltatum, 95–96
Pelargonium ×scarboroviae, 95–96
Pelargonium tomentosum, 95–96
peperomia, 106–107
Peperomia argyreia, 106–107
Peperomia caperata, 106–107
Peperomia obtusifolia, 106–107
peppermint, 242
peppermint geranium, 95–96
perlite, 18–19
Persian ivy, 128–130
Persian violet, 11, 159–160
Peruvian apple cactus, 207–208
Peruvian torch, 207–208
pest problems
 
 
 
 
  mealybugs, 262
 
overview of, 259
scale insects, 259, 262, 263
 
slugs and snails, 262–263
 
spider mites, 263–265
 
 
thrips, 265
  whiteflies, 265
 
petiole, 35, 66
Petroselinum crispum, 242
Phalaenopsis, 184–186
Phalaenopsis equestris, 184
Phalaenopsis lueddemanniana, 184
Phalaenopsis violacea, 184
Philodendron bipinnatifidum, 115–116
Philodendron erubescens, 124–126
Philodendron hederaceum var. 

ants, 259–260
aphids, 260
earwigs, 260–261
leafhoppers, 261–262

yellowing leaves from, 257

oxycardium, 124–126

philodendrons, 82–83, 115–116, 

124–126, 133–135

Phlebodium aureum, 145–146
Phoenix dactylifera, 49
Phoenix roebelenii, 49–50
phosphorus (P), 20, 21
photosynthesis, 11, 15
picotee, 118
piggy-back plant, 107–108

pigtail anthurium, 93–94
Pilea cadierei, 79–80
pink jasmine, 130–132
pink polka-dot plant, 110
pink quill, 194–196
pinnae, 143
pinnate leaves, 33
pinnatifid, 145
plantain, 34–35
plant collapse, 252–253
plant problems. See also diseases; 

leaf problems; pest problems

pseudostem, 34
pummelo, 53
pups, 25
purple basil, 240
purple heart, 136–137
purple passion plant/vine, 112–113
purple prickly pear, 234–235
purple queen, 136–137
purple shamrock, 92–93
purple velvet plant, 112–113
pussy ears, 232–234
pygmy date palm, 49–50

edema, 247

salt burn, 255

 
  flower issues, 247–248
 
leggy growth, 251–252
 
loss of vigor, 252
  needle drop, 252
  plant collapse, 252–253
  plant sprawl, 253
  post-repotting collapse, 253–254
  premature dormancy, 254–255
 
  wilting, 256–257
plant propagation, 24–29
Platycerium bifurcatum, 148, 150
Plectranthus verticillatus, 135–136
pleomele, 38–39
plush plant, 232–234
poinsettia, 108–109, 248
poison dart plant, 87–88
polka dot plant, 110, 249
pony-tail palm, 47–48
poor man’s croton, 89–90
porcelain flower, 137–138
post-repotting collapse, 253–254
potassium (K), 20, 21
pothos, 11, 28, 132–133, 249, 250, 267
potting containers, 16–17, 21–22
potting media, 17, 18–19
potting tips, 23–24, 253–254, 257
powdery mildew, 272
prayer plant, 105–106, 111–112
premature dormancy, 254–255
prickly pear, 234–235, 248, 275
propagation, 24–29
pruners, 24–25
pseudobulb, 166, 275
Pseudorhipsalis, 231–232

queen of the night, 208
Queensland umbrella tree, 72–74
Queen’s tears, 191–192
Queen Victoria agave, 200–201

rabbit’s foot, 111–112
rabbit’s foot fern, 144–145
radiator plant, 106–107
rainbow plant, 38–39
rat tail cactus, 235–236, 248
rattlesnake plant, 105–106
red cap cactus, 208–210
red-edge dracaena, 38–39
red-top cactus, 208–210
reed palm, 45–47
regal geranium, 95–96
re-potting, 24, 253–254, 257
respiration, 15, 18
rex begonia, 113–115
Rex Cultorum group, 113
Rhapis excelsa, 44–45
rhizome division, 25
Rhododendron, 157–158
ribbon dracaena, 101–102
ribbon plant, 101–102, 116–117
Rieger begonia, 160–162, 251, 268
ringspot virus, 25, 271–272
river spiderwort, 136–137
rootbound plants, 257
root rot, 255, 257, 272–273
rose geranium, 95–96
rose mallow, 63–65
rosemary, 241, 242, 243
rosette, 78
Rosmarinus officinalis, 242

Index      289

rosy maidenhair, 148–149
roving sailor, 90–92
royal velvet plant, 112–113
rubber bush, 68–70
rubber fig, 68–70
rubber plant, 68–70
rubber tree, 24, 29, 68–70
ruby ball, 208–210
Russian ivy, 128–130
Russian tarragon, 243
rust fungus, 273–274

‘Blue Boy’, 78
‘Blue Girl’, 78

saffron spike, 75–76
sage, 242, 243
sago palm/cycad, 70–71
Saint George’s sword, 236–238
Saintpaulia, 78–79
 
 
saloon plant, 85–86
salt burn, 255
Salvia officinalis, 242
Sander’s dracaena, 101–102
Sansevieria trifasciata, 236–238
Saxifraga stolonifera, 90–92
saxifrage, 90–92
scale insects, 259, 262, 263
scarlet star, 179–182
scented-leaf geraniums, 95–96, 240
schefflera, 72–74
Schefflera actinophylla, 72–74
Schefflera arboricola, 72–74
Schefflera elegantissima, 58–59
Schlumbergera ×buckleyi, 210–212
Schlumbergera russelliana, 210–212
Schlumbergera truncata, 210–212
sea urchin cactus, 221–223
Sedum morganianum, 215–217
 
seeds, 29

‘Burrito’, 215

Selenicereus, 231–232
selloum, 11, 115–116, 267
Seminole bread, 54–56
Senecio rowleyanus, 119–120
sentry palm, 43–44
shade, 13
shamrock, 92–93
shark jaws, 238–239
shoe flower, 63–65
shrunken leaves, 255
Siamese lucky plant, 213–214
silver ball cactus, 203–205
silver net leaf, 102–103
silverthorn, 213–214
silver vase plant, 197–198
silver vine, 132–133
Sinningia concinna, 97–98
Sinningia pusilla, 97–98
Sinningia speciosa, 97–98
skylights, 13–15
sky plant, 194–196
slab plantings, 178–179
slugs, 262–263
small-leaf spiderwort, 136–137
snails, 262–263
snake plant, 11, 25, 27, 236–238
soft rot, 274–275
soil, 18–19
Solenostemon scutellarioides, 89–90
Solomon Islands ivy, 132–133
song of India, 38–39
sooty mold, 262, 265
sori, 141
spadix, 83
spathe, 83
Spathiphyllum, 103–105
spearmint, 240, 242
sphagnum peat moss, 19
spider aloe, 201–203
spider aralia, 58–59

spider mites, 263–265
spider orchid, 193–194, 246
spider plant, 11, 25, 28, 116–117, 251
spiderwort, 136–137
split-leaf philodendron, 10, 11, 

133–135, 267

Sprenger’s asparagus fern, 140–141
spring bulbs, 162–163, 248, 252, 275
spur, 138
squirrel’s foot fern, 144–145
staghorn fern, 148, 150
standard rosette, 78
starfish plant, 175–177
star pine, 66–68
stem rot, 275
stem/stem tip cuttings, 26–27
sterilizing tools, 24–25
stolon division, 25, 28
stomates, 17
storksbill, 95–96
strawberry begonia, 90–92
strawberry geranium, 90–92, 95–96
strawberry saxifrage, 90–92
streptocarpus, 27, 117–119
Streptocarpus cyanandrus, 117
Streptocarpus dunnii, 117
Streptocarpus johannis, 117
string of beads, 119–120
string of pearls, 119–120
strobili, 71
succulents
 
 
suicide tree, 66–68
sunburned leaves, 256
Superba Canes begonias, 80–82
‘Super Dwarf Cavendish’ banana, 34
Swedish begonia, 135–136
Swedish ivy, 135–136, 249
sweet orange, 53

growing tips, 10–11, 13, 19, 25, 28
growth problems, 254, 255

290      Index

Swiss cheese plant, 133–135
Syngonium podophyllum 

(syngonium), 123–124

Tahitian lime, 53
tailflower, 93–94
taro vine, 132–133
tarragon, 242–243
temperature regulation, 15–16
Thai basil, 240
Thanksgiving cactus, 210–212
thatch palm, 43–44
thousand mothers, 107–108
threadleaf aralia, 58–59
thrips, 265
thyme, 242, 243
Thymus ×citriodorus, 243
Thymus vulgaris, 243
ti, 27, 50–51
tiddly-winks, 159–160
tiger aloe, 201–203
tiger jaws, 238–239, 248
Tillandsia, 194–196
Tillandsia cyanea, 194–196
tobacco mosaic virus, 270–271
Tolmiea menziesii, 107–108
tools, 24–25
Tradescantia, 136–137
Tradescantia fluminensis, 136–137
Tradescantia pallida ‘Purpurea’, 

136–137

Tradescantia zebrina, 136–137
transpiration, 17–18
transplanting, 23–24
tree ivy, 71–72, 254
tree philodendron, 115–116
triangle tree, 66–68
Trifolium dubium, 92
troubleshooting. See plant problems
true aloe, 201–203

true Irish shamrock, 92
tuber division, 25
tuber ladder fern, 143–144
tuberous begonia, 160
tulip, 162–163

umbel, 137
umbrella tree/plant, 72–74
unifoliate, 167
up-potting, 23–24, 257
urn plant, 197–198

variegated croton, 56–57
vase plant, 179–182
velvetleaf, 60–62
velvet plant, 112–113
Venezuela treebine, 127–128
Venus maidenhair, 148–149
Venus’ slipper, 182–183
Verschaffeltii Group (nerve plant), 

103

vigor, loss of, 252
vine layering, 28–29
viral infections, 25, 259
Vitis, 127
Vriesea splendens (vriesea), 177–179

wandering gypsy, 136–137
wandering Jew, 11, 136–137
wandering sailor, 136–137
wandering tradescantia, 136–137
wandering Willie, 136–137
watering, 16–17, 18, 25
watering cans, 17
watering probes, 16
watermelon peperomia, 106–107
watermelon pilea, 79–80
wax begonia, 160
wax plant, 11, 137–138, 248
weeping fig, 11, 74–75, 249

white calla lily, 83–85
whiteflies, 265
white jasmine, 130–132
white sails, 103–105
whitish spots on leaves, 256
Whitsun cactus, 217–218
whorled plectranthus, 135–136
wild Boston fern, 143–144
wilting, 256–257
windowleaf, 133–135
winter-blooming begonia, 160–162
winter jasmine, 130–132
wolf mouth, 238–239
woodsorrel, 92–93
woolly thyme, 243
wrinkled leaves, 255

Xanthomonas campestris pv. 

dieffenbachiae, 266

yellow on/yellowing leaves, 257–259
yellow palm, 33
yellow tower cactus, 203–205
youth-on-age, 107–108

Zamia pumila, 54–56
Zamioculcas zamiifolia, 120–121
Zantedeschia, 83–85
Zantedeschia aethiopica, 83–85
Zantedeschia elliottiana, 83
Zantedeschia rehmannii, 83
Zanzibar gem, 11, 120–121, 267
zebra bromeliad, 177–179
zebra plant, 75–76, 105–106, 220–221
zonal geraniums, 95–96
zz plant, 120–121

Index      291

y
e
l
k
c
i
B

 
.

 

W
n
h
o
J
 
y
b
 
s
o
t
o
h
P

About the Authors

David Deardorff and Kathryn Wadsworth are 
authors and photographers who travel across the country 
holding popular workshops and lectures. Deardorff’s PhD 
in botany and years of experience as a plant pathologist 
informs their shared expertise; and Wadsworth’s skill as a 
naturalist and author illuminates the connection between 
plants and people. Together they have nurtured house-
plants and gardens in the Desert Southwest, the Pacific 
Northwest, and Hawaii. They have appeared on numer-
ous U.S. radio shows, including Martha Stewart Living, 
Joe Lamp’l’s Growing a Greener World, Ken Druse’s Real 
Dirt, and Ciscoe Morris’s Gardening with Ciscoe, and are 
the authors of What’s Wrong With My Vegetable Garden?, 
What’s Wrong With My Fruit Garden?, and the award- 
winning What’s Wrong With My Plant? (And How Do I Fix 
It?). They can be found creating bountiful polyculture  
gardens in Port Townsend, Washington, and online at 
kathrynanddavid.com.

292      

